The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

China thanks Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing. We support
the Special Representative in leading UNMIK's
implementation of its mandate. I also welcome the
presence of Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, at this meeting and thank him for
his briefing. I also take note of the statement delivered
by Ms. Citaku.

At present, the security situation in Kosovo is
stable on the whole, but it still faces some complexities.
Resolution 1244 (1999) is an important legal basis
for resolving the Kosovo issue. All parties should, in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and within the framework
of the relevant resolutions, reach a solution that is
acceptable to all through dialogue and negotiation.

China respects Serbia's sovereignty and territorial
integrity, understands Serbia's legitimate concerns on
the Kosovo issue and appreciates Serbia's efforts to seek
a political solution to the Kosovo issue. China welcomes
the commitments made by Belgrade and Pristina to
promoting the normalization of bilateral relations
through dialogue and consultation. We also welcome
the constructive efforts of both parties to implement the
agreements already reached, gradually build mutual
trust and continue to create conditions conducive to
reaching a comprehensive and lasting solution.

It is in the fundamental interests of all of the
ethnic groups in Kosovo to achieve reconciliation and
common development, which in turn will contribute
to peace, stability and prosperity in the Balkans. It is
hoped that all parties concerned will put the well-being
of the people first, protect the legitimate rights and
interests of all ethnic groups, promote socioeconomic
development and avoid words or actions that might lead
to escalating tensions.

While the Council should remain seized with the
Kosovo issue, the international community should play
a constructive role in promoting a proper solution. We
hope that UNMIK will maintain its coordination with
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
the Kosovo Force and others in a joint effort to improve
the situation in Kosovo and promote the due settlement
of the Kosovo issue.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at 1.35 pm.
