Mr. J erandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I should like
to begin by thanking Mr. Hedi Annabi for introducing the
third report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), which gives a
comprehensive account of the situation prevailing in the
country and identifies the challenges to be faced in order to
complete the peace process successfully, as well as the
steps to be taken in order to act effectively to meet those
challenges.

My delegation supports Mr. Annabi's suggestion that
the report henceforth be published every 60 days.

In this regard, my delegation notes with satisfaction
the progress that has been made in the political area in the
implementation of the provisions relating to governance.

Here we would like to point out the need to speed up
this process so as to establish and put into effective
operation, as soon as possible, the National Electoral
Commission and the Commission for the Management of
Strategic Resources, National Reconstruction and
Development.

However, we are bound to acknowledge that the
situation in Sierra Leone, because of its continuing
precariousness, is still profoundly disquieting, in particular
with respect to the manifest reluctance of Mr. Sankoh to
cooperate in implementing the Peace Agreement. Here we
reaffirm Tunisia's commitment to the full and early
implementation of the provisions of that Agreement, which
offers a genuine chance for salvation to the people of Sierra
Leone, who have already endured such hardship and who
continue to be the victims of a tragedy of vast
humanitarian, social, economic and political dimensions.

My delegation would like to express its profound
concern at the failure by the rebels to respect their
commitments, undertaken voluntarily in the framework of
the Lome Agreement. We feel that it is essential for them,
and in particular for Mr. Sankoh and his party, to fulfil
their responsibilities Vis-a-vis their people and their
country in good faith, especially since Mr. Sankoh now
bears a post of responsibility of high importance in the
Government.

In this regard, we deem it necessary for the Security
Council to continue to exert pressure on the recalcitrant
parties and to indicate, as firmly and forcefully as
possible, its commitment to securing a return to peace,
security and stability in the country, in accordance with
the provisions of the Peace Agreement. This commitment
is all the more pressing because the barriers placed in the
way of humanitarian assistance and the obstacles
impeding the implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, as well as
the obstructive manoeuvres to impede UNAMSIL's
activities and attacks on personnel of the Mission, have
become daily occurrences.

My delegation in this regard would like to
underscore the +pertinent nature of the steps suggested by
the Secretary-General in part VII of his report, which are
aimed at creating a climate of confidence and the
necessary conditions for the implementation of the various
aspects of the peace process. The proposals by the
Secretary-General deserve our full support, and we should
all do our utmost to see them put into effect.

The following steps seem to us to be most urgent in
this regard: the rapid establishment of an effective
peacekeeping force throughout the territory; the provision
to peacekeeping troops of the necessary equipment to
permit them to carry out their mandate properly and
command the necessary credibility; strict respect for the
rules of engagement by UNAMSIL troops; the speeding
up of the deployment in the field of the police officers
provided for in resolution 1289 (2000), and, as necessary,
an increase in their personnel in the light of the needs
perceived in this area; an increase in financial assistance
to Sierra Leone; and, lastly, support by the Security
Council for the efforts deployed by the President of Mali,
Mr. Alpha Oumar Konare, current Chairman of the
Economic Community of West African States - efforts
which attest to the importance that western Africa, and
Africa in general, attaches to the situation in Sierra
Leone.

 

My delegation believes that the question of
development, including the right of the people of Sierra
Leone to development, should be one of the priorities of the
Sierra Leone peace process in view of the close link
between development and lasting peace, as was stated so
eloquently by the Secretary-General in his report on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of lasting peace and
sustainable development in Africa.

In our opinion, focusing on development in Sierra
Leone not only will contribute to the successful
implementation of the demobilization and reintegration
programme for former combatants, but will also help to
resettle refugees and displaced persons in their country and
to steel Sierra Leoneans against any temptation to rally
behind the forces of destruction.

Since there is no need for further proof of the link
between peace and development, particularly with regard to
internal conflicts, it seems to us appropriate for the Security
Council to envisage including a reference to this question
in its resolutions and statements dealing with this type of
conflict.

I also wish to thank the Ambassador of the United
Kingdom for the first-hand information he gave us
concerning his recent trip to the country. I endorse his
suggestion regarding a statement to the press by the
President of the Council.

