Mr. Ele Ela (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Michel Kafando, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi, for his
excellent briefing on the situation in Burundi. We also
thank the Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Jiirg Lauber.

We appreciate the efforts made by the Special
Envoy, as set out in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/1028), which reflects the hard work carried out
by Mr. Yoweri Museveni, President of Uganda, and
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, former President of the United
Republic of Tanzania, as mediator and facilitator
of the dialogue process, respectively, between the
Burundian parties. The updated report sheds light on
and contextualizes the current situation of the country
following the constitutional referendum on 17 May,
which enjoyed widespread popular support. We take
note of all the efforts undertaken by the actors involved
in the ongoing political process for the general elections
of 2020 and the appointment of the new members of
the national independent electoral commission. We
encourage the Government and all other stakeholders to
continue encouraging dialogue so that the Burundians
may shape their own destiny.

Equatorial Guinea subscribes to the efforts of the
international community in the search for a peaceful
solution to conflicts. For that reason, any action
aimed at the consolidation of peace and the return
to international legality through dialogue will have
our support. That is why we continue to encourage
and support the Government, political parties, civil
society and national actors involved to continue
strengthening dialogue for the peaceful development of
political activities and for the preparation of the 2020
elections so as to ensure their credibility, transparency,
inclusiveness and the full participation of women.

We believe that compliance with the principles
of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement
included in the new constitution, the recommendations
of the negotiator and the inter-Burundian dialogue
endorsed by the results of the constitutional referendum,
should serve to address the political dialogue and serve
as a guarantee for the satisfactory preparation of the
elections in an atmosphere of peace, harmony and
security that should continue to grow in solidity in the
electoral and post-electoral process.

With regard to the security situation, we note the
continued improvement and commend the progress
observed after the signing of a tripartite agreement
by Burundi, Tanzania and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, which has
enabled the voluntary return of refugees mainly from
Tanzania, Kenya, Uganda and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. That demonstrates the commitment of the
Government to continuing to work for the protection
and promotion of human rights. In that regard, we
encourage the Government to promote social cohesion
and urge it to fight and take measures against impunity
so that those responsible for crimes and serious
violations of human rights and humanitarian law are
held accountable before justice.

Equatorial Guinea has always believed in and
supported the mediation efforts of all international,
regional and subregional organizations, as well as
the work of national political actors for a negotiated
solution to the conflict and to channel the political
process in Burundi, within democratic principles and
values, which prioritize the country's sovereignty,
human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of
law as essential elements of the Partnership Agreement
between the members of the African, Caribbean and
Pacific Group of States, on the one hand, and the
European Community and its member States, on the
other, as well as the foundations set out in the African
Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights, the African
Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance,
and the resolution of 4 November 2016 of the African
Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights on the
situation of human rights in the Republic of Burundi,
in order to facilitate the protection of civilians, curb
impunity and provide guarantees for the exercise of
fundamental freedoms. In that regard, we urge all
Burundian political actors to pursue their efforts to
restore and strengthen the trust that will facilitate a
national dialogue that is frank, inclusive and transparent.

Let me conclude by commending the President
of Burundi's decision, announced on 7 June, not to
run as a candidate in the 2020 elections, as well as
the initiative taken by the Burundian Government to
finance those elections. Those actions demonstrate
their willingness to strengthen democracy and return
peace, security and stability to the country and the
region, as can also be seen in their contribution of
troops to peacekeeping operations.

We take this opportunity to strongly urge the
international community to continue resolutely
supporting the Government and other parties that are
directly involved in promoting confidence-building
measures to guarantee an environment that is
conducive to the peaceful holding of elections and to its
commitment to the Constitution and the road map to the
peaceful transfer of power in an atmosphere of peace
and national accord.

Lastly, Equatorial Guinea welcomes the launching
of Burundi's national development plan, which has the
potential to offer new means of participation and, in
view of the recommendations of the Special Envoy in
the report on the socioeconomic situation in Burundi
(S/2018/1028), we believe that a renewed effort to restore
trust between the Government of Burundi, on the one
hand, and the donor community and development
partners, on the other, is crucial to the establishment of
closer ties in the fight against poverty and ignorance,
which provide a breeding ground for instability.

