Mr. Petranto (Indonesia): I would like to begin
by thanking you, Mr. President, for having convened
this urgent meeting. Once again, a brutal series of
events is unfolding in Palestine, culminating yesterday
in brutal artillery attacks by Israel which killed 19
Palestinian civilians, including children and women, in
the Gaza town of Beit Hanoun, and wounded dozens of
other innocent civilians.

Before continuing, my delegation would like to
express its condolences to the Palestinian people for
their terrible and painful losses.

It will be recalled that yesterday, the
Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, spoke with horror of her experience during her
visit to the area. She spoke of the despair of people
trying to come to terms with death and destruction on a
scale not seen in Gaza for many years.

The continued military offensive by Israel in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, is a threat to the prospects of achieving a
negotiated solution to the conflict based on the two-
State solution. In view of these events and the tragic
humanitarian situation on the ground, we are deeply
concerned that this body has taken no action to
intervene.
My delegation once again condemns Israel's
aggression and its excessive and disproportionate use
of force without any regard for the lives of
Palestinians, including innocent women and children.
We condemn Israel's policy of collective punishment,

which continues to cause extensive loss of life and
damage to infrastructure, institutions and property. As
a result of these military incursions, the humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory has
become even worse. The deterioration is from an
already precarious level of despair, which began with
the most recent elections, held earlier this year.

My delegation once again calls on Israel to
recognize that there is no military solution to the
situation in the Middle East. Israel must resist
temptation to exercise its military strength and must
stop all aggression against Palestine. Israel must
withdraw fully from Gaza and from the rest of the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, as stipulated in General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions relevant to the question of
Palestine. Furthermore, Israel must abide by its
obligation under the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
international law and other rules of humanitarian law.

We are deeply concerned that these flagrant
violations of international law continue to be
undertaken by Israel. The unfortunate impression is
being conveyed that the international community is
condoning Israel's behaviour even though this global
institution has, on many occasions, called for the rule
of law to be respected by all. At the same time,
Palestinian militants should stop firing rockets into
Israel's territory.

My delegation calls on the Security Council to
accept and exercise its responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
further urge the Council to express a sense of urgency
in view of the terrible humanitarian conditions endured
by the Palestinian people as a result of Israel's
aggression and its policy of military might.

The Council must make certain that this killing
and this wanton destruction of infrastructure do not
recur, particularly in view of the fact that, as the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East has reported, Israeli forces
are still present in other parts of Gaza. We also call
upon the international community, particularly the
Quartet, to take immediate steps to halt the conflict and
to revive the peace process towards a just solution, in
accordance with relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, the Road Map and the Arab Peace Initiative of
2002. In this connection, my delegation supports the
draft resolution submitted by Qatar, which we believe
serves as a basis for moving forward.

