Mr. Skau (Sweden): Let me begin by thanking
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations Keita for her informative briefing to the
Security Council today.

As we just heard, the situation in South Sudan
remains gravely worrying, not least for civilians
caught up in a seemingly endless nightmare of
conflict, displacement and hunger. We remain deeply
concerned about reports of continued fighting, as
well as preparations for renewed offensive operations,
which point to a lack of commitment by the parties to
finding a solution to the conflict through dialogue. Let
me reiterate that an immediate cessation of hostilities
by all parties - the Government and the armed groups
alike - is a sine qua non, not only to alleviate suffering
but also to allow for a meaningful political process.

All parties must recognize that only a political
solution can resolve the conflict. In that regard, we
strongly commend the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) for preparing the high-level
revitalization forum as a means of reinvigorating the
peace process. The forum represents a unique window
of opportunity that merits our full and active support.
It is imperative that the forum take place without
delay. The legitimacy and success of the forum will be
strengthened by ensuring that the process is transparent
and inclusive, with the effective participation of
women and civil society. Building on the communique
of the African Union Peace and Security Council of
20 September, the Council must now stand unified and
speak with one voice to provide the forum with the best
possible prospects for taking a genuine step forward.
We note, in that regard, the support also voiced by
the European Union in its statement of 7 November.
A national dialogue could be one part of the way
forward, but only if it is genuinely inclusive, impartial
and transparent. A national dialogue will not be
credible while violence continues and the freedom of
expression is restricted. Although a national dialogue
cannot replace the peace agreement, it could serve as a
complement as part ofa national reconciliation process.

The humanitarian and human rights situation for
millions of people in South Sudan remains perilous.
We are extremely alarmed by accounts that the access
to food is being used to further military objectives.
Such serious reports should be actively followed up.
It is unacceptable that violations and abuses of human
rights and violations of international humanitarian
law continue. Restrictions on the access to health
care, attacks against medical facilities and transport,
and wide-spread looting of medical facilities by all
parties to the conflict are also unacceptable and cannot
be tolerated. That clearly shows that the work of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) is
crucial and that there is a need to make further progress
in connection with the deployment of the regional
protection force. The establishment of the Hybrid Court
will act as a further strong deterrent against atrocity
crimes. We welcome the steps taken thus far towards
its establishment.

Time is running out for millions of South Sudanese.
Every day that the conflict continues makes building
peace, recovery and reconciliation even more difficult.
We fully support the leadership being shown by IGAD
and the region. It is now essential that we exhaust every
avenue in the search for peace in South Sudan.

