Mr. Mendoza-Garcia (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like at the outset to
thank you, Mr. President, for this important initiative
to discuss for the first time the peace and security
challenges that small island developing States (SIDS)
face.

Costa Rica may not be a member of that group,
but it fully empathizes with the peace and security
challenges confronting those States. We are in full
solidarity with them in the face of the need to work
together in the quest for solutions to these challenges.

After having listened to the statements made by the
representatives of Marshall Islands and the Federated
States of Micronesia, who spoke so eloquently about
their immediate needs as countries, we realize that
these are issues to which we must accord maximum
priority.

From our perspective, peace and security are
essential elements for the achievement of sustainable
development. It is not possible for developing countries
to achieve higher levels of progress if we do not
decrease our vulnerability indices and increase our
national resilience, building peaceful societies in
which the absence of conflict, the rule of law, good
governance and sustainable development are part of our
daily realities.

My country believes in the strengthening of
a cooperation strategy established by the SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action, and we support
more specific cooperation among island States and
other countries that are not island States but that share
challenges, vulnerabilities and aspirations. Working
together on the eve of the outcome of negotiations on
the new sustainable development agenda and on the
basis of the already negotiated Addis Ababa Action
Agenda should fuel our desire to deepen our dialogue.

Our aim must always be to promote a comprehensive
approach in that respect, acknowledge the various
challenges facing this group of countries, place the
United Nations system at the heart of the activities, and
closely involve the relevant regional and subregional
organizations, the international financial system, the
private sector, civil society and the populations of
the countries concerned, as well any individuals who
wish to cooperate with them. These efforts must be
accompanied by the establishment of an action plan for
cooperation on the part of the international community
with middle-income countries, many of which are
SIDS.

These efforts also must go hand in hand with the
implementation of the Green Climate Fund. It is key
to ensure its funding, so that developing countries,
including SIDS, will have the financial resources
necessary to deal with the impacts of climate change
and will be able to provide better, more effective and
lasting solutions focused on adaptation and mitigation.
We call on the developed countries to fulfil the objective
of mobilizing $100 billion annually by 2020, as they
have committed to doing.

The emerging global trends caused by natural
disasters and the adverse impacts of climate change
compel us to look at the big picture, including the
effects involuntary human displacements. We believe
that initiatives such as the Nansen Initiative on cross-
border displacement due to natural disasters can lay the
foundation for a protection and prevention agenda so
as to guarantee the fundamental rights of the people
involved.

To conclude, I wish to call upon all Member States
not to forget these and other challenges mentioned in
this debate during negotiations at the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change Paris
Conference, in Paris. The agreement we reach there
must take into account the main concerns we have
expressed here, and we hope that the final Paris outcome
will reflect those concerns.

