Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative ofthe Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his
comprehensive briefing. I would also like to welcome
Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia,
and Mr. Hashim Thaci, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kosovo,
whom I thank for their statements.

First of all, we congratulate Kosovo on having
formed its Government, which we hope will fulfil the
aspirations of the people of Kosovo. Achieving the
promise of its policies and overcoming the problems
that existed in the course of setting up the current
Government require greater efforts from the authorities
and genuine, responsible actions to improve the
political atmosphere prevailing in Kosovo. Stabilizing
the political environment will contribute to a stronger
State, leading to the economic and social development
that the citizens of Kosovo deserve.

Good-neighbourly relations and respect for
sovereignty and the individual characteristics of each
State by the other countries of the region are the most
important elements in ensuring stability and prosperity
for the Balkans in general. We therefore call on the two
neighbours -Serbia and Kosovo - to continue with
the full implementation of the agreements reached
bilaterally, including the Brussels Agreement. We
also call for strengthened cooperation in all areas. We
welcome the announcement of next week's resumption
of the high-level dialogue sponsored by the European
Union. We hope that the meetings will be successful
and lead to the full normalization of bilateral relations
between the two States.

Jordan welcome's Kosovo's adoption of a law to
criminalize participation in foreign conflicts. This will
contribute to improving the domestic security situation
in Kosovo and help preserve stability in the region.

The progress and positive steps taken by Kosovo
on all fronts in general, and specifically on the rule
of law and human rights, are a testament to the will
of the people of Kosovo to consolidate the institutions
of a modern State, thereby proving to the world that
they are able to live up to their responsibilities. All of
those efforts strengthen that stature of Kosovo on the
international level.

In that connection, one of the most important
features of a modern secular State is its ability to treat
all citizens equally and without discrimination. We
therefore encourage the authorities in Kosovo to step up
their efforts, in particular in the areas of modernizing
the legislative system with regard to autonomy
for minorities so as to ensure their rights, thereby
strengthening efforts at reconciliation among all
members of society. Minorities must be protected from
all attacks and against any attacks on their religious,
cultural and historical institutions or property.

Jordan reiterates its call for strengthened relations
between Kosovo and the international community,
including facilitating its accession to various
international organizations. Efforts must be made
to not hinder Kosovo's accession to such bodies. We
also reiterate our support for extending the reporting
period of the reports of the Secretary-General on the
activities of UNMIK, given the stability of the situation
in Kosovo.

We emphasize the importance of the activities
carried out by the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo, which is helping the country to modernize
and build the State. We express our gratitude to
UNMIK's leadership and staff for their efforts to
discharge their mandate, which throughout the years
has led to an improvement of the situation in all areas.

