I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of African countries on the Security Council - the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia - as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1). The A3+1 thanks the Secretary-General for his reports on the situation in the Sudan and the activities of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) (S/2020/1155) and on the drawdown of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and a follow-on presence (S/2020/1115). We would also like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and Mr. Atul Khare for their briefings and efforts in support of the ongoing peace process in the Sudan. Our statement focuses on three main points - the political and security situation; the socioeconomic and humanitarian situation; and the issue of coordinating the transition to the establishment of UNITAMS following the drawdown of UNAMID. First, with regard to the political and security situation, the A3+1 welcomes the initiatives that led to the signing of the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan on 3 October. Despite lingering challenges, the signing of the Agreement demonstrates the willingness of the parties to the conflict to strive for lasting peace in the Sudan, under the auspices of the transitional Government. To that end, we call on all signatories and partners of the Sudan to honour their obligations to ensure the effective and efficient implementation of the Agreement, which would include progress on issues such as gender equality, the protection of human rights and the rule of law. The ongoing peacebuilding process requires all parties to commit to the Agreement and to work actively to clarify and address all outstanding issues. That would facilitate the mobilization of the trust fund integrating the strategic, technical and planning dimensions of activities in support of the peacebuilding process. We commend the collaboration of the African Union and the United Nations as well as the leading role played by subregional bodies and neighbouring countries, namely, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and South Sudan, in the peace process. In addition, the upsurge in intercommunal violence and the clashes between Government forces and certain armed groups that remain outside the Agreement attest to the need for continued efforts to address the root causes of the conflicts, in particular poverty and unemployment. In that regard, we call on Abdul Wahid Al-Nur to join the peace process as soon as possible in order to give comprehensive and inclusive peace a chance in the Sudan. On the socioeconomic and humanitarian front, the A3+l1 welcomes the economic and financial reforms undertaken, despite the difficulties related to the coronavirus disease pandemic. We call on the Government and partners of the Sudan to build on the conclusions of the national economic conference held in Khartoum from 26 to 28 September. I am pleased to note that the United States decision to remove the Sudan from the list of State sponsors of terrorism will, as we have always emphasized, promote the Sudan's economic and social development through access to international development financial institutions. The humanitarian situation in the Sudan is further exacerbated by the economic crisis; food insecurity; the adverse effects of climate change, as illustrated by the worst floods the country has experienced since 1988; epidemics; intercommunal violence; the prolonged displacement of populations; and the influx of refugees from neighbouring States. The current situation, which affects just over 9.6 million people, demands that we demonstrate our responsibility and solidarity with the Sudan with a view to mitigating the impact of the humanitarian situation on its ongoing peacebuilding process. It also illustrates once again the interdependence between security and development. Regarding the coordination between the establishment of UNITAMS and the drawdown of UNAMID, the A3+1 commends the transitional Government of the Sudan for its collaboration with, and support for, the UNITAMS planning team in facilitating a coordinated transition between the two missions. We believe that the situation on the ground and the arrangements put in place by the transitional Government to ensure stability and the protection of people and property in Darfur are such that UNAMID should begin the drawdown process and hand over to UNITAMS as of 31 December, in accordance with resolution 2525 (2020). In conclusion, it should be noted that the acknowledgement in the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan of concerns such as the ratification of international conventions on the protection and promotion of human rights, transitional justice and the implementation by the Government of a national plan for the protection of civilians offer hope for a coordinated transition between the two missions. In that connection, we call on all of the Sudan's partners to join the country in a successful transition through the organization of democratic elections.
