Mr. Ghafoorzai (Afghanistan): At the outset,
we wish to commend the Indonesian presidency for
holding today's debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

Twenty years have passed since the inclusion of
the protection of civilians focus in the agenda of the
Security Council, yet millions of peoples across the
world still face conflict-related challenges. That means
innocent lives lost, families left in grief and enormous
humanitarian consequences in the form of loss of
property, displacement and lack of basic necessities,
such as food, water and electricity.

For Afghanistan, the meaning of protection is
broad and comprehensive, entailing not only physical
protection but also human security. Civilians continue
to bear the cost of the decades-long imposed conflict
in our country. The Taliban and its affiliate terrorist
groups have continued their attacks on all segments of
Afghan society - ordinary Afghans, religious figures
and journalists. They also attack public infrastructure,
such as schools, hospitals and religious sites. When
they do, they spare no one their brutality. Based on
the quarterly report of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, Taliban attacks from January
to March 2019 resulted in almost 700 civilian casualties.
They have resorted to all means and tactics, including
launching attacks from public places and compounds,
civilian homes and mosques, and they have used women
and children as human shields.

This month alone, during the holy month of
Ramadan - a time of spiritual renewal and reflection
to better one's life and advance peace, harmony and
solidarity in society - new attacks by these groups
occurred in different parts of the country. A few weeks
ago, in Ghazni province, a Taliban-planted improvised
explosive device killed eight children, while another
such attack in Farah province left many wounded.
These events are a manifestation of the gross violation
and disregard of international humanitarian law and
fundamental Islamic values.

Sadly, we have also seen a rise in the deliberate
targeting of humanitarian personnel and infrastructure
in different parts of the country. This month we
witnessed Taliban attacks on two aid organizations in
Kabul - Counterpart International and CARE -killing
15 people, including aid workers and civilians. The
group vowed that the attacks would not be their last
on aid organizations operating in Afghanistan. They
are doing whatever they can to disrupt the normal
functioning of humanitarian agencies and organizations
in the country.

We strongly condemn all attacks against civilians,
infrastructure and humanitarian personnel in
Afghanistan as a violation of international humanitarian
law. We call on the Council to take appropriate action
to end such atrocities. Continued Taliban attacks come
at a time when the people of Afghanistan and the
international community extended another opportunity
to the group to give up terror for peace. Where Afghans
have made immense sacrifices to achieve peace and
prosperity, the Taliban have responded with the same
old approach: violence, killings and destruction. This
further affirms the need for a careful collaborative
approach in the context of ongoing peace efforts to
end the current conflict in the country. Any eventual
outcome to peace talks should come with clear and
decisive guarantees for ajust and lasting peace that will
conform to the needs and expectations of all Afghans.

Our focus on the protection of civilians is being
pursued by various Government institutions and
agencies as their highest priority. The Afghan security
forces are defending our country and people against
the dangerous threats of international terrorism and
extremism. They are operating with professionalism,
adhering to strict guidelines of rules of engagement
and coordinating closely with international forces on
counter-terrorism operations to avoid and prevent
harm to civilian populations, schools, hospitals,
medical facilities and other public infrastructure.
These precautionary measures are also based on
presidential decrees and other directives from the
security institutions. Any incident of collateral damage
by our security forces are investigated thoroughly and
with accountability.

Our protection measures also include a special
focus on ensuring the protection and well-being of
our children in society. To this end, we have signed
a joint action plan with the United Nations, which
is continuing to be steadily implemented. Various
directives, laws and mechanisms have been issued to
ensure the protection of children.

We all know that civilian protection can best be
achieved by preventing conflicts. This requires a new
organizational approach, addressing the immediate
needs of civilians caught in conflict as well as the root
causes and structural drivers of conflict in each given
setting. We welcome the creation of the Departments
of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace
Operations as important components of the Secretary-
General's reform agenda. The role of the United Nations
will remain vital in the context of international efforts
to prevent the outbreak, exacerbation and continuation
of conflicts around the world.

In conclusion, let us make sure that today's meeting
builds on the important work of the Council to protect
civilians in conflict. Our collective success in this
endeavour means success in defending and promoting a
fundamental principle of humanity.

