The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.

In my introduction to this debate, I referred to
United Nations peacekeeping as a unique global
partnership and, over the past six months, I have been
struck by the extent to which we have a shared
understanding of the challenges that we face and how
we can overcome them. That substantial common
ground has been made clear again today.

I think that we all agree on the central principle
that peacekeeping can only support a political strategy;
it cannot replace it. We all agree on the importance of
having mission mandates that clearly reflect achievable
objectives and in which tasks are prioritized. We also
agree on the need to enhance consultations with those
countries that contribute troops, police and other units
to peacekeeping operations.

I think that there are three things on which we
now need to focus, and those are captured in the draft
presidential statement that we look forward to adopting
later today.

First is a commitment to building on the work
that we have done in recent months, paying greater
attention to the monitoring and evaluation of missions,
more realistic mandates; greater involvement of the
troop- and police-contributing countries, and better
information-sharing between the Secretariat and
political and military experts of the countries
concerned. We have made some progress. We have
much more still to do, as many colleagues have said.

Secondly, we need to take advantage of
opportunities, such as under the forthcoming Austrian
presidency in November, to develop a wider consensus
on the critical tasks that we expect modern
peacekeepers to perform. We know that today's
conflicts require a complex range of responses from
peacekeepers. They must help to protect civilian
populations, monitor and protect human rights, work to
build fledgling police forces and judiciaries in support
of national authorities, and support electoral processes.
Those activities are all essential to the wider
peacebuilding process.

To deliver success in peacekeeping, we must
ensure that it is part of a longer-term effort to build a
sustainable peace. That requires coordination with a
wide range of partners with specialist skills from
within the United Nations, funds and programmes,
international financial institutions, and regional and
subregional organizations. It is that approach that
represents the transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding and the greater integration and
coordination of effort of which we often speak.

Thirdly, we should support the call from our
colleagues in the Secretariat - the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support - to establish a new horizon for United
Nations peacekeeping. We have heard much support
for the recommendations made in their recent
non-paper in statements today.

Those are not issues that can be tackled by the
Security Council alone; nor should they be. During the
rest of today's debate, I look forward to hearing ideas,
perspectives and views from across the peacekeeping
partnership, including from Member States that
contribute personnel to operations and money to
finance them.

The Council should continue to support the work
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
and the Secretariat as we take forward what is a very
challenging agenda, set out in the draft presidential
statement that we will adopt this afternoon.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Sweden.
