Ms. Coleman (United States of America): The
United States strongly supports resolution 2317
(2016), which targets many of the most serious causes
of instability in the Horn of Africa and mandates
the United Nations Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring
Group to continue its crucial work. Renewing that
mandate reflects the Security Council's understanding
that sanctions regimes are an important part of the
international community's comprehensive response to
the situation in the Horn of Africa.

First, on Eritrea, I would like to point out that,
while Eritrea calls for the lifting of United Nations
sanctions, as have several members of the Council, the
lack of engagement by Eritrea with the United Nations
Monitoring Group - under a Security Council Chapter
VII mandate - is not the path to lifting sanctions.
Eritrea has not been forthcoming with information with
regard to its support to regional armed groups. And,
while the Monitoring Group has not found evidence
of Eritrea's support to Al-Shabaab, it is difficult to
corroborate that information, because the Monitoring
Group has not been allowed to visit the country in
five years. While Eritrea has released some Djiboutian
prisoners of war, it has not been forthcoming with
information on any remaining such prisoners. That lack
of cooperation must change if the Council is to take
seriously Eritrea's calls to lift sanctions.

Turning to Somalia, during the 21 September high-
level meeting on Somalia, Council members widely
affirmed that Somalia had transitioned from State failure
to State-building. Today Somalia stands at a critical
junction to solidify its political and security gains. That
is why the United States strongly supported language
in the resolution that reflects the Security Council's
commitment to eliminate all sources of funding for
Al-Shabaab, a group that continues to attack innocent
civilians and to threaten the peace and stability of both
Somalia and the region. The resolution also supports
the Government's efforts at security-sector reform,
including developing a professional army.

We also support the resolution because it
acknowledges several of the Government's goals,
including its intention to seek greater international
recognition and support for its efforts to address
extensive illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
in waters where it has jurisdiction. It also makes clear
that the mismanagement of public funds in Somalia
will undercut the credibility of governance, the gains
made in the country and its prospects for future growth
in Somalia. By supporting the full implementation
reflected in today's resolution, Member States would
help to promote the long-term peace and stability of the
broader region.

In conclusion, Somalis are laying the foundation
for a more stable, representative and inclusive
Government. The United States stands by Somalia and
the international community. The Council must remain
engaged to ensure that Somalia and the region achieve
a more peaceful future. We thank Council members for
joining with us in sending that strong message today.

