Mr. Elbahi (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of my country welcomes this open debate on
the topic of children and armed conflict.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier today by the representative of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

The issue of the rights of children and the
protection of those rights is a top priority for the
Government of the Sudan, as evidenced by the efforts
and policies it has continued to implement. With regard
to the Government's achievements at the international
level, for example, my country has acceded to the
international Convention on the Rights of the Child and
of its two Optional Protocols, on the involvement of
children in armed conflict and on the sale of children,
child prostitution and child pornography.

My Government has also ratified two relevant
conventions of International Labour Organization
Convention No.138 concerning the Minimum Age for
Admission to Employment and Convention No. 182
concerning the Prohibition of and Immediate Action for
the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour.
The delegation of my country has expressed its support
for the campaign launched by the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict in cooperation with UNICEF. We
also took part in the inauguration ceremony of that
campaign.

Secondly, at the level of national legislation, the
law on the armed forces, the law on the police and
the law on security formally prohibit the recruitment
of children under 18 years into the ranks of the
armed forces. Furthermore, our country has set up a
comprehensive system ofjustice for minors as well as
a corrections system for minors. We are also involved
in the promulgation of the law of 2010 on the protection
of children, as well as the establishment of a special
prosecutor for the rights of minors.

Thirdly, in terms of a mechanism for the protection
ofminors, the Government has established a unit for the
protection of children within the armed forces, as well
as a department within the Ministry of the Interior for
the protection of children and families. Furthermore,
the Government has tasked the Prosecutor General of
Darfur to investigate the crimes committed in Darfur
since the start of the conflict there in 2003, in particular
allegations pertaining to violations of the rights of
children. The Government has also established a fact-
finding commission with regard to the abduction and
recruitment of children in Southern Kordofan and Blue
Nile states. Furthermore, last July the Government
inaugurated a national ten-year comprehensive plan for
the promotion of human rights in the Sudan.

Fourthly, regarding the level of cooperation with
United Nations agencies involved in the rights of
children, the Government of my country in Khartoum,
through the Permanent Mission of the Sudan to the
United Nations, is in constant cooperation with the
Office of the Assistant-Secretary-General and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, as well as with UNICEF,
in order to address all the concerns related to children.
On that point we would like to underscore the very
successful visit carried out by a mission of the UNICEF
Executive Board to the Sudan last May. We expect it to
have a positive impact on the situation of children in
the Sudan.

The Government of my country is pursuing its
efforts aimed at promoting the rights of children.
On that point, the National Council for Children in
the Sudan established a national task force last April
in charge of dealing with the situation of children in
emergency situations. It has been tasked with protecting
children, focusing on the situation of children that
find themselves in emergency situations, also in
coordination with the UNICEF office. In the same
context, the National Council for Children organized
a seminar in May on local cultures and their impact on
the protection of children, using as an example the issue
of the recruitment of children.

The seminar sought to achieve the following goals.
First, it sought to raise awareness of the international
standards and principles regarding the rights of
children, and to step up the role of the media with regard
to the local cultures that encourage the recruitment of
children, while reiterating the important role of civil
society organizations and scientific organizations in
that area.

Secondly, the goal was to prepare the launch of a
media campaign to announce and outline the goals of
the seminar. That campaign will be coordinated with
the UNICEF office in Khartoum and will be sending
awareness-raising messages through local community
leadership, including through women. The campaign
will involve coordination with the parties involved in
the recruitment of children in order to put an end to
such recruitment. All of those institutions are involved
in those efforts. Thanks to the policies I have just
mentioned and thanks to the concrete policies that we
have been implementing, we would like to call for the
Sudan to be dropped from the list in the annex to the
Secretary-General's report (S/2014/339).

As part of our comprehensive approach to the
protection of the rights of children, my country would
like to draw the Council's attention to the following
points. First, there is a need to assist the Governments
of countries in conflict in their efforts to put an end
to those conflicts by persuading or forcing the rebel
parties to lay down their arms.

Secondly, we need to remedy the deep-rooted
causes for the enrolment and recruitment of children
by focusing on the causes of conflict, in particular
poverty and the impact of climate change. It is also
important to put an end to the unilateral economic
sanctions that have been imposed on certain countries,
forgive the debts of the developing countries, provide
those countries with technical assistance and help them
develop their capabilities in the area of education and
training. Furthermore, it is important to participate in
assisting their reconstruction efforts.

Thirdly, it is essential to involve the Governments.

Fourthly, the signature by rebel movements of
action plans that seek to put an end to the recruitment
of children is not enough to ensure the end of the
violations that they commit. Those violations have to
be accompanied by the condemnation of those rebel
movements and by forcing those rebel movements to
lay down their arms and negotiate.

Fifthly, the delegation of my country, while being
fully committed to continuing its cooperation with
United Nations bodies mandated to protect the rights
of children, would like to call for efforts to ensure that
reports of the Secretary-General be based on confirmed
and reliable information. Sudanese rebels often
wear uniforms that are very similar to the uniforms
of the regular army in order to conceal themselves.
Furthermore, we would like the information in question
to be circulated to Member States before it is reflected
in reports of the Secretary-General. The report before
us today includes very important statistics and figures
and is very sensitive, and the fact that Governments
have not been shown the information means that the
information should be treated as allegations and not be
included in the report of the Secretary-General. Such
reports should be characterized by transparency and
credibility.

