I wish to congratulate France and Germany on their presidencies of the Security Council in June and July, respectively, and to thank you, Sir, for having organized this debate on children and armed conflict. I would point out that all the elements highlighted by Ecuador in the debate held on 27 May on the protection of civilians (see S/2020/465), in particular as concerns the consequences of conflicts, are even more applicable to boys and girls. On that occasion, I expressed Ecuador's interest in participating in the efforts of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict to further promote the efforts of the international community in terms of the protection of children. Today I have the honour of aligning Ecuador, for the first time, with the statement delivered on behalf of the Group of Friends, of which we have been a part since June. On 21 March, Ecuador also formalized its adherence to the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. Although there have been important advances in the 75 years since the United Nations was founded, the situation of children in armed conflict continues to reflect a devastating reality, as described in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525). Ecuador is also deploying considerable efforts at the regional level to fight the trafficking and recruitment of minors. However, this is a global challenge that concerns the entire international community. It represents yet another reason to increase, for example, the funds allocated to peacebuilding, not only for countries in conflict but also for cross-border cooperation in affected areas, and to direct them towards the protection of children. We as an Organization must focus greater efforts on the care of children, which has also deteriorated owing to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has exacerbated conditions in conflict zones. For that reason, Ecuador, together with Malaysia, Bangladesh, Egypt, Slovenia, Japan, Jamaica, Oman, Senegal and Sweden, initiated a statement of firm support for the Secretary-General's call for a ceasefire at the global level, which has received the support of more than 170 delegations. It is vital that the Security Council adopt the draft resolution on COVID-19 (S/2020/607) and endorse the call for a ceasefire so that it can be implemented more effectively. For that reason, I invite all Council members to do so in order to save the lives and alleviate the suffering of the more than 420 million children living in conflict zones. I would be remiss if I were to conclude without once again stressing the urgency of strengthening the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary- General for Children and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, especially in this context of increased pressure and challenges resulting from the pandemic. Finally, the message conveyed by Mariam, from Mali, this afternoon in the Security Council must not only be recorded in the record of speeches given during this debate but must also be heard and truly heeded by the Security Council and the United Nations in general. Mariam, 15 years old, is a contemporary of resolution 1612 (2005), whose fifteenth anniversary we are also commemorating. The best way to do so is to ensure the effective promotion and protection of the rights of children worldwide, with special attention paid to those who live in conflict zones and those who, despite still being in zones of peace, are at risk of being kidnapped or recruited.
