Mr. Fulci (Italy): First of all, allow me to express
my full agreement with, and support for, the statement
that the distinguished Permanent Representative of
Ireland, Ambassador John Campbell, is going to make
later as President of, and on behalf of, the European
Union.

More than 100 million mines are scattered
throughout the villages, fields and roads of one third of
the Member States of the United Nations. Every day 66
persons are killed, maimed or scarred by this lethal
weapon: an instrument of barbarity rather than of war, of
revenge rather than of defence. Its primary victims are
innocent civilians, the unarmed and children.

The economic devastation and terrible emotional and
physical toll of this indiscriminate weapon often obstruct
reconciliation, the peace process, reconstruction and the
reintegration of refugees. The spread of anti-personnel
land-mines jeopardizes regional stability, security and

 

development. It demonstrates the vital link between
international security and economic development.

Many men and women of good will and vision have
been crusading against this scourge. I want to pay homage
to one of them: American Senator Patrick Leahy of
Vermont, who came here so many times to persuade
ambassadors and delegations that something had to be
done - and done quickly - to carry out demining and to
stop mine production and export. Ever since, the ranks of
those opposing this threat have greatly increased in number.

Italy wants to be second to none in stressing the need
for every country in the world to stop manufacturing and
exporting land-mines. As early as December 1993 my
country joined the moratorium on the export of anti-
personnel land-mines, and in early 1994 Italy ceased
production of land-mines altogether. As a member of the
European Union we actively promoted a joint action in
1995, and as President of the European Union during the
first semester of this year my country contributed to the
Review Conference of the States Parties to the Convention
on Prohibitions or Restrictions of Certain Conventional
Weapons - only a first step, but a step in the right
direction.

That is why Italy supports the extension of that
agreement to every type of conflict and is convinced that an
effective and binding verification mechanism is needed for
every aspect of its implementation. May I take this
opportunity to draw the Council's attention to documents
A/49/275 of 2 November 1994 and N5 1/139 of 20 May
1996, which state the Italian national position and the
European position at the time of our presidency.

As the President of the Council mentioned at the
beginning, today's public debate is very rightly focused on
demining in connection with peace-keeping operations. The
Secretary-General stresses two main goals: first, to provide
a secure environment for peace-keeping forces and
personnel and, secondly, to implement wider mandates -
such as elections and freedom of movement - for which
huge mine-clearing programmes are prerequisite. In fact,
mines constitute one of the most significant dangers for the
deployment of any peace-keeping force. Two hundred and
seventy-three peace-keepers have been victims of anti-
personnel land-mines; 60 lost their lives and 213 were
wounded. To prevent such casualties we need not only
more sophisticated equipment, but above all better training
focused on detection, recognition and reporting of mines.

Experience in Cambodia, Mozambique, Afghanistan,
El Salvador and Bosnia and Herzegovina shows that,
particularly in demining activities, peace-keeping and
humanitarian assistance must be very closely coordinated.
More resources should be allocated to the Secretariat, the
Department of Peace-keeping Operations (DPKO) and the
Department of Humanitarian Affairs (DHA) for demining
programmes.
Demining stand-by capacity has been envisaged for
the DHA; but stand-by modules should also be used for
peace-keeping operations. Italy has made an effort, both
through bilateral and multilateral programmes, and has
hosted training courses in Italy for Egyptian, Pakistani
and Kuwaiti personnel. Courses have also been organized
in Turin by the International Labour Organization to train
the trainers for Afghanistan. We think this is an example
of the valuable programmes that can be pursued by the
Staff College in Turin.

The resources that the international community
allocates to demining also belong to post-conflict
peacebuilding activities. We have pledged more than
$600,000 to the trust fund for Angola and $1.1 million for
Mozambique, through the United Nations Office for
Humanitarian Assistance Cooperation and the United
Nations Development Programme. Italy has also
meaningfully contributed to the European Union's
financing for Angola, Mozambique, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia. Believe me, we will try to do
as much as we can, because we think this field is really
a priority.

Demining is crucial to international peace and
security and, hence, must also remain a priority issue for
the Security Council.

