Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening this very relevant
meeting on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1540 (2004), which is a vital component of
the global security architecture. My delegation would
like to register its deep appreciation for the efforts made
by the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) under your chairmanship, Madam, as well
as that of your predecessors.

The 10-year extension of the Committee's
mandate until 2021 has effectively led to a permanent,
institutionalized 1540 Committee. Yet much more
needs to be done. To start with, steps must be taken to
encourage United Nations States Members to accurately
comply with resolution 1540 (2004) in a timely manner
by adopting national legislation, in conjunction with
other legal instruments and mechanisms such as the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the
Proliferation Security Initiative, which is also known
as the Krakow Initiative. The key is to intensify efforts
to promote full implementation through outreach,
dialogue, assistance and cooperation by leveraging
the capabilities and experience of international
organizations and regional bodies. We will need to
address such institutional challenges as the timely
submission of State reports in order to regularize the
flow of information to the Committee, the provision
of feedback to interested States and the collection and
dissemination of best implementation practices. We
must also coordinate the efforts of the 1540 Committee
and the Group of Experts and build relationships with
the relevant organizations and partners.

All those steps will help to develop transparency
and political will with respect to internal issues,
institutional capacity and the availability of resources.
Resolution 1977 (2011) goes a considerable distance in
bridging that gap. Those goals must be accomplished
with the understanding that the Committee is a
subsidiary body of the Security Council, and not the
secretariat of an international treaty organization.

For its part, Kazakhstan has been actively engaged
in several initiatives. The decisions of the three Nuclear
Security Summits are being seriously implemented. My
country proposes that the cycle be extended beyond
2016. Kazakhstan is willing to convene such a summit
in 2020.

We seek to support the Department of Nuclear
Safety and Security of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), which has a special role to play in
assisting countries with the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. To further the cause of non-proliferation, my
country will shortly host the IAEA international low-
enriched uranium fuel bank, under the supervision of the
IAEA, negotiations for which are nearing completion.
We will also convert high-enriched uranium reactors
to low-enriched fuel, establish a regional nuclear
security training centre and strengthen its emergency
preparedness, response and mitigation capabilities.

As indicated, regional organizations and
institutions also play a pivotal role. For that reason,
Kazakhstan has cooperated actively in the work of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), the Commonwealth of Independent States and
OSCE countries. In particular, the States parties to
the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central
Asia are focused on strengthening nuclear safety and
resolution 1540 (2004). Two workshops were hosted by
my country, in Astana in 2011 and 2014, to enhance
cooperation in preventing illicit trafficking in nuclear
materials and to combat nuclear terrorism in our region.

Kazakhstan is the larger producer and supplier
of uranium, and therefore introduced the 2007
Export Control Act, which follows the most stringent
international standards. We are strictly committed
to implementing all Security Council resolutions.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is one of the priorities of our
non-proliferation policy. We have joined virtually all
global treaties and conventions related to combating
weapons of mass destruction, and also acceded to
all 13 universal international conventions against
terrorism.

My country is a member of the Nuclear Suppliers
Group, the International Code of Conduct against
Ballistic Missile Proliferation and the Zangger
Committee. While awaiting accession to the Australia
Group, the Missile Technology Control Regime and the
Wassenaar Arrangement, Kazakhstan is unilaterally
committed to implementing the demands and regimes
of those bodies.

Kazakhstan is fully committed to joining the
international effort in strengthening the work of the
1540 Committee.

