Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Grandi,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, for
his briefing. I think that this is clearly a topic that
moves very many members of the Council. I also
wanted to pay tribute to the High Commissioner and all
his staff, including those around the world. The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) probably sees people at the worst point in
their lives and the High Commissioner and his team do
an incredible job in the face of increasing insecurity
and displacement. I ask to please pass on our thanks.
The United Kingdom is a strong supporter of UNHCR
through both core and country funding, and we gave
nearly $100 million dollars last year. I was also very
interested to hear what the representative of Equatorial
Guinea said about the African Union interest in this
subject as well as its desire to establish a humanitarian
agency. It is very good to see humanitarian issues
receive such prominence.

The principal role that UNHCR plays with regard
to returns is very much one that sets the international
standard and that by which we should judge these major
conflicts. Returns are a part ofthe key durable solution.
It is important to remember that for the majority of
refugees and host countries alike return is, by some
margin, the preferred option. But as Mr. Grandi said,
it is not always available and sometimes results in
some rather pernicious trade-offs where refugees are
encouraged to go back in circumstances that are very
far short of safe, voluntary and dignified. I think that he
is right to challenge us to be more strategic, and I would
welcome anything more he could say in that regard.

Looking at the individual countries that he
mentioned, I think they show that the reality is difficult.
I thought what he said about Libya was worrying. I
am sorry that the staff are under pressure. If there is
anything more that he can tell us about what immediate
steps would be helpful, that would feed into the
discussions we hope to have later this week on Libya.

In Syria we do not support returns where the
conditions do not allow time and we look to UNHCR to
continue to set the standard of the three safe, dignified
and voluntary principles.

Looking at Myanmar, we have worked hard
with UNHCR and the United Nations Development
Programme to try and help create conditions. The
34 projects the High Commissioner mentioned are
welcome but they are certainly not enough. We would
welcome any more he could say about how exactly we
could help to expand those projects from the Council
and what exactly the state of play is on the memorandum
of understanding with the Government.

That said, we recognize the challenges ofa situation
like the Rohingya and Myanmar and Bangladesh. We
are not ideological about how the repatriation process
occurs as long as international principles are upheld.
Tomorrow we will have a briefing on Venezuela, where
the figures that the High Commissioner was quoting
will be very relevant. I look forward to hearing what the
representatives of Peru and Columbia have to say later
in the week about the refugee burden.

I wanted to turn to the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration. From our perspective,
it is a major opportunity to deliver longer-term
solutions, looking at jobs, education, infrastructure
and opportunities for livelihoods, but, as we all know,
they must be delivered in a way that supports those host
communities and countries that are generous hosts. I
believe that the whole-of-society approach in the Global
Compact must be right, getting the right mix of actors
around the table and, by doing that, allowing UNHCR
to concentrate on its core mandate. We look forward to
the first global refugee forum in December and we are
ready to play our part.

Lastly, I was struck by what Mr. Grandi said
about toxicity. I think that is something to which the
Council ought to return. As we look at individual
country situations, we ought to remind everyone of the
humanitarian principles in play.

