Mr. Hunter (United States of America): We are
pleased with the Council's strong statement of support
for the efforts of the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Western Sahara, Horst Kohler, to achieve
a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political
solution that would provide for the self-determination
of the people of Western Sahara. We are disappointed,
however, that some members of the Council still chose
to abstain in the voting, despite our sincere efforts to
underscore the Council's unity towards the ongoing
political process.

With this mandate renewal, the United States
sought to maintain the Council's focus on that political
process. The Security Council's objective should be
to advance a timely and mutually acceptable political
solution. As the Council has clearly stated today with
this mandate, it is crucial that the parties and the
neighbouring States cooperate more fully with each
other and build additional trust, which is needed to
achieve a political solution.

We believe that the Council's close attention to this
issue been instrumental to the political progress made
over the past year. In December, Morocco, the Frente
Popular para la Liberacion de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio
de Oro (Frente POLISARIO), Algeria and Mauritania
met under United Nations auspices in Geneva for the
first direct talks since 2012. In March, the delegations
met again and began in-depth discussions on how
to achieve a mutually acceptable political solution.
Those ongoing consultations between the Personal
Envoy, Morocco, the Frente POLISARIO, Algeria
and Mauritania, which aimed at achieving a realistic,
practicable and enduring solution for the Western
Sahara, are crucial to laying the groundwork for a
negotiated settlement.

As we have said before, United Nations peacekeeping
operations must support political solutions, and we will
continue to assess the performance ofthe United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara against
that principle. We express our full support to Personal
Envoy Kohler and his team. We stand ready for his
briefings to the Council as he deems appropriate. We
also thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Western Sahara, Colin Stewart, and the
members of MINURSO for their efforts.

