Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to join colleagues is thanking Ambassador
Danforth for his stewardship of the Council in
November. I would also like to wish you every success,
Mr. President, during your presidency in December.
You will have the full support of the delegation of the
United Kingdom.

The resolution we have adopted today not only
extends the mandate of the United Nations Operation
in Burundi (ONUB) for another six months, it also
contains important messages to the Burundian parties
and, most prominently, to the Forces national de
liberation (Palipehutu-FNL). The resolution is the first
reaction of the Council to the Gatumba massacre,
which unfortunately is not the only case of atrocities
committed during the more-than-a-decade-long conflict
in Burundi. That recent history is also a record of
widespread human rights Violations, as well as one of
impunity. To achieve peace, that cycle has to be
broken.

The fight against impunity for grave violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law is a
matter of the utmost concern, and it needs to be
addressed as a matter of priority by Burundi and by
other States in the Great Lakes region. The Burundian
justice system therefore desperately needs our political
and material support, if the fight against impunity is to
be won.

We welcome the intention of the Government of
Burundi, expressed by what it said in its statement, to
refer the matter of the massacre to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) following its own internal
investigation. One of the recommendations of the
United Nations report on Gatumba is indeed to
encourage the Government of Burundi to invoke the
jurisdiction of the ICC.

The United Kingdom particularly welcomes the
support that the Council has now expressed in this
resolution for efforts which States are making, aimed at
ending impunity, as well as national efforts. That
includes efforts which States are making in cooperation
with international institutions and tribunals, notably the
International Criminal Court.

There are different views within the Council on
the ICC. We are not seeking to impose our Views on
others, but the Government of Burundi is making a
significant effort to investigate the massacre in the
Gatumba refugee camp, including through its key
decision to refer the case to the ICC. It is right,
therefore, that the Council should encourage all
Governments and parties concerned in the region
actively to cooperate with those efforts.

