Mr. Simonovic' (Croatia): I would like to thank
the High Representative and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for their reports and for the
opportunity to give comments and to ask some
questions.

My Government totally supports the approach of
the High Representative and the Special Representative
to the effect that, in Bosnia, there is no time for
pessimism and that the key to a sustainable Bosnia and
Herzegovina is reform. We also fully agree with the
High Representative's recent statement that Dayton
should be the floor and not the ceiling.

Concerning the elections and comments
concerning them, we would like also to pay tribute to
Bosnia and Herzegovina for holding successful
elections and to draw the attention of the Council to the
fact that, during the electoral campaign, there were
some encouraging signs indicating that the scope of
values shared by all major political forces is
broadening and that it does include support for the
unity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and for the
constituent status of all three constituent peoples
throughout the territory of the country.

Concerning the outcome of the elections, we
share the View that the key, the yardstick by which
political parties should be measured, is their support
for reform. We believe that a country becomes normal
not only when its Government becomes normal, but
when its opposition can be considered normal as well.

We give full support to justice and jobs
programmes. We find that the role of justice is of
immense importance to peace-building in all post-
conflict societies, and especially in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We think that the fight against corruption
is extremely important and that it is key to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's ability to attract foreign direct
investment.

My Government is particularly worried by the
comments of both the High Representative and the
Special Representative concerning Karadzic and
Mladic and we think that it is questionable as to
whether, with Karadzic and Mladic at large, we can
speak about a sustainable Bosnia and Herzegovina. My
question to them is: Is there anything they think the
Security Council should do in this regard? This is, in
any case, a discussion that should be continued next
week, when we will hear a briefing here by the
Prosecutor for the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, Carla del Ponte.

Finally, I would like to thank Jacques Klein for
everything and all the good he has done in South-East
Europe, first in Croatia and then in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I would like to remind members of the
Council that, under his command, the first arrest of an
indicted war criminal by international forces took place.

