Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I assume you,
Mr. President, are sharing your water with all the
members of the Security Council who need it.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing. I also welcome the Ambassador of the Sudan
here. The Under-Secretary-General talked about some
of the remarkable changes that have happened since the
Council last met on the Sudan (S/PV.8603). I would add
one to those, which was the sight of and opportunity
to hear Prime Minister Hamdok during the General
Assembly's high-level week. I think that he made a
huge impression on all of those of us who met him and
listened to what he had to say. If a better illustration of
the change that has taken place in the Sudan over the
past few months were ever wanted, it was that for me.
I again congratulate and salute the people of the Sudan
for the courage that they have shown in choosing the
path that they are now on. I am sure that it will not
always be a straightforward path, but we and others are
there supporting them.

As Under-Secretary-General Lacroix set out, we
continue to see positive developments in the Sudan as a
civilian Government takes forward the implementation
ofthe Constitutional Declaration. Like him, I would like
to welcome the appointment of women to key positions
within the new Government and also the milestone
agreement to open an Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in the Sudan.
But as we were enjoined, we must all support
unequivocally the new momentum behind the peace
talks, in Mr. Lacroix's words. From the United Kingdom's
perspective, the start of those peace talks between the
Government and the armed movements - the work
done in Juba - is of particular importance to note. We
therefore encourage all sides, in particular the armed
movements, to engage constructively, immediately and
without preconditions so that a comprehensive, fair
and inclusive peace agreement can finally be achieved.
I would also like to say how much we welcome the
decision to remove bureaucratic impediments imposed
on humanitarian actors and hope that this decision
will be implemented fully to enable much-needed,
unfettered humanitarian access throughout Darfur and
wherever it is needed in the Sudan.

Turning to the situation on the ground,
notwithstanding the positive elements that we have
learned about today, we cannot ignore the fact that the
security, humanitarian and human rights situations in
Darfur remain volatile. We remain concerned about
the gaps that Mr. Lacroix mentioned, namely, the
increase in intercommunal conflict and criminality,
continued civilian displacement and human rights
violations and abuses, all of which are documented in
the special report of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations (S/2019/816). The Council, the United
Nations, the African Union and, most critically of all,
the Government of the Sudan will need to seriously
consider how to address those continued challenges in
order to prevent them from undermining the transition
to peacebuilding.

With respect to the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), let me first say that the United Kingdom
remains absolutely committed to ensuring a transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, and that it is
successful and responsible. As I have already said, we
are extremely optimistic about that and the opportunities
presented by the new civilian Government and the
prospects for a comprehensive peace agreement in not
only Darfur but also other areas.

It is a complex situation, and the root causes remain
unresolved. I think that we will take into consultations
a more detailed conversation on UNAMID's mandate,
but let me just say here that the United Kingdom will
be guided by the emphasis that the Government of the
Sudan has placed on the importance of not creating a
security vacuum during the ongoing peace efforts. I note
the communique of the African Union in that context.
We certainly believe that withdrawing UNAMID at this
critical time would create such a vacuum and remove a
key part of international support to the peace process.

On the follow-on side that the Under-Secretary-
General also touched on, I think that it is really
important, as he said, that the priorities for the follow-on
are aligned with those of the Government, and we think
that it is important to ensure ongoing support to Darfur.
We will want to give the Government time to consider
the options that it wants for future international support
and cooperation.

Let me finish by simply welcoming the
commitment - as I believe everyone already has and
the United Kingdom certainly has - made by the
United Nations and the African Union to engaging
actively with the Government in the coming months on
options for a follow-on presence. We look forward to
receiving them, I believe it was said in December, and
to making progress on the transition from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding. All of us support the people and
Government of the Sudan at this time.

