Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation, through me, would like to
welcome the convening of this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, and to thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the Palestinian Authority,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for the clarity of his briefing.
The information he shared with us once again confronts
us with the extreme volatility of the situation on the
ground and in the peace process, which has clearly been
struggling since 2014.

Against the backdrop of the particularly tense
situation in Jerusalem, a city that is a symbol of three
monotheistic religions, my delegation calls upon the
parties to work to reduce tensions, as Mr. Mladenov
urged. We reiterate our call for respect for the status
quo of the Muslim and Christian holy sites, including
the Holy Esplanade, and welcome the important role
Jordan continues to play in that regard.

The fourth International Conference on
Jerusalem - whichjust took place in Baku, Azerbaijan,
on 20 and 21 July, at the initiative of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, in cooperation with the Organization for Islamic
Cooperation - rightly drew attention to the centrality
of the issue of that city in the search for negotiated
peaceful solution to the conflict. While expressing
our condolences to the relatives of the victims of the
recent violence, we reiterate our disapproval and
condemnation of all forms and manifestations of
violence and terrorism, regardless of the perpetrators
or motives.

On 19 and 20 June, here at OrganizationHeadquarters
in New York, that Committee, in accordance with
its mandate from the General Assembly, organized
a forum to mark 50 years since the Arab-Israeli war.
On that occasion, Israeli and Palestinian participants,
as well as experts and members of civil society from
various backgrounds, with innovative ideas, urged the
international community - in particular the Security
Council, in View of its international obligations - to
work tirelessly in support of the two-State solution,
which is the only viable solution, as it would guarantee
peace and security to both Israelis and the Palestinians,
who are condemned by geography to live together.

At a time when we agree on the need to give priority
to conflict prevention, the disastrous humanitarian
and socioeconomic situation in Gaza, which appears
to be a time bomb, should receive our full attention.
The Special Coordinator recently alerted us to the
scale of the crisis, at the same time launching a call for
$35 million in funding to cover emergency needs.

In its report entitled Gaza Ten Years Later, the
United Nations country team - which in 2012 had
already pointed out that Gaza would become unliveable
by 2020 should the trend continue - describes once
again a most bleak humanitarian situation. In addition,
there are structural problems linked to the supply of
water and electricity, and to sanitation, not to mention
the rebuilding of infrastructure. My delegation
therefore urges Palestinian political actors to set aside
their divisions in order to tackle humanitarian and
socioeconomic challenges, in particular the electricity
supply gap, which affects about 2 million people, half of
whom are children. Against that backdrop, we reiterate
our support for ongoing efforts to ensure that the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East has predictable, adequate
and sustained resources, with a view to enabling it to
continue its vital work for the benefit of millions of
Palestinian refugees.

Beyond the humanitarian aspect, however, with
the support of the international community, the parties
should work towards the recovery of the Palestinian
economy, particularly in Gaza, which suffers from the
decline in assistance from external partners. In these
difficult circumstances, we renew our appeal to the
parties, in accordance with their repeated commitments
to the two-State solution, to open negotiations that
would lead to a definitiveg peace that responds to the
security needs of Israel and the legitimate aspirations
of the Palestinians for a sovereign State.

While renewing its support for the diplomatic
initiatives undertaken by several countries - including
Egypt, France, Jordan and the Russian Federation - my
delegation also calls for the culmination of the ongoing
efforts of the United States with a view to relaunching

the peace process, on the basis of existing platforms
such as the Arab Peace Initiative, which was reaffirmed
at the latest Summit of the League of Arab States.

Seventy years after the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 181 (II), the international
community, in particular the Security Council, has no
choice but to redouble its efforts to fully implement
these texts, so that, like the Israeli people, who enjoy
a prosperous State, the Palestinian people can see
their legitimate aspirations for a sovereign and viable
State fulfilled.

Senegal will continue to support any initiative to
achieve the two-State solution.

