Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are very pleased to welcome you, Sir, as
you preside over the Security Council at this important
meeting. We would like to thank our Austrian partners
for their initiative to once again address the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We would
also like to express our gratitude for Austria's
contribution to the drafting of the resolution that the
Council has just adopted (resolution 1894 (2009)). We
are also grateful for the statements made by Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, Under-Secretary-General
Holmes and Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Deputy High
Commissioner for Human Rights.

We support the resolution that the Council has
adopted today, which is a comprehensive document
that was the outcome of a thorough discussion and
which encompasses legal, humanitarian and
peacekeeping issues as they pertain to the issue under
discussion.

The Russian Federation supports the peaceful
settlement of disputes. There should be no room for
violence and armed conflict in the twenty-first century.
However, we live in the real world. In spite of efforts
by the international community, conflicts continue to
occur and to take the lives of many people, most of
them civilians. It is therefore civilians who require our
special protection, first and foremost women, children,
older persons and the humanitarian staff who assist
them.

We are convinced that, in order to remedy the
situation, we must reject selective and one-sided
approaches to violations of international humanitarian
law. There must be strict adherence to human rights
standards, as well as compliance with the relevant
decisions of the Security Council.

We unequivocally condemn both deliberate
attacks on civilians and the loss of civilian life as the
result of the indiscriminate or disproportionate use of
force, which is a gross violation of international
humanitarian law. We welcome the fact that this issue
has been duly reflected in the resolution that the
Council has adopted today. There is no justification for
armed groups that attack civilians, carry out terrorist
acts and take hostages.

We would like to underscore the shared
responsibility of all parties to ensure the protection of
civilians and to adhere strictly to international
humanitarian law. We also support the thorough
investigation of incidents involving violence, including
punishing those responsible. That also applies to the
activities of private security companies, whose actions
often victimize innocent people.

The protection of civilians is primarily the
responsibility of the Governments of the States
involved in a conflict. All parties to an armed conflict
have the responsibility to protect civilians. The actions
of the international community should be focused on
assisting national efforts in that regard. The
international community can only take appropriate
steps, especially when it comes to the use of force,
under the auspices and with the consent of the Security
Council, as well as in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations. Of course, we should always bear
in mind the economic, social, historical, religious,
cultural and other specific features of each country and
region, including the specific nature of each conflict
and the possible ways to resolve it.

The issue of the protection of civilians during
peacekeeping operations still requires more detailed
work. That should be done in harmony with further
steps to enhance the effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. In that regard, we are in
favour of further fine-tuning the practice of operational
consultations between members of the Security

Council, troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat on all aspects of peacekeeping operations,
including during the planning stages, on the basis of
existing procedures and arrangements and previous
decisions of the Security Council.

There is no doubt that the Security Council
should develop clear and realistic mandates to protect
civilians, bearing in mind the material and financial
resources available to United Nations peacekeeping
operations and the operational guidelines in that
regard, as well as on the basis of consultations with
Member States.

At the same time, we must not forget that the
protection of civilians is only one aspect of the
mandate of a peacekeeping operation. The main task of
United Nations peacekeepers is to assist the peace
process. In the protection of civilians, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants
can play a very important role. Such efforts require an
appropriate level of support from United Nations
peacekeepers. An important factor is the work of
humanitarian agencies, which should be carried out in
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and
humanitarian principles. The success of such action
depends largely on how it accords with the efforts of
the international community in achieving a peaceful
settlement.

