Mr. Amendola (Italy): First of all, I would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Onanga-Anyanga for his comprehensive briefing.
We commend the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic for its tireless efforts in halting violence and
protecting civilians. Its strong position against the
armed groups prevented them from further expanding
their control over the majority of the country. I would
also like to seize this opportunity to reiterate our
condolences on the loss suffered by the Mission.

I also thank Assistant Secretary-General Gilmour
for his briefing. We welcome the United Nations
mapping project documenting serious violations of
international humanitarian law and violations and
abuses of human rights committed in the country from
2003 to 2015. That could become an important tool for
the special criminal court, which we hope will soon be
fully operational.

Italy is concerned about the significant deterioration
of the security situation in the country. Over the past
few months, it has had a severe impact on the civilian
population. It risks derailing the progress achieved over
the past year. In that fragile security environment, the
already dramatic humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate, with increasing numbers of newly displaced
people and refugees.

The worsening security situation in the country
proves that the political process is not moving forward.
It is positive that the meeting held in Bangui in
April of the Consultative Follow-up Committee on
Disarmament, Demobilization, Reintegration and
Repatriation was attended by representatives of all 14
armed groups. Nonetheless, it seems that that platform
is not sufficient to stop the fighting. That is the reason
that other actors have stepped in to support and
complement the reconciliation process led by President
Touadera. In that regard, we welcome and commend the
efforts led by Sant'Egidio, on which President Marco
Impagliazzo just briefed the Council. The commitment
and the process in which Sant'Egidio is involved is
for us a secure point of reference for the political
decision-making process.

We remain fully supportive of the African
mediation initiative and we hope that in the coming
weeks the African Union will be able to put in place
a road map to which the Council could give voice its
support. Italy believes that that is the key to ensuring
close coordination of the various initiatives, bearing in
mind that President Touade'ra, who was democratically
elected by the people last year, must remain the pivot of
the Central African political scene. We therefore call on
the authorities, on one side, and all the armed groups,
on the other side, to step up their efforts and address the
root causes ofthe conflict. For its part, the international
community has to concretely and significantly help the
Central African Government in the different sectors.
In that regard, we welcome the action plan of the
Secretary-General and fully support the priorities
outlined by Special Representative Onanga-Anyanga.

Italy remains an active player in the humanitarian
development sector through its development cooperation
and supports the pledges made at the Brussels
Conference. We hope that all the relevant parties will
swiftly proceed with creating the conditions for pledges
made at the Brussels Conference to be eventually
turned into reality. In that regard, just a few days ago,
the European Union and the Government of the Central
African Republic signed a programme of support for
the Central African Republic worth €302 million over
the 2014-2020 period, by which the European Union
showed a clear commitment to stepping up its support
for the authorities and the people of the country.

The European Union also plays a major role in
complementing the efforts of MINUSCA on the ground.
The European Union's Military Training Mission in
the country is providing an invaluable contribution to
security sector reform. In fact, it has just completed
the training of the first battalion of the Central African
Republic armed forces. But any kind of international
support and any discussion on the priorities for the
future of the country could prove to be useless without
a real political agreement, as our friends mentioned
before in their briefings.

At this critical juncture for the history of the
country, the Central African Republic should make an
effort in the direction of long-lasting peace.

