Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela co-sponsored and voted in favour of
resolution 2231 (2015), which ratifies the agreements
reached between the P5+1, the European Union and
the Islamic Republic of Iran. We are convinced that
through this resolution the Security Council is giving
its firm backing to an important agreement that ushers
in a new era in relations among the various States.

Venezuela welcomes this important agreement and
congratulates all the delegations that participated in
the negotiations process that led to the signing of this
important document - on the courage, persistence,
political will and commitment they showed throughout
the 18 months of intense negotiations. The results
achieved reveal the importance of political and
diplomatic efforts to find a peaceful solution to the
impasse, in accordance with Article 2 of the Charter
of the United Nations. It also shows once again that,
where there is political commitment among the
parties, peace and dialogue impose themselves in the
face of warmongering speeches that fuel distrust and
confrontation.

This agreement is the triumph of diplomacy over
war. The full implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action will guarantee the Islamic Republic of
Iran the right to exercise its sovereign right to the use
of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes with a view to
promoting its technological and energy independence.
We are also convinced that this instrument will
contribute positively to the birth of a new phase of
diplomatic relations between Iran and the States party
to the agreement, based on mutual trust and respect and
a collective commitment with a view to strengthening
international peace and security.

We are pleased that the agreements reached will in
the end allow for the final lifting ofthe Security Council
sanctions regime as well as other unilateral coercive
measures unlawfully applied in other areas related to
Iran's nuclear programme, which include measures
restricting access to economic, commercial, financial,
technological, energy goods and services, inter alia,
which has had a negative impact on the Iranian people
and other States in their cooperative relations with
Iran. We reaffirm our full support and implementation
of this historic effort with a view to achieving the
welfare and progress of the Iranian people. We hope
that the agreement reached will mark the beginning
of a far-reaching political process that paves the way
to progress towards a peaceful solution to the other
conflicts taking place in the Middle East - including
regarding the Palestinian issue, Syria, Iraq, Yemen and
extremist terrorism - that are threatening peace and
stability in the region.

In conclusion, we believe that the international
community must now support and demonstrate
the same political will with a view to achieving
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East in
conformity with the package of measures agreed at
the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which is
necessary and of major importance in achieving peace
and stability in that troubled region.

