Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing. I have also listened carefully to the statement
made by the Permanent Observer of Palestine.

The current situation in the Middle East remains
complex and fragile and is a source of concern. The
international community should continue to push for a
political settlement of the question of Palestine. This is
not only in line with the universal expectations of the
people of the region, including the Palestinians and
Israelis, and the international community, but also
touches directly on lasting peace and security in the
Middle East.

China has always maintained that, on the basis of
relevant Security Council resolutions, the principle of
land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Middle East Road Map to peace, Palestine and Israel
should settle their differences through dialogue and
negotiation that will result in the establishment of an
independent State of Palestine so that Palestine and
Israel can coexist in peace.

At present, the issue of settlements is the greatest
obstacle to the resumption of direct talks. China urges
Israel to immediately and completely cease settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including the West Bank and East Jerusalem. China
hopes that Israel will adopt a serious and responsible
approach and create the conditions necessary to
building mutual trust and relaunching the peace talks.

China welcomes and supports all international
peace efforts to resolve Palestinian and Israeli
differences and to restart dialogue and negotiation. We
hope that Palestinians and Israelis will make common
efforts for the early resumption of talks and the
achievement of substantive results.

The humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, especially in the Gaza Strip,
remains harsh and serious. That is not good for
regional stability, nor is it conducive to the creation of
appropriate conditions for peace talks between
Palestine and Israel. We hope the parties concerned
will effectively implement the relevant United Nations
resolutions and quickly and completely lift the
blockade on the Gaza Strip and return to the people of
Gaza normal and respectful conditions for survival and
development. The international community should
continue to provide more assistance and support to the
Palestinian people. China is ready to join hands with
the various parties and to continue to play a
constructive role for the early achievement of a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.

