Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Algeria
welcomes the attention that the Security Council
continues to devote to the issue of small arms, whose
importance for the maintenance of international peace
and security is now self-evident. I thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2003/l2l7) and Mr. Abe for
his excellent introduction of it. I should like now to
make the following observations.

First of all, we must emphasize that the issue of
small arms - like that of conflict prevention - is an
area where the shared responsibility of the General
Assembly and the Security Council is obvious. The
Assembly is doing its part admirably: the convening in
July 2001 of the United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects, followed by the adoption of a Programme
of Action aimed at preventing, combating and
eliminating the illicit trade in such weapons, made
great progress in heightening our collective awareness
of the spread of this scourge and of the threat it poses
to international peace and security, in that it maintains
and exacerbates conflicts and fuels terrorist networks
throughout the world.

For its part, the Security Council constantly
confronted with this scourge's grave consequences in
managing conflict situations and conducting its fight
against international terrorism, took the initiative -
through today's meeting and those preceding it in
August 2001 and October 2002 - to join its efforts
with those of the General Assembly, particularly by
formulating precise recommendations.

In that regard, my delegation shares the
Secretary-General's view that we must strengthen the
interaction between those two principal organs in order
to promote the development of long-term strategies to
put an end to the illicit proliferation of small arms. In
the normative and legislative areas, such interaction
should be carried out swiftly within four areas.

The first is the framework of the open-ended
working group charged with negotiating an
international instrument to enable States to identify and
trace, in a timely and reliable manner, illicit small arms
and light weapons, which the General Assembly
created last month through its resolution 58/241.

The second is the establishment of supplementary
measures to strengthen international cooperation to
prevent, combat and eliminate the illicit brokering of
small arms, particularly through the widespread
establishment of national registers of arms brokers and,
in the case of arms embargo violations, registers of
intermediary firms and transport agents, as well as the
organization of broad-based consultations open to
States and other entities, provided for in resolution
58/241.

The third area is that of the objectives to be
pursued under an end-user certificate regime at the
regional and international levels and under an
information-exchange and verification mechanism to
monitor exports more effectively.

The fourth and final area is the improvement of
transparency in the sphere of armaments - particularly
efforts aimed at universal and consistent participation
in the United Nations Register of Conventional
Arms - it being understood that transparency must
also cover national production and related purchases as
well as military allocations. From that perspective, the
establishment of a mechanism for structured
cooperation between the General Assembly and the
Security Council is very desirable.

Because it bears primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council, for its part, should make further use
of the means of action conferred on it by the Charter to
fight the illicit trade in and circulation of small arms.
The Council should remind Member States -
particularly the countries that produce small arms - of
their obligation to implement all resolutions containing
sanctions, particularly arms embargoes, and to enforce
arms embargoes more rigorously and effectively, in
conformity with Article 41 of the Charter.

Consideration of the reports and activities of the
various sanctions committees and mechanisms
established by the Council in various regions reveals,
however, a diversity of situations, requiring diverse
actions. The example of West Africa shows that the
widespread idea that the States neighbouring conflict
areas bear primary responsibility for arms embargo
violations does not always hold true. The praiseworthy
commitment by the States of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) in settling the
conflicts in Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone and
Guinea-Bissau shows that we should attribute the illicit
circulation of small arms in that conflict region more to
the very piecemeal implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) processes,
with well-known consequences for the transfer of idle
former combatants - particularly the vulnerable
category of child soldiers - from one conflict zone to
another, and the criminal phenomenon of mercenaries,
as well as for the entry of new quantities of weapons. It
is therefore of the greatest importance that the Security
Council echo most resolutely the concerns expressed
by the Secretary-General in his report on the need to
provide DDR operations with planned, foreseeable and
adequate financing, without which the resources and
efforts deployed to settle so many conflicts will have
simply been wasted.

The particular nature of the situation in West
Africa should not, however, hide the fact that arms
embargo violations and the illicit exploitation of
natural resources by countries in conflicts which they
maintain and fuel with illicit weapons are often the
responsibility of Member States which are sometimes
neighbours and sometimes geographically remote
weapons producers. We believe that the Council should
envisage the adoption of enforcement measures in that
respect, given the dimensions that the threat posed by
the illegal trafficking of small arms has assumed.

Furthermore, a precise analysis of the factors
generating and developing the traffic in small arms will
help to clarify the concepts, enabling us to prevent
lumping it together with the legal trade in small arms
covered by Article 51 of the Charter, which recognizes
each State's inherent right to legitimate defence and
right to put in place a system of self-defence.

To conclude, I reaffirm the importance of
international cooperation in the fight against
transnational organized crime, which cannot be
separated from international cooperation against
terrorism. Collaboration among custom, police and
information services is essential, and it is encouraging
to learn that efforts are currently being undertaken to
strengthen the Interpol Weapons and Explosives
Tracking System.

