Mr. Jallow: I feel greatly honoured to once more
present a progress report on the work of the Office
of the Prosecutor of both the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, this time
covering the six months since December 2014.

The ICTR has now reached a milestone in the
march to completion and closure. In 2015, the Office
of the Prosecutor presented its oral arguments in the
case of the Prosecutor vs Nyiramasuhako and five
others, otherwise known as the Butare case. This is
the last appeal and the last case of the ICTR. The oral
hearing that took place in April is therefore significant
in bringing to a close a very important chapter in the
life of the Tribunal and the mandate of the Office of
the Prosecutor. We expect that the Security Council's
request that all cases pending at the ICTR be completed
by end of 2015 will be fulfilled by delivery of the final
judgement in the Butare case before the end of 2015.
In that regard, I would like to thank all the staff of the
Office of the Prosecutor of the ICTR, and indeed of the
whole Tribunal, who have for several years devoted their
time, talent and energies to the execution of the ICTR
mandate and generally to the cause of international
justice.

Accordingly, a sizeable number of appeal staff,
including some members of the Butare appeal team,
among them secretarial, language and administrative
staff who worked tirelessly over the years in the appeals
division of the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICTR,
were separated from the Tribunal in May 2015 following
the conclusion of the oral hearing in the Butare case. A
small number of staff has been retained in the Appeals
Division in order to complete outstanding pre- and post-
appeal proceedings in the Butare case, as well as other
ongoing closure- and legacy-related activities. The
Council will recall that earlier on, with the conclusion
of trials and the establishment of the Mechanism's
Arusha branch, the Investigations and Trial Divisions
of the Office of the Prosecutor had been abolished.

The Office of the Prosecutor continues to focus on
and make progress in other areas such as archiving,
disclosures and legacy projects. In the past six months
since November 2014, some 1,100 boxes of material
linked to active cases, particularly related to the
three Mechanism fugitives, Felicien Kabuga, Protais
Mpiranya and Augustin Bizimana, have been cleaned,
processed, classified and transferred to the Office
of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism. A significant
amount of material in closed cases has already been
handed over to the Mechanism Registry and that
process will continue to the end of 2015. However, staff
separation and attrition continue to hamper efforts
towards timely completion of the remaining archival
work of the Office of the Prosecutor, and current staff
have been consistently urged to double their efforts.
Notwithstanding those contraries, we shall continue to
work towards concluding the remaining archiving work
of the Office of the Prosecutor by the end of 2015.

The completion of legacy and best practices
projects, including the writing of the genocide narrative
based on facts judicially established by the Tribunal,
remains on course for conclusion by the end of the
year. In January 2015, the Office of the Prosecutor
completed and published in the ICTR and Mechanism
websites its report on the Tribunal's experience in the
referral of cases to national jurisdictions, highlighting
the challenges of empowering national jurisdictions to
discharge their primary responsibility to investigate
and prosecute international crimes, as well as ways
to address some of those challenges. We believe that
the ICTR experience carries useful lessons for the
implementation of the principle of complementarity,
the bedrock of international criminal justice.

Turning now to the Mechanism, I wish to report
that the Office of The Prosecutor continues to take
over functions from the Offices of the Prosecutors
of the ICTR and the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), as mandated by
the Mechanism Statute. A few months ago, in April,
during the period of remembrance of the 1994 Rwandan
genocide, I visited Rwanda and met with various
Rwandan Government officials to discuss various issues
of mutual interest, particularly in respect to tracking
fugitives and management of the cases referred by
the ICTR to Rwanda for trial. The Mechanism Office
of the Prosecutor continues to intensify its efforts in
tracking the three top fugitives earmarked for trial by
the Mechanism. We remain fully committed to their
arrest and trial.

We continue to work closely with our partners in
the Government of Rwanda, particularly the National
Public Prosecution Authority, with INTERPOL and
with and the United States War Crimes Rewards
Program under the State Department's Office for
Global Criminal Justice. The Investigations Section
of the Office of the Prosecutor has been strengthened
with new and additional staff, fresh initiatives have
been taken and new working methods have been put in
place to locate the fugitives and bring them to justice. I
must stress however, that those internal measures need
to be supported by the full cooperation of all States,
particularly those where indictees are suspected to
reside, if the tracking efforts are to be successful.

With regard to judicial activities, judgment in the
Ngirabatware appeal case, the only Arusha branch
appeal case, was delivered on 18 December 2014, with
his convictions for genocide affirmed by the Appeals
Chamber. Following the delivery of that judgement, the
staff members of the ad hoc appeals teams handling
that case have now been separated from the Mechanism
in accordance with the policy to keep the staff size of
the Mechanism at a low level. Meanwhile, the core
staff, with assistance from appeal staff of the Office
of the Prosecutor of the ICTR, continues to deal with
post-appeal review litigation arising from requests
filed by persons convicted by the ICTR. The Office
also continues to make preparations, including the
creation of rosters, for the speedy recruitment of staff
to manage the trials of the three Mechanism fugitives
for the Arusha branch, and the possible appeals in
the Seselj, Karadzu': and Hadzie cases, which are
anticipated during the next 12 months. As a matter of
fact, recruitment has already commenced in order to
manage those three possible appeals.

We will continue our policy of active engagement
with the countries in the former Yugoslavia in order to
strengthen the close collaboration with them that has so
far yielded good results in the arrest and prosecution
of persons responsible for crimes committed in
those territories. I anticipate that the forthcoming
international conference scheduled for Sarajevo and the
Brijuni meeting of regional prosecutors this month will
both provide opportunities for further consultations
with our regional partners on the intensification
of cooperation with and assistance to the national
jurisdictions ofthe former Yugoslavia in their efforts to
ensure accountability for the serious crimes committed
in that region during the conflict.

The Office of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism
continues to provide assistance to national authorities
and international organizations in the investigation
and prosecution of crimes committed in Rwanda and
in the States of the former Yugoslavia. In the past six
months, the Office has serviced a total of 208 requests
for assistance from 10 countries and international
organizations. As countries increasingly take over
the functions of investigating and prosecuting those
crimes, we anticipate an increase in the number of such
requests for assistance from States and institutes.

I wish to thank the members of the Council, the
Member States, the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Secretariat for their very strong support to the
ICTR over the years, which has enabled the Tribunal to
now reach this momentous stage in its mandate. Their
unflinching commitment to the cause of international
criminal justice has also enabled the Mechanism to
take off and begin to execute its functions effectively
in a very short period.
