Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We are happy to see you, Mr. Minister, once again sitting
in the President's chair.

The protracted armed conflict in Angola is cause for
very serious concern, for us and for the entire international
community. As a member of the troika of observer States
for the implementation of the Angola peace process, Russia
confirms its consistent position that responsibility for the
continuation of the conflict lies entirely with the leadership
of UNITA, headed by Jonas Savimbi, who is refusing to
comply with his commitments under the Lusaka Protocol
and the demands contained in Security Council resolutions.
Given these circumstances, we must further increase
pressure on the military and political leadership of UNITA
so as to make it comply with the demands of the
international community, first and foremost to halt the
fighting and return to the track of a political settlement.

Furthermore, we sympathize with the position of the
Angolan leadership. We are pleased to welcome the
Minister for External Relations of Angola to the Council
Chamber today, and we sympathize with his position. Jonas
Savimbi has so often broken his promises and agreements
and acted in bad faith that he has now lost the right to
participate in this process and can have no political future.
Jonas Savimbi and his entourage have shown their
indifference to the fate of the Angolan people. Because of
his uncontrollable lust for power, hundreds of thousands
have paid with their lives and borne the full weight of the
humanitarian crisis in the country - a country whose
subsoil could, indeed, yield prosperity for its people.
Foreign citizens have often been victims of his
organization, including those who have gone - some under
the United Nations flag - to help the Angolan people in
their time of trial.

For more than one year, UNITA has been holding
prisoner citizens of the Russian Federation, one of whom
has died. All these facts make clear that, in UNITA, the
Security Council is faced with outright contempt for the
will of the international community. There is a conscious,
carefully premeditated policy to evade the sanctions
introduced by the Council, which were designed to deprive
the UNITA military machine of the financial, material and
technical input that it needs.

Given these circumstances, therefore, it is of
paramount importance to strengthen the effectiveness of
control over the current sanctions regime against UNITA.
The active efforts being made by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993),
and the efforts of the Chairman of that Committee,
Ambassador Fowler, have already had an important
positive impact on ensuring greater respect for the
sanctions against UNITA. We welcome the report to the
Security Council of the Panel of Experts established
pursuant to resolution 1237 (1999), and we participated
actively in drawing up the draft resolution that we will be
adopting today. Based on the recommendations of that
Panel, it will help us to achieve the goals that we have set
for ourselves.

We believe that implementation of the draft
resolution will contribute to improving the effectiveness
of control over the sanctions against UNITA, and it will
help to close off the channels used by the leadership of
that organization to preserve their ability to continue the
war - a war that UNITA has imposed on the people of
Angola.

