Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Baroness Ashton for her briefing. I welcome this
second visit of the High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy of the European Union,
which attests to the importance of European Union
engagement within the United Nations.

I need not recall that the European Union has
long been a prime political mover - a reality that the
implementation of the Lisbon Treaty has strengthened
further. The European Union - the largest contributor
to the United Nations budget, responsible for some 40
per cent - undertakes decisive action in pursuit of the
Charter objective to ensure international peace and
security.

Having brought peace to the old continent, which
was a source of numerous conflicts, the European
Union plays its full role in managing crises around the
world. On the one hand, it has launched many civilian
and military operations, mandated by the Security
Council. Without going into exhaustive detail, I cite by
way of example the support of the European Union and
its member States for such varied operations as those in
Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
on land and at sea in Somalia, and in Kosovo.
Moreover, in the case of serious humanitarian crises or
natural disasters, the European Union plays a decisive
role in emergency assistance and reconstruction. In
Haiti, for instance, we offered our expertise and
committed more than €1.5 billion, making the
European Union once again the largest donor.

The European Union is also involved in the
resolution of major international crises. From that
perspective, I thank the High Representative for her
very useful and enlightening comments today on the
meeting of the Middle East Quartet that she chaired.
That meeting, she told us, was just a first step; it
should augur a change in the political software used by
the international community to advance towards a
negotiated final settlement of the dispute, the
parameters of which are familiar to us all and which we
know the two parties are incapable of achieving by
themselves. Phased approaches have proven to be paths
to nowhere, and we must therefore move on to a final
settlement. We hope that the Quartet will play a key
role in that regard.

I should also like to revert to the Iranian nuclear
issue, in which the European Union is represented by
the E3+3 in negotiations to ensure that Iran honours its
international obligations, especially with regard to the
Security Council. As has been recalled, at the Istanbul
summit the six reaffirmed their unity and steadfastness,
while the Iranians insisted on new conditions in
pursuing the same dilatory tactics they have used for
the past six years.

With regard to another priority international
portfolio - counter-terrorism - on 31 January
Baroness Ashton was asked by the Council on Foreign
Relations to develop a European Union strategy for the
Sahel, which we hope will be adopted as soon as
possible. Its goal is to combat the links between A1-
Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and drug trafficking
channels in West Africa. This is clearly a subject of
great interest to both the European Union and the
Security Council.

Lastly, the European Union is an essential partner
in preventing conflict and building peace. As Baroness
Ashton has mentioned, the Brazilian presidency will in
a few days organize a Security Council debate on the
interdependence between security and development. In
that regard, it is worth recalling that the European
Union is the main provider of official development
assistance, contributing more than 60 per cent of the
assistance provided by member countries of the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development - that is, about €50 billion annually.
The European Union's participation in this debate
therefore has particular relevance.

Beyond financial assistance, however, I should
like to refer to the efforts of the European Union in the
areas of good governance, respect for human rights and
gender equality. As the European Council affirmed on
4 February, the European Union is determined to
provide its unreserved support for political transition
and to support reforms in the southern Mediterranean.
European heads of State have entrusted the High
Representative with a mission in that regard.

Of course, much remains to be done. However, as
Robert Schuman said in his speech of 9 May 1950,
Europe will not be made all at once, or according to a
single plan. It will be built through concrete
achievements which first create a de facto solidarity.
That is equally true when it comes to foreign policy.
The time has come to say and to demonstrate that the
European Union is not some super non-governmental
organization or purveyor of assistance. It has values
and projects power.

You can therefore count on France's
determination, Madam President, as a permanent
member of the Security Council and as a founding
member of the European Union, to ensure that that EU
assumes its share of responsibility in building a world
of peace, stability and prosperity, in line with the
objectives of the Charter of the United Nations.

