Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) and the steady progress in implementing
UNMISET's mandate. We also congratulate
Timor-Leste on its engagement with the international
system, the setting up of a Government administration
in such a short time-frame, and its commitment to
upholding the ideals of human rights and democracy.

The Secretary-General's report says, however,
that a number of challenges remain. Ongoing efforts
will need to be made and attention paid to developing
capable security forces, progressing border
demarcation, fostering participatory democracy and
open government, developing a strong judicial system,
and bringing to justice those responsible for human
rights violations in the territory in 1999.

New Zealand commends the responsiveness of
the Security Council to security developments on the
ground in Timor-Leste and the adoption of resolution
1473 (2003), providing for an adjustment in the
timetable for downsizing the military and police
components of UNMISET. It is clear that the recent
security-related incidents were beyond the ability of
the domestic police force, and in this respect we
particularly welcome the measures in the resolution
aimed at supporting and strengthening the police sector
in Timor-Leste.

We also endorse the Secretary-General's appeal
for donors to consider targeted support to the police
sector. We acknowledge that this is a sector which will
require ongoing assistance even after the end of the
UNMISET mandate. New Zealand, at its recently held
bilateral assistance talks with the Timorese
Government, pledged that it would focus part of its
bilateral assistance programme on police development
through agreed multilateral and bilateral projects,
especially in the areas of community policing and
civilian support.

A functioning judicial system is clearly important
for social and political stability. The Secretary-
General's report notes that problems still remain in the
justice sector. New Zealand is particularly concerned
that Timor-Leste establish a functioning Court of
Appeal as soon as possible. The recent appointment of
the President of the Court of Appeal is a welcome
development in this respect. New Zealand is also
concerned about the large numbers of prisoners held on
remand, including a significant number whose warrants
for their incarceration have expired.

New Zealand congratulates the Timor-Leste
Government on its initiative to develop a more open
system of government, with its series of Visits to the
districts by Members of Parliament and officials to
promote discussion of Government policy and to
receive feedback. As regards addressing the grievances
of former combatants and veterans, we welcome the
work of the two Commissions established by the
President's Office to identify veterans who served from
1975-1979 and 1980-1999. We hope that the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) "Recovery,
Employment and Stability Programme for Ex-
Combatants and Communities in Timor-Leste" will
draw, and build upon, the work already undertaken by
the commissions.

New Zealand also welcomes the work of the
United Nations Serious Crimes Unit in Timor-Leste
and notes the recent series of indictments issued by the
Unit for crimes against humanity. We hope that all the
parties involved will take the steps necessary to bring
the individuals involved to trial. We are closely
watching the separate ad hoc tribunal process in Jakarta
and reiterate comments made previously that this
process must meet international standards of justice.

Finally, we agree with the report's assessment
that, while progress has been steady, much remains to
be done. Continued support from the international
community will be vital to enable Timor-Leste to
address the political, economic and security challenges
that lie ahead. The United Nations also plays a vital
support role in this. New Zealand commends the
leadership of Special Representative Sharma in
implementing UNMISET's mandate and endorses its
renewal for a further 12 months. I should like also to
thank Mr. Sharma for his introduction of the report
here today.

