Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): We
wish to thank Tribunal Presidents Khan and Meron and
Prosecutors Jallow and Brammertz for their briefings
today. We also wish to congratulate President Meron
on his recent re-election as President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and wish him much success. In
addition, we thank former President Robinson for his
valuable service at that Tribunal.

Since we last addressed the Council on the
Tribunals (see S/PV.6545), shortly after the arrest of
Ratko Mladie, the last remaining fugitive under ICTY
indictment, Goran HadZie, was captured. We mark their
capture, arrest and transfer as one step, albeit a
significant one, on the path to justice and
reconciliation, but we understand that that is only one
step on a long road to peace and justice. Even as the
ICTY is completing its mandate, and even as we look
forward to the start of the Residual Mechanism, the
ICTY is extremely busy with proceedings in 15 cases
against 35 persons. We are confident that President
Meron and the Tribunal as a whole can meet the
challenge of concluding those trials fairly and
efficiently while also coordinating the transfer of key
functions from the Tribunal to the Residual
Mechanism.

The ICTY recently held a conference to discuss
what kind of legacy it is leaving for future generations.
Among other things, the ICTY has shown that the
international community can establish an effective
judicial institution that will bring to justice those who
perpetrate atrocities. The ICTY has in large part been a
success because of the hard day-to-day work of its
judges, prosecutors and staff, who are committed to
their core mission of being an effective court and
dispensing justice. The ICTY has shown that it can
provide fair trials, that war crimes fugitives cannot
escape justice, and that victims can now expect that
those who commit crimes against civilians will be held
to account.

Again, we note with appreciation the progress
that the Tribunal has made in ensuring that its
procedures are both expeditious and fair, including
doubling up on staff and judges, such that they work on
more than one trial at a time. We note with
appreciation the measures that President Meron has
outlined here today, and welcome his continued efforts
to improve the work of the Tribunal.
The United States continues to call on States of
the former Yugoslavia to cooperate fully with the
ICTY. We encourage the Government of Serbia to
continue its efforts to determine how Ratko Mladie and
Goran Hadzic' were able to avoid justice for so many
years, and to take appropriate measures against their
support networks. We also look forward to cooperation
from the relevant countries in the region on the
apprehension of Radovan Stankovie, who escaped in
2007 from prison in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
addition, we note the Government of Croatia's record
of cooperation with the ICTY, and urge it to work to
support the ICTY and to continue to cooperate with the
prosecution.

Turning to the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), the United States welcomes the
24 June judgement in the case against the former
Minister of Family and Women's Development and
five others. The conviction of the former Minister of
Family and Women's Development is a significant
milestone, because it demonstrates that rape is a crime
of violence that has been used as a tool of war by men
and women alike. The United States also welcomes the
17 November 2011 judgement in the case against the
former mayor of Kivumu, who had authority over the
local police yet failed to prevent the massacre of more
than 1,500 people.

When we last addressed these issues in the
Council in June, the United States welcomed the then
recent apprehension of fugitive Bernard Munyagishari
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Now, 190
days after his arrest, the United States is discouraged
that nine remaining fugitives remain at large. Ensuring
completion of the work of the Tribunal and smooth and
efficient transition to the Residual Mechanism is not
the work of the Tribunal alone; every Member State
has an obligation to apprehend the remaining fugitives.
The United States, along with many others, is making a
concerted effort to assist other nations in bringing these
fugitives to justice. We ask all States to redouble their
efforts and to cooperate fully with the ICTR to locate
and apprehend the remaining fugitives.

On behalf of the United States, let me thank the
United Nations Office of Legal Affairs for its
dedication and service to the Tribunals. Let me again
also thank the Tribunal Presidents, Prosecutors,
Registrars and their staffs for all that they do to
promote justice under international law for the victims
of war crimes and mass atrocities.

Due to the hard work of the Office of the ICTY
Prosecutor and the Serbian authorities, all of the
fugitives indicted by the ICTY have been apprehended.
We now hope that all parties will make the necessary
but difficult decisions to actively encourage inter-
ethnic reconciliation by speaking to their communities
of the rewards of peace. With the ICTR, the situation is
slightly different, since so many indictees remain at
large. We pledge our assistance in bringing the
remaining ICTR fugitive indictees to justice as quickly
as possible, and our doors are always open for
consultation with the ICTR.

Since the end of the Second World War, the
United States Government has viewed justice for
Victims of war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide as an essential element for peace and
stability. We take this opportunity to reaffirm those
convictions and to applaud all those who contribute to
that important task.

