At the outset, allow me to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Implementation of the Peace Agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his clear and concise briefing. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, as elsewhere in the world, the unprecedented human tragedy of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) affects individuals, families, communities and society as a whole. At this time of crisis, allow me to commend the cooperative and coordinated efforts of political and institutional leaders to save lives and preserve livelihoods. Nevertheless, the success of those efforts remains dependent on their adherence to the country's legal and constitutional framework, their transparency and their full respect for international standards of human rights and fundamental freedoms. The constructive role of the international community in providing financial and material assistance to the political and institutional leaders to address the COVID-19 pandemic also deserves to be highlighted. The challenge to sovereignty, territorial integrity, competencies and institutions at the State level not only poses a serious threat to the overall political stability, but also represents a setback for key achievements in the implementation of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is therefore the responsibility of all parties to work in accordance with the constitutional and legal framework to ensure the functioning of all institutions and their close cooperation in the interest of the citizens and all levels of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The lack of progress in resolving electoral issues is also a major source of concern. Therefore, all appropriate measures must be taken for the establishment of the federal Government following the 2018 general elections and the resolution of problems arising from the decision of the Constitutional Court on the electoral system of the city of Mostar, where no elections have been held since 2008. Furthermore, I urge the political parties to accelerate their efforts to support female candidates, which would better reflect the composition of the population and move Bosnia and Herzegovina in the right direction towards gender equality. The realization of the right of refugees and internally displaced persons to return to their homes of origin remains at the core of the objectives of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that regard, it is the responsibility of the authorities at all levels to create the political, economic and social conditions conducive to the voluntary return of refugees and displaced persons, without preference for any particular group. The European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina plays a vital role in supporting efforts to maintain a viable and secure environment. To that end, I urge the authorities to focus their efforts on the professionalism, accountability and coordination of the police service in order to serve the citizens and provide them with personal security and protection. In conclusion, my delegation would like to see the implementation of forward- looking reforms that support and enhance the security, stability and prosperity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the promotion of local ownership of the General Framework Agreement for Peace.
