Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (spoke in Arabic):
I thank you, Sir, for giving me this opportunity to
brief the Security Council once again on the latest
developments in Yemen. This briefing falls on the eve
of the next round of face-to-face talks in Kuwait, where
I hope the parties will come to an agreement on a clear
way to end the violence and devastation in Yemen.

As a result of months of intense negotiations, on
9 April I received letters from the Government of Yemen,
the Ansar Allah and the General People's Congress,
confirming their commitment to a nationwide cessation
of hostilities. The cessation of hostilities began at
midnight on 10 April, and I hope that it will provide
an environment conducive to the upcoming talks, offer
an opportunity for expanded humanitarian assistance,
and provide a rare ray of hope to Yemenis longing for a
return to peace.

The de-escalation and coordination committee
established in the last round ofpeace talks in Switzerland
has been working hard to prevent violations and avoid
any military escalation. I commend the parties for
their commitment to the work of the committee and
thank the European Union, Germany, the Netherlands,
Turkey, the United Kingdom and the United States for
providing training to members of the committee and
support for its operations.

The agreement on the cessation of hostilities
also raised local levels of support. The Government
of Yemen and Ansar Allah have nominated local
committees in militarily contested areas to work with
the de-escalation and coordination committee to ensure
better compliance with the cessation of hostilities. The
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia bore witness to the signing
of an agreement to form such committees upon the
request of both parties. Most local communities are not
yet fully functional, but we are working to ensure that
they become more effective in the coming days.

The early days of the cessation of hostilities
witnessed a notable decrease in the level of military
violence in most parts of the country. However, there
are have also been an alarming number of serious
violations, particularly in Al-Jawf, Amran, Marib and
Ta'izz. Fighting in Ta'izz continues to claim civilian
casualties, and I am concerned that a spiral ofescalating
violence could threaten the success of the peace
process. However, the events of the past two weeks
have given me hope. I should like to acknowledge the
courage displayed by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and
Ansar Allah in agreeing to settle border disputes. Both
parties confirm that these agreements pave the way for
a general cessation of hostilities in Yemen.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has supported
both the Government of Yemen and the Houthis in
signing a landmark agreement aimed at supporting
the cessation of hostilities and the work of the
de-escalation and coordination committee, as well as
the local de-escalation committees, and supports the
role of the United Nations. The role of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia has been praised by both parties, which
represents an important positive development in the
current crisis.

The humanitarian situation of the Yemeni people
continues to deteriorate, causing additional human
misery. As part oftheir commitments under the cessation
of hostilities, the parties have pledged to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
ensure unhindered access to humanitarian agencies. I
call on all parties to support the important work being
carried out by the humanitarian agencies. There is no
doubt that humanitarian workers will do their utmost
to deliver assistance to those in need, in particular in
affected hard-to-reach areas. My colleague, Assistant
Secretary-General Kyung-wha Kang, will brief the
Council further on these efforts.

There is no doubt that Yemen's rapidly deteriorating
economy is further undermining the humanitarian
situation. In order to help Yemen maintain its economic
stability in this crisis, I have also pursued agreements
seeking to maintain the operations of key State
institutions, including the central bank, on which many
people depend. Re-establishing institutions like the
Social Welfare Fund, which provides cash transfers
to the most vulnerable sectors of the population, will
help prevent the disintegration of the social fabric and
extreme poverty and accelerate economic recovery
once an agreement is reached.

On the security front, Yemen is facing a brutal war,
on the one hand, and a significant terrorist threat, on
the other. The Yemeni people continue to witness the
devastation caused by terrorist attacks throughout the
country. In my recent visit to Brussels, which suffered
a tragic terrorist attack on 22 March, I noted that
the absence of the State in many parts of Yemen has
encouraged the expansion of terrorist groups, creating
a long-term threat to the country. The current cessation
of hostilities will help to create an environment more
conducive to preventing further radicalization and
violent extremism, but much more needs to be done
in order to prevent irreparable damage to the future
of Yemen.

I take this opportunity to note that this morning
the Government of Yemen, supported by coalition
forces, regained control of Al Hawtah, the capital of
Lahij governorate, from Al-Qaida forces, which seized
control of the city last summer.

My team and I have been engaged in extensive
discussions over the past few months with Yemeni
leaders and regional and international partners on the
future direction of the country and possible outcomes
of the Kuwait talks. I met with President Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour four times, and wish to thank
him for his support for my mission. I also met with senior
Yemeni Government officials. I visited Sana'a several
times for meetings with representatives of Ansar Allah
and the General Popular Congress; His Royal Highness
the Deputy Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, Mohammad
bin Salman Al Saud; the Foreign Ministers of Saudi
Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar and Jordan;
and the Deputy Foreign Minister of Russia. I also
engaged in telephone calls with the Foreign Ministers
of France, the United Kingdom and the United States
of America, all of whom reiterated their support for the
cessation of hostilities and the peace process facilitated
by the United Nations. The success of the upcoming
talks will require the consistent and coherent support
of the region and the international community at large.

In a few hours, I shall leave for Kuwait in order
to facilitate the next round of Yemeni peace talks.
In that context, I should like to express my sincere
gratitude to the Government of Kuwait, which has
generously offered to host the talks. I also extend my
thanks to the Sultanate of Oman for its political and
logistical support for the efforts of the United Nations
in the region. The talks will begin on 18 April and
seek to reach a comprehensive agreement to end the
conflict and allow the resumption of inclusive political
dialogue, in accordance with resolution 2216 (2015)
and other relevant resolutions. The talks will build on a
negotiating framework that provides a mechanism for a
return to a peaceful and orderly transition based on the
Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and the National
Dialogue outcomes.

I will encourage the parties to the talks to
negotiate a detailed way forward, starting with each
of the following areas: the creation of interim security
arrangements; the withdrawal of militias and armed
groups; the hand-over of heavy weapons to the State;
the restoration of State institutions and the resumption
of inclusive political dialogue; and the release of
prisoners and detainees. With these components, we
are building on what has been discussed and agreed
in principle in resolution 2216 (2015). This framework
provides a strong foundation for developing a new
political consensus that will help Yemen to achieve
the stability and security that its people deserve and
its future requires. A positive outcome will require
difficult compromises on the part of all sides, as well
as determination to reach an agreement. I encourage
all sides to come to the talks in good faith and with a
flexible attitude in order to reach a political solution
and a final way out of the current crisis. The path to
peace may be arduous, but it can be navigated.

Yemen is now at a crucial crossroads. One path
leads to peace, while the other can only lead to a
humanitarian and security crisis. The Security Council
must maintain its support for Yemen and the peace
process in the coming weeks, which will help Yemen
to reach a comprehensive ceasefire and return to a
peaceful, inclusive political process. I wish to thank all
members of the Council for the trust and unyielding
support in ensuring that the rights of Yemenis are well
respected.

In conclusion, I would ask all Council members
to dwell on this critical, historic moment. We have
never been so close to peace. Will all parties rise to
the occasion and genuinely engage in peace talks?
Can they acknowledge their differences and agree to
overcome obstacles? Can they drop their belligerent
and destructive attitudes now that we are so close to
peace? That is what we are asking for. We will have our
answer in the coming days.

