Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): My delegation would
first of all like to convey to you, Sir, as you conclude your
responsibilities as President of the Council, our deep and
sincere appreciation for the able and effective manner in
which you have conducted the business of the Council
during the very heavily loaded month of June.

Bangladesh would like to join others in thanking the
Security Council for the timely convening of this meeting
to consider the situation in the occupied Arab territories.

Much work still needs to be done - notwithstanding
so many resolutions, United Nations sessions and

 

international conferences - to bring about a just solution
to the Palestine question and to achieve a lasting peace in
the Middle East. We fully share the concern expressed by
the representative of the Sudan in his letter to the
President of the Security Council in document
S/1998/558, dated 23 June 1998, transmitted in his
capacity as Chairman of the Arab Group, regarding the
decision of the Israeli Government to expand the
boundaries of the municipality of Jerusalem and to create
a "municipal umbrella" that would include a number of
Jewish settlements on the West Bank.

The situation in the occupied territories is a matter
of grave concern to the international community. A single
country's continued defiance of international law and all
United Nations resolutions and the systematic violations
of human rights in the occupied territories are indeed
unfortunate. The United Nations has stressed the need to
preserve the territorial integrity of all occupied territories
and to guarantee the freedom of movement of persons and
goods in the territories, including the removal of
restrictions into and from East Jerusalem and freedom of
movement to and from the outside world.

The United Nations has also demanded immediate
and full cessation of construction in all Israeli settlement
activities, as well as of all illegal measures and actions in
Jerusalem. To our utter disappointment, Israel has not
only paid scant attention to the demands of the
international community, but has continued its illegal
measures and actions that violate the territorial integrity
of the occupied territories and impose restrictions on the
freedom of movement of persons and goods.

It is all the more regrettable that recently the Israeli
Government approved a programme to strengthen Israel's
illegal hold on Jerusalem. This programme, if
implemented, would expand the border of Jerusalem and
extend the municipal authority over some Jewish
settlements in the West Bank under the "municipal
umbrella".

This is unacceptable. Bangladesh calls upon the
Security Council and the international community to have
Israel refrain from this gross violation of international law
and the relevant resolutions on Jerusalem adopted by this
body. We reiterate our full support for the decisions of
the United Nations with regard to the legal status,
demographic composition and character of Jerusalem.

Israeli settlements in the occupied territories have
always been a source of tension, as these settlements

 

violate the land rights of the people under occupation.
Unfortunately, Israel, in defiance of United Nations
resolutions, including General Assembly resolutions
ES-10/2, ES-10/3 and ES-10/4, continues to pursue
repressive policies in the occupied territories, including
Jerusalem. These resolutions demand immediate and full
cessation of construction in Jebel Abu Ghneim and of all
other Israeli settlement activities, as well as of all illegal
measures and actions in Jerusalem. The resolutions also
underline the obligation of the High Contracting Parties to
the Geneva Convention to ensure respect of the Convention
by Israel.

Bangladesh is concerned at Israel's flagrant violation
of human rights and its imposition of the instrument of
oppression against the Palestinian people under the pretext
of security considerations. Retaliation for individual
offences is taking the form of collective punishment, such
as blockading, demolition of houses, confiscation of
property, deportation and the conduct of collective searches.
Bangladesh is watching with concern the developments
regarding the systematic campaign being carried out by
Israel to demoralize the people of the occupied territories,
particularly the Palestinians, with a view to perpetuating its
illegal occupation under various pretexts.

Bangladesh is committed, by its Constitution, to
supporting oppressed peoples throughout the world. Thus,
we have consistently expressed our strong solidarity with
our Palestinian brethren, always and everywhere,
particularly at the United Nations and in all of the major
international forums. My delegation would like to stress the
need for full implementation of Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973), which form the basis of the
Middle East Peace process, and the need for immediate and
scrupulous implementation of the agreements reached
between the parties, including the withdrawal of Israeli
forces from the West Bank and the commencement of the
negotiations on the final settlement.

Bangladesh calls upon the international community to
re-inject momentum into the peace process and to deploy
all the necessary efforts and initiatives to bring the peace
process back on track and to ensure its continuity and
success.

We believe that it is absolutely necessary to end all
illegal measures and actions by Israel in the interest of
restoring mutual confidence and promoting peace. It cannot
be over-emphasized that the achievement of a
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the Middle
East conflict will constitute a significant contribution to

 

strengthening international peace, security and progress.
We call upon all concerned to ensure that the peace
accords are complied with fully and negotiations with the
Palestinian Authority are pursued in a congenial
atmosphere.

We believe that the peace process can be effectively
advanced by the withdrawal of all troops from the
occupied Palestinian and Arab territories, stopping
settlement in those areas with immediate effect and
allowing the Palestinian diaspora to return to their
homeland.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
United Nations has an abiding responsibility in resolving
the problems arising from the illegal occupation by Israel,
as foreign occupation in itself constitutes a flagrant
violation of international law. The people of Palestine are
seeking protection under international law and the
establishment of a sovereign, independent State of
Palestine with Jerusalem as its capital. Bangladesh
expresses total solidarity with them.

