Mr. Wittig (Germany): Allow me to thank Under-
Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his insightful
briefing.

Last month, the Council met for a high-level
debate on peace and security in the Middle East. The
Secretaries-General of the United Nations and of the
League of Arab States both called for a fresh and
united approach by the international community to
a changing Middle East. In that spirit, we adopted a
presidential statement encouraging closer cooperation
between the United Nations and the Arab League
(S/PRST/2012/20) - ajoint commitment that must now
be brought to life.

Above all else, we must together address two
pressing issues: the crisis in Syria and the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict.

Let me start with a few points on Syria. With the
shelling of Akcakale, Turkey last week, the crisis there
has reached yet another nadir. That was not the first
time that Damascus has taken violence beyond its
borders. But this time, the bombs not only killed an
innocent Turkish woman and her four children, but they
also violated the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
our NATO partner. The Security Council unequivocally
condemned the shelling in the strongest terms. Despite
all divisions, the Council has sent a clear message that
it will not tolerate Damascus threatening regional peace
and security. We continue to hope that the Council will
also soon find unity in supporting a political transition
process to a new post-Al-Assad Syria.

Let me be clear. No matter how many letters the
Syrian delegation sends to the Security Council, and
no matter how much Damascus portrays itself as the
innocent victim of external aggression and terrorism,
its deadly action on the ground speaks for itself. We
also encourage the opposition in Syria and beyond to
work towards a unified political platform.

On Friday, the Council met with the independent
international commission of inquiry the Syrian Arab
Republic. Its findings show a clear pattern of gross
and systematic human rights violations committed
by the Syrian authorities and orchestrated at the
highest level. Abuses are also being committed by the
anti-Government groups, although not comparably in
scale and organization. It is my Government's firm
conviction that accountability for such grave violations
of human rights has to be ensured. The findings of
the commission will provide a solid basis, including
possible action by the International Criminal Court.

The Syrian people deserve our support. The crisis
of internally displaced persons and refugee will worsen
with the winter approaching, putting further strain on
neighbouring countries. We welcome the efforts of
the relevant United Nations agencies in neighbouring
States in providing support to Syrian families in need.
Germany will continue to be a reliable partner in
providing humanitarian aid to alleviate the suffering.

These days, the Middle East process makes fewer
headlines than most other events in the region. That is
because the process is stalled, not because it is in any
way less urgent. On the contrary, with every day that
goes by, the concerns over the viability of a two-State
solution become more acute. Mr. Feltman highlighted
that in clear words in his briefing. The security and
stability risks posed by the status quo should instil in
everybody a sense of urgency.

Since the beginning ofthis month, dozens ofrockets
have been launched from Gaza against residential areas
of southern Israel. Those are terror attacks which we
condemn in the strongest terms. At the same time,
we urge Israel to exercise its self-defence with utmost
restraint.

On 20 October, Palestinians in the West Bank,
except for East Jerusalem, will vote in local elections.
That will be another step towards the consolidation
of good governance and democracy in the future
Palestinian State. Under current conditions however,
the Palestinian authority has no resources to pay
salaries or services for the rest of the year.

What is at stake here is more than a mere budget
problem. The very achievements of a successful
State-building process under the leadership of
President Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad are at risk.
We therefore call on all donors to come through on
their commitments of support. For its part, Germany
will continue its significant level of assistance to the
Palestinian Authority.

Beyond that immediate need, however, the
financial crisis can only be overcome through economic
development. Such development will not be possible
without a political perspective. Above all, Palestinians
must be able to move freely on their land and have
access to Area C. We need to see increased control
by the Palestinian authorities over those areas, in line
with the Oslo Agreements and the road map. We call on
Israel to work with the Palestinian Authority towards
realizing that objective.

During the general debate of the General Assembly
this year, both Prime Minister Netanyahu and President
Abbas reaffirmed their support for a two-State solution
and their willingness to reach it through negotiations
(see A/67/PV.12). Negotiations are the only way to get
the process back on track. We strongly encourage the
Middle East Quartet to expand its efforts to frame and
support the process.

We strongly believe that progress on the Middle East
peace process would contribute to regional stability and
offer new opportunities for the region as a whole. Ten
years ago, the League of Arab States showed foresight
and courage in adopting the Arab Peace Initiative. In
this time of transformation in the region, Israelis and
Palestinians must now prove their will to shape their
national destinies.

