Mr. Cevik (Turkey): Current developments in the
Middle East affect Turkey in many ways. The situation
in Palestine remains a source of concern to us, for
humanitarian and political reasons. The immediate
needs of Palestine in general and Gaza in particular
constitute a priority for the international community.
With that understanding, the total amount of our official
development assistance to Palestine over the past decade
has reached $350 million. More recently, we announced
at the Cairo Conference an additional $200 million for
the reconstruction of Gaza from 2014 to 2017. In addition
to the aid that we channel through the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, the transfer of wounded Palestinians to
Turkey - 123 to date - the construction of a hospital
in Gaza, our projects to supply humanitarian aid, fuel,
electricity and water will continue. We also welcome the
trilateral agreement brokered by the United Nations on
a temporary mechanism involving Israel, Palestine and
the United Nations to secure the entry of reconstruction
materials to Gaza.

Following the tremendous humanitarian suffering,
death and destruction inflicted by the Israeli attacks,
we should focus on preventing the recurrence of such a
catastrophe in the future. Returning to the status quo is
not an option.

The need to find a negotiated political settlement
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on two States
living side by side in peace and security, within the
pre-1967 borders and in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative, remains an urgent priority. Any negotiations
should take place on an equal footing. Although the
Israeli side has been enjoying its statehood since 1948,
the Palestinians have been denied that inherent right.
That is unacceptable, and we urge all members of the
international community to recognize the State of
Palestine. We reiterate that negotiations cannot take
place while one party is unilaterally claiming and
confiscating the other's land. Israel should therefore
end its occupation and illegal settlement activities.
With that understanding, we support President Abbas's
initiative, announced during this year's general debate
in the General Assembly, regarding the introduction of
a draft resolution on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict for
adoption by the Security Council (see A/69/PV.12).

Palestinian unity is crucial to reaching a lasting
solution. We should all support President Abbas and the
Palestinian Government of national unity. Turkey, in
cooperation with international partners, will continue
its efforts to find a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution to the conflict. We remain committed to
supporting our Palestinian brothers and sisters in their
quest to live in peace, prosperity and dignity.

Turkey shares 1,295 kilometres of borders with
Syria and Iraq. The instability in the region, particularly
as represented by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), is a national security threat for us. In the
light of that situation, our Government has obtained the
necessary authority of Parliament to enable it to respond
to potential security challenges. We are increasingly
feeling the strain of the current state of chaos on our
doorstep resulting from the serious humanitarian and
security situation on the ground. The combination of
the non-inclusive policies of the former Government
in Iraq and the crisis in Syria caused by the regime's
brutal war on its own people and massive violations of
human rights have allowed ISIL to flourish.

We welcome the Iraqi Government's appointments
on 18 October to Iraq's Ministries of Defence and the
Interior, and to other vacant ministries. A new, inclusive
political start is essential to solving Iraq's problems.
That significant development is an important step in
the process and will help the new Government take the
measures necessary to overcome the threat of terrorism.
For our part, we are taking necessary measures to
combat the activities of the extremist groups. Full
compliance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014),
is important. Preventing the illegal transportation of
logistics and manpower across the Turkish-Syrian
border is a high priority. Such transnational threats
require full and efficient international cooperation,
with a comprehensive, coordinated strategy. From a
security perspective, I would also like to emphasize that
the destruction of Syria's chemical stockpiles should
not be considered a closed case, and the international
community and the Security Council should remain
vigilant concerning the matter.

Our cooperation with the international community
in eradicating terrorism and ISIL will continue. In that
regard, it is crucial that we address the root causes of
the problem through a comprehensive plan. Taking
steps to ensure that there is a transfer of power to a
representative Government, the result of a genuine
political transition, in accordance with the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex), should be our shared
priority. We have always been in the forefront in
defending the rights and freedoms ofthe Syrian people,
including the Kurds, with whom we are continuing
our dialogue. Any group in Syria must work for the
common goal of a democratic and prosperous Syria
and refrain from taking unilateral steps. The future
constitutional structure of a new Syria can be decided
only by a parliament formed as the result of free and
fair elections. The territorial integrity and unity of
Syria must be preserved.

With the recent influx of nearly 200,000 people
from the Ayn al-Arab/Kobani region, the total number of
Syrians in Turkey is more than 1.5 million. In the face of
that enormous challenge, we must reiterate that sharing
burdens actively and meaningfully is the collective
responsibility of the international community. In the
context of the cross-border operations by the United
Nations agencies being conducted under resolution 2165
(2014), 155 trucks transporting humanitarian assistance
have entered Syria so far.

I would like to conclude by reiterating that our
strong commitment to peace and security in the region
and our full solidarity with the Palestinian people will
continue.

