Mr. Insulza (spoke in Spanish): Madam
President, I wish to thank you, President Santos
Calderon and your Government for having invited us to
participate in this meeting of the Security Council on
the question of Haiti.

As members of the Council are aware, since
August 2010, the Organization of American States
6
(OAS) and the countries of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) have had a joint electoral observation
mission in Haiti with the goal of monitoring all aspects
of the electoral process.

This observation mission, the first such joint
mission, is part of the efforts of the OAS to support the
strengthening of the rule of law and governance in
Haiti, which, we hope, will ultimately lead to the
creation of a more permanent institution for organizing
future elections in that country. The joint mission is
also an example of the importance of coordination
among the various international actors in Haiti,
including the United Nations, through the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and the representatives of the Friends of Haiti, the
OAS, CARICOM, and, of course, the international
financial institutions, especially the Inter-American
Development Bank.

As noted by the chief of the mission, Ambassador
Colin Granderson, the elections of 28 November 2010
took place in circumstances that were not very
propitious, as we all are aware. It is important,
therefore, that we give proper credit to the President of
Haiti, Mr. Rene' Preval, who, in spite of all of the
difficulties encountered, never prevaricated with regard
to the need to ensure that the elections took place on
the agreed date, as democracy must prevail over any
difficulties that may be encountered.

Of course, there were problems surrounding the
first round of elections, and we all are aware of the
efforts that were made to facilitate a resolution of that
crisis.

The second round of elections, held on 20 March
2011, were better organized and were conducted in a
more peaceful atmosphere. We had a second electoral
mission of more than 200 observers who were
deployed in the field, in addition to the other activities
that our mission was coordinating.

One of those challenges - and this is reflected in
the mission's first report - involved the preliminary
results that were announced by the Provisional
Electoral Council, which were confirmed on 16 April.
Haiti will have a new President and once again a
peaceful handover of power, which is the hallmark of a
democratic process. Once again, as we heard this
morning, President Rene Preval will play a leading role
in this peaceful transition.
11-29077

Thus a new chapter begins in Haiti. This will not
be an easy chapter, as it will focus on the many
political challenges that the country and its new
President will face in terms of State power divided
between two branches of Government. The preliminary
results indicate that the parties that lost or which did
not participate in the presidential elections will hold
the majority in the two houses of Congress, which has
to approve the nomination of the new Prime Minister.
There is therefore a need for ongoing political dialogue
among all relevant actors, which is a prerequisite for
effective governance. This is an area in which we will
continue to support the efforts made by Haiti working
together with the Caribbean community through
CARICOM.

This is easier said than done. Not only are the
parties from different ideological persuasions, but the
divisions created by the recent elections are obstacles
to reconciliation. However, good governance will
require a new approach to politics in terms of seeking
out a compromise and a consensus between the
executive and legislative branches that will lead to
stability and promote a successful reconstruction
process. It will also be necessary for the various
interests to find expression and to contribute to the
progress of society, moving forward as one and not as
disparate, feuding groups.

It is therefore all the more important that there be
a dialogue, so that the international community can
continue to support reconstruction efforts, which are
critical. To that end, as has been said here, Haiti must
lead its own recovery process, with a clear vision as to
what the Haitian people need for their future and the
reconstruction of the country, on the basis on an
agreement among the political powers.

We have heard here some of the concerns
regarding the involvement of the Interim Haiti
Recovery Commission (IHRC) with respect to its focus
and operations. There are concerns about the limited
resources that have been disbursed vis-a-vis the funds
that were pledged to the Haiti Reconstruction Fund,
and about an apparent shift in the approach of countries
and institutions towards an approach that is aimed
more at bilateral planning and use of resources than at
coordination. This, perhaps, may not bode well for
addressing the priorities identified by the Haitian
Government in its long-term action plan.
11-29077
With a new President to be inaugurated shortly, it
is therefore crucial that the working methods of the
IHRC be reviewed in order to ensure that the priorities
of the Haitian Government are met on an urgent basis
during the remainder of the life of the Commission.

At this time, I wish to reiterate the call on the
international donor community to provide the funds
that were pledged to the Reconstruction Fund and, to
the largest extent possible, harmonize their bilateral
activities, as well as the input of non-governmental
organizations, with the priorities of the Government of
Haiti.

Statements have been made recently on the
advisability of maintaining or modifying the character
of MINUSTAH. We have no doubts about the need to
extend its presence, because we believe that it is
essential for maintaining the peaceful and stable
environment that is necessary for reconstruction. But
the international community has to be able to act in a
more coordinated and orderly fashion and must direct
all its resources to achieving goals that are decided
upon by and with the Government of Haiti.

Most Haitians and many of their leaders are under
the impression that a large part of the resources are not
really being spent in Haiti and are not being spent to
meet its people's needs. That impression must be
dispelled through fast, coordinated and transparent
action. In that regard, we welcome the statements made
by former President William Clinton with regard to the
manner in which the resources in the Reconstruction
Fund are to be channelled.

The OAS is willing to support Haiti in the
promotion of a policy of dialogue and compromise, in
the strengthening of institutional governance, and in
the creation of an effective public sector. Equally
crucial in this phase is to work together with the
Government in order to further develop the cadastral
infrastructure project, which was recently submitted to
the IHRC for approval. In addition to the ongoing civil
registry project, which is almost complete and the first
phase of which we are implementing, we are working
on a joint project with the Electoral Council; the
cadastre project is also crucial in order to strengthen
the rule of law in Haiti. It is also the basis for
economic progress through investment, as order and
predictability in the area of property rights and land
ownership are essential contributing factors to ensuring
7

economic development and reconstruction as well as
foreign and internal investment.

The time is ripe to re-establish trust between
Haiti and the international community. That trust was
apparent in the months immediately following the
earthquake of 12 January 2010, but it was severely
tested in the aftermath of the first round of elections. In
the new chapter unfolding in Haiti, we hope that we
will join forces for the democratic development of that
dear country.

