Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Sir, for giving me the opportunity to address the
Council at this meeting, which is of particular
importance as the occasion for the renewal of the
mandate of the Panel of Experts on Darfur. I shall
make my statement brief and concise.

By participating in this meeting, I seek once
again to reaffirm our determination and intention to
achieve a final settlement of the conflict that began in
2003. We have had a number of successes in the
peaceful settlement process laid out in the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. The members of the
Security Council are bearing witness to the onset of
implementation of the Document by the Darfur
2
Regional Authority, which began its work just a few
days ago.

I commend the various provisions of resolution
2035 (2012), reaffirming that the Darfur conflict
cannot be resolved by military means. We have been
convinced of that from the outset, as we reiterated to
our brothers in South Sudan through the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement ending the long-
standing conflict there. We also recognize the Security
Council's support for the efforts to achieve a
comprehensive solution. While that support is certainly
positive, we should not like to see it remain mere
words on paper; it needs to lead to concrete action.

In that regard, I should like to refer to an incident
that I reported to the Council, in which the Justice and
Equality Movement (JEM) crossed the border into
South Sudan equipped with logistics and weapons
supplied by the Libyan regime. Our report was replete
with details concerning the location of those forces in
South Sudan. I was informed that a member of the
Panel of Experts went to South Sudan, where the
Government did not grant him the access he needed to
pinpoint the location of the Libyan weapons.
Regrettably, the Council failed to act on this matter.

I mention that incident because the JEM. is the
only armed force that remains active in Darfur and has
not joined the peace process. Two of its leaders are
now in South Sudan, and members of the Council are
no doubt aware that they have launched a movement to
overthrow the Government in Khartoum by armed
force. I appeal to all Council members to act on the
provisions of resolution 2035 (2012) and to translate
them into sustained efforts to punish that movement. A
number of resolutions have insisted that those who do
not join the peace process will be penalized and held
accountable for their refusal.

I wish to touch on two other issues. First, we are
very optimistic with regard to the Regional Authority's
activities, which will undoubtedly enjoy swift success.
However, we need the Council's support to bring
pressure to bear on the rebel groups that refuse to
negotiate.

Secondly, I wish to reiterate that, as my brother
the representative of Colombia is well aware, we
intend to cooperate fully with him in order to facilitate
the Panel of Experts' mission. I was therefore very
surprised to find reference in the resolution to
obstacles, including delays in the issuance of visas, and
12-23459
other impediments to the Panel's fulfilment of its
mandate. Such wording, copied from other resolutions,
undermines the Council's credibility, the activities of
the Panel and the work of the Committee. I note that
we granted visas to the Panel's members within 24
hours of being requested to do so, and that we
facilitated its meetings with all relevant individuals in
the Sudan. I received two letters from the Chair of the
Committee stressing the cooperation extended by the
Government of the Sudan to the Panel.
I was also surprised to see reference in the
resolution to ongoing military action, including aerial
bombardments. Such attacks are things of the past, and
we did not expect the resolution to contain such a
paragraph.

