Mr. Kobler (Spoke in French): I would like to start
by congratulating Luxembourg on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of March.

Two months ago, I briefed the Council on how the
hopes that arose in 2013 had began to materialize to
the benefit of the Congolese people (see S/PV.7094).
Today, I am here to seek the Council's support for
another renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in order to bring
the Mission to an end.

This meeting provides an excellent opportunity
to demonstrate the effectiveness of MONUSCO, in
particular its military component. We have achieved
a great deal since 2013. The defeat of the militants of
the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23), the joint operations
against the Forces democratiques de libe'ration du
Rwanda (FDLR) and the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF) and securing the liberated areas are all
contributing to the restoration of pockets of stability
in order to gradually re-establish State authority in the
eastern part of the country. We must now consolidate
the gains achieved, while continuing to secure the areas
where the armed groups are still active. That means
preventing any backsliding by establishing safeguards.
It is now up to us to robustly maintain the peace with
conviction and perseverance.

(spoke in English)

There is a new momentum, and we must build on
that. Our robust protection stance and the hard-won
stability are the foundation upon which peace can be
built. At the outset, let me describe two events that
symbolize where we stand. The first is a good barometer
of the progress made, and the second illustrates that
much remains to be done to bring peace and security to
conflict-affected areas.

The Amani music and dance festival for peace,
initially scheduled for September 2013, eventually
took place in February, thanks to the return of peace
to Goma. The festival was a perfect illustration of how
culture is capable of bringing people together in peace.
More than 11,000 Congolese and Rwandans sang and
danced together.

After the festival, I visited the so-called triangle
of death in Katanga. I saw some of the 80 burned and
deserted villages. Mayi-Mayi Bakata Katanga groups
have been systematically burning down villages and
terrorizing the population. More than 400,000 people
have been displaced so far. I saw childrenjust separated
from those armed groups, their eyes glazed and empty,
their parents killed. They had no home to return to.
I decided to reinforce our presence in Katanga. Still,
Katanga, like the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
is a real paradox. It is very rich but also is troubled by
extreme poverty.

Those two events illustrate the hope and the
desperation, the chances and the challenges, the past
and the future of the people of the Congo.

On the eve of the adoption of a new mandate,
MONUSCO's overriding priorities remain the same.
Security and protection will be our first priority,
followed by the stabilization of conflict-affected areas
and, thirdly, support for the reform processes and the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. MONUSCO cannot stay in the Congo
forever. With the Council's help, we must speedily and
consistently work together with our Congolese partners
to bring about sustainable peace and start planning to
phase out the Mission. The move of much of our civilian
personnel to the east is a first step.

Thanks to intelligence gathered from different
sources, including unarmed unmanned aviation
systems, or the so-called unmanned aerial vehicles,
ongoing sweeping operations have become better
targeted against the FDLR. We have been very clear
to them: surrender now or you will face the full Force
Intervention Brigade. The Government, too, has
stepped up its efforts to put an end to the threat that
the FDLR poses to the population. I am confident that
it will not stop until they have laid down their weapons.
Together, we have continued our military operations
against the FDLR.

After the ADF attacks in December, during which
21 civilians were killed, including 11 babies and young
children, the Congolese army launched large-scale
operations against ADF positions. With the support of
the Force, the Congolese army destroyed the main ADF
headquarters and cleared their main axes and routes
and is now undertaking operations to flush out the
remaining pockets of ADF resistance.

To bring our Mission to a good end, the Force,
however, has to modernize. Fourteen years of a static
approach to the protection of civilians has proven
insufficient. The Force needs to be robust, flexible,
versatile, highly mobile and well trained - and fully
able to deploy across the whole of the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, holding key areas
and operating deep in the most inaccessible areas. We
need a more active presence in Ituri, South Kivu and
Katanga.

If we are to enhance our ability to effectively deal
with armed groups, the Force as a Whole has to tirelessly
pursue them. To that end, the Force is reducing part
of its long-term static side and operating bases and
is focusing on the use of mobile forces. The recent
redeployment of Egyptian special forces to Katanga and
the Uruguayan reaction to the attack of Cheka on Pinga
in January demonstrated how a proactive approach can
deter attacks on civilians and how all Force components
and units can work together in a combined approach.
Our motto says it all - One Mandate, One Mission,
One Force.

The use of force is not a means in itself, however.
It is guided by one important principle: politics first.
We always strive for a peaceful and voluntary solution.
The use of force alone will not achieve sustainable
results if not embedded in a political framework. The
military success over the M-23 will not be durable if
the Nairobi Declarations are not implemented and the
ex-combatants now in Uganda and Rwanda not speedily
integrated into society. I welcome the recently adopted
amnesty law, which rightly precludes perpetrators of
gross human rights violations.

However, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo needs to take concrete steps
rapidly to ensure implementation of the National
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Plan. I urge both the international community and the
Government to find solutions as to the structure and
financing of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process. I cannot overestimate
the importance of adequate civilian follow-up actions;
without them, the military gains will prove to be
ephemeral. Given that we cannot tolerate any rollback
or undermining of what has been achieved so far, a
failure to rapidly implement the DDR Plan would be a
serious setback. We cannot allow that to happen.

Since my last briefing to the Security Council, sexual
violence against young girls and women has continued
to be a problem. The Mission maintains zero tolerance

for sexual terrorism, and MONUSCO, together with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, will publish a thematic report on
the fight against impunity for sexual violence in the
coming days. We remain engaged in fighting impunity.
The trial of those suspected of involvement in the
Minova case resumed after interruption. The military
court has so far heard testimony from 60 victims of
rape and other human rights violations. In support of
the Congolese military justice, MONUSCO continued
to provide technical and logistical support.

There is also zero tolerance for recruiting child
soldiers. Since mid-December, 268 children have
been removed from the ranks of armed groups that
surrendered to the Congolese army. The youngest was
a boy of 10 years of age.

Our second priority - the stabilization of
freed areas - should lead to the restoration of State
authority. The concept of "islands of stability" was a
direct answer to quickly embed State authority in post-
conflict territories. In my last briefing, I could not
report that children were going to school or that the
administration was functioning in areas liberated from
the M-23. Now I can.

I am pleased to report that in Kiwanja Rutshuru the
advances have been quite impressive. Police units have
been deployed, supported by the United Nations police
with tents, rations and fuel. The territorial administrator
and civil servants have returned, and MONUSCO and
the country team are developing projects to rehabilitate
police, justice and administrative buildings. The prison
of Rutshuru has reopened, and its personnel were
trained by MONUSCO.

Ownership is crucial. That is why I am glad that the
North Kivu authorities identified seven additional pilot
projects to turn into islands of stability. But, despite
the progress, daunting difficulties remain to be dealt
with before we can speak of delivery of full basic public
services to people in the region. Although hampered by
poor logistics and irregular payment of salary to civil
servants, the local Government needs to be practical
and focus on what can make a difference to the people.

To better support the Government where it is most
needed, the Mission is undergoing a transformation
into a field mission. We move to the east. Two thirds
of all substantive staff in Kinshasa are being deployed
to reinforce existing field offices in support of our
operations in the east. We have established a permanent
civilian presence in Kiwanja, and that will be replicated
in other areas. MONUSCO moves nearer to the very
people it means to assist. The reconfiguration is not
meant to prolong MONUSCO's stay in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. On the contrary, it is the first
step to an inevitable exit.

Our third priority is encouraging the implementation
of key reforms in the context of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework. Continued robust military
operations by the Armed Forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO, followed
by stabilization efforts, need to be accompanied by
consistent reform efforts on the part of the Government.

In support of the Government's reform plans, I have
set up a coordination group at the ambassadorial level
in Kinshasa aimed at harmonization of the positions of
the donor community. That coordination group looks at
four areas of overarching concern for the United Nations
and international partners in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo - DDR, elections, security sector reform
(SSR) and stabilization. Our messages are clear. DDR
of former fighters has to happen now. Preparations for
the elections have to start now. Concrete progress on
SSR has to be delivered now.

I strongly encourage the Government to accelerate
implementation of key reforms, and I urge donors to
assist in financing those reforms. I am particularly
concerned by the slow pace of security sector reform
despite President Kabila's emphasis in his address to
the nation on 23 October 2013 that it was the priority
of priorities. We need the Congolese army's rapid
reaction force to ultimately take over from the Force
Intervention Brigade. Early advances in police reform
andjustice reform have also suffered a setback because
of insufficient budgetary provisions. In the long term,
that prevents us from addressing impunity and poor
governance.

On the electoral front, the Independent National
Electoral Commission presented the National Assembly
with a draft road map calling for local, urban and
municipal elections in early 2015. It is important that
its adoption be conducted in a transparent and inclusive
manner. Through our good offices we will continue to
promote an inclusive dialogue with a view to creating
an environment conducive to the holding of credible
elections. Respect for the constitutional provisions
regarding the elections, in terms of both procedure and
calendar, must be upheld.

I appeal to the international community to support
the Democratic Republic of the Congo on its path to
democratic rule. The Council's support is crucial to
safeguarding proper democratic principles. Its support
is crucial to guaranteeing a vote for every Congolese. Its
support is crucial to avoid the errors of the past. I also
call upon the opposition to participate constructively,
and I urge all political parties to sign the Code of
Conduct.

I remain concerned, however, by recent political
developments that prevent all political forces from
freely moving and campaigning. I therefore urge the
Government to respect fundamental rights, such as
freedom of speech, expression and assembly, and
extend them to all political forces, as provided for by the
Congolese Constitution. I have instituted an electoral
incidents task force to closely monitor the situation; it
will report regularly.

On 24 February, we celebrated the first anniversary
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mary
Robinson, with whom I continue to enjoy an excellent
relationship, will go further into detail on the
implementation of the national commitments.

After decades of conflict between neighbouring
countries, contacts at all levels of the region's
Governments indicate a new dynamic in the region.
Mutual trust is fragile. Confidence-building takes time.
Still, investment in crossborder transport infrastructure
and economic cooperation will pave the way to regional
prosperity.

First, I wish to thank the donor community for
its financial contribution in helping us upgrade the
Goma airport. Turning Goma into an economic hub
will boost economic development and foster regional
cooperation. I leave it to Special Envoy Mary Robinson
to elaborate on the current initiatives to promote private
entrepreneurship.

Secondly, the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should be a source of prosperity,
not poverty. I welcome the Government's intention to
increase public revenues from natural resources. The
legalization and regulation of the exportation and
exploitation of minerals is addressing the root causes
of the conflict.

Despite many difficulties, I sense a spirit of
dynamism and hope. That is certainly not a guarantee
for success. That spirit, however, places an obligation
for all of us in MONUSCO and in the country team to
grasp the opportunity - maybe for the first time in
many years - to reach a durable solution.

However, peace has a price tag. MONUSCO will
reduce its budget. Over 300 posts will be cut. I am
the first to criticize inefficiencies, reduce duplication,
fine-tune management structures. Solid work, however,
needs solid resources.

(spoke in French)

On the eve of the renewal of MONUSCO's mandate,
we look to the future hopefully but realistically. I am
confident that when the songs of the Congolese youth
have replaced the sound of bullets, prosperity will be
around the corner.
I would like to thank all of the United Nations staff
for their daily commitment, in increasingly difficult
circumstances, to working for a lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. More specifically,
on the twelfth anniversary of Radio Okapi, allow me to
express my enormous gratitude to the station's entire
staff for their work and commitment. Radio Okapi is
a radio station unlike any other. It has become part
of daily life for the Congolese and is often their only
source of information. Through the airwaves it helps to
unify Congolese society.

I thank you, Madam President, and the members of
the Security Council once again for your support.

