Mr. Spatafora (Italy): Like previous speakers, I
wish to express my thanks to the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2007/608) and to thank Under-Secretary-
General Pascoe for the briefing.

We fully share both the positive and negative
assessments of others regarding the challenges, so I
will be very brief in my remarks.

I also wish to thank Ambassador Khalilzad for his
briefing on behalf of the Multinational force, and I
must say that we have noted and strongly welcome the
positive and encouraging developments on which he
has briefed us. Let us hope that in the future, those
encouraging developments will deepen and expand. I
believe that we all have the responsibility to give
oxygen to this process.

I think our starting point should be the Secretary-
General's View, which was recalled by Ambassador
Pascoe: "there is an opportunity today that should not
be missed". Once again, I think that that is a starting
point. We are at a critical juncture, and we have to
move quickly and decisively in all directions. Any
improvement in the security situation is an opportunity
to take, so that we can build what Iraqis really need: a
national compact, a shared vision of their common
future as a people and as a nation.

As stated in the report, by Mr. Pascoe in his
briefing and by other speakers preceding me, the
responsibility for the internal political process lies with
the Iraqi people and their legitimate institutions. But, at
the same time, the United Nations now has a
fundamental and substantially expanded role, as set
forth in resolution 1770 (2007). The Iraqi people, as
Ambassador Qazi told us in June, are faced with
choices that "are not black or white; nor are they zero-
sum" (S/PV.5693, p. 3). The United Nations is uniquely
suited to identify gray areas that can accommodate all
the legitimate concerns of the participants in the
political process, and it is up to all of us to empower it
to do so. I believe, that, as Ambassador Pascoe told us,
"it is important that the United Nations be afforded the
necessary political and humanitarian space to
implement the new mandate, and the ability of the
Organization to talk with all sides must be protected
and respected (supra)".

Another crucial element is the ongoing regional
dialogue between Iraq and its neighbours, which has
been touched upon by many previous speakers. We
welcome last September's initiative, by the Secretary-
General and the Iraqi Government, to convene a
ministerial meeting. We strongly support the ongoing
process that began with the extended meeting of
neighbouring countries at Sharm el-Sheikh, and we
look forward to the next meeting, to be held in
Istanbul. We have also noted, as a positive sign, the
indication of strong United Nations engagement in the
process of facilitating the dialogue with the
neighbours.

Furthermore, we continue to be extremely
concerned by the humanitarian situation. We commend
the efforts of those countries that have received Iraqi
refugees, as well as the efforts of the United Nations.
For its part, Italy responded to last July's Joint Appeal
of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and UNICEF by giving
more than $4.2 million for activities to benefit Iraqi
refugees and internally displaced persons in Iraq, Syria
and Jordan.
We have to proceed effectively in the
implementation of the International Compact with Iraq
and in the reconstruction effort. Italy, as Co-Chair of
the Donor Committee of the International
Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq (IRFFI), is

planning to convene the sixth meeting of the Donor
Committee in Bari, Italy, on 28 and 29 October, in nine
days' time. At the Bari meeting, we will consider the
final recommendations emerging from the review of
the IRFFI terms of reference, conducted during the past
month. The goals of the review are, as we know, to
ensure strong Iraqi ownership and leadership of the
IRFFI process; to ensure clear alignment of the IRFFI
with Iraqi priorities as contained in the country's
national development strategy and the International
Compact with Iraq; and to clarify and streamline the
values component of IRFFI governance. We are
confident that the revised terms of reference will
respond to all those goals.

A more effective IRFFI will be an important tool
at the disposal of the international community - a tool
that responds to the appeal of Ambassador Pascoe that
security arrangements and financial and logistical
backing are also essential for the success of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. That is what we
are trying to do.

At the same time, unified leadership by the
Secretary-General, through his Special Representative
for Iraq, over the contributions of United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes, as stipulated in
resolution 1770 (2007), is an essential step towards
making the international contribution to Iraq's
reconstruction more effective.

