Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): I should
like first of all to thank you, Sir, for having so
judiciously organized this open meeting on the
strengthening of cooperation between the United
Nations and Central Africa in the maintenance of
international peace and security. We would like to pay
tribute to the Foreign Ministers of the Central African
Republic, the Republic of the Congo, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Gabonese Republic and the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea, who are with us today
and whose contribution is a measure of the success of
our work.

I am duty bound to pay tribute to the Regional
Director of the World Bank, the President of the
Economic and Social Council, the representative of the
United Nations Development Programme and other
participants who are with us today and whose various
statements have contributed to the high quality of our
debate.

In order to understand the need for heightened
cooperation between the United Nations system and
Central Africa, it would be helpful to note a number of
elements that attest to the complex nature of the
situation in that subregion of the African continent -
an area that is rich in mineral, hydraulic and
agricultural resources.

With the passage of time and as a consequence of
events, Central Africa has become one of the major
concerns of the United Nations. Despite some
encouraging signs of progress, a number of hotbeds of
tension persist, thus undermining the subregional
balance and producing worrying humanitarian
scenarios.

It is now clear that greed for mineral resources,
the debt burden, the deterioration of the terms of trade
and problems associated with governance and poverty
are among the factors underlying current conflicts.

My delegation notes and laments the fact that
seven of the 11 countries of Central Africa are now, or
have been, in the grip of intra-State or inter-State
conflicts. Likewise, of the 12 peacekeeping, peace-
building and peacemaking missions, five are operating
in Central Africa. Furthermore, six out of a total of 20
representatives of the Secretary-General are based
there.

This United Nations presence reflects the
importance attached by the Organization to the
settlement of conflict in Central Africa, as well as its
resolve to strengthen, on an ongoing basis, the
mechanisms that it brings to bear in tackling these
recurrent crises.

In this regard, my delegation welcomes the
diplomatic, political and military success achieved at
the regional level in the Great Lakes region, with the
implementation of the Pretoria Agreement between the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and of Rwanda, and the Luanda Agreement, signed by
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and of Uganda.

That development contrasts negatively with the
situation on the ground in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is
continuing to worsen to a dangerous extent. We urge
South Africa and the Secretary-General - the third
party - to continue their endeavours to overcome the
remaining obstacles and to secure unconditional
compliance with the commitments undertaken. For its
part, the Security Council must ensure the efficient
conduct of the operations. The mandate of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo clearly needs to be revised in
order to enable it better to cope with the new
challenges.

We urge the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to continue its efforts to
conclude an inclusive, comprehensive political
agreement in keeping with the spirit of Sun City. We
encourage Burundi to join in this momentum for peace
and to normalize its relations with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, particularly in the area of
security.

Furthermore, Guinea takes the view that the
peace agreement concluded between UNITA and the
Government of Angola is an example of political
wisdom that should be emulated. It welcomes the
adoption of resolution 1439 (2002) concerning the
phased lifting of sanctions, which marks a positive
landmark in the peace process.

My delegation has also noted the decision taken
at the Summit of the Heads of State of the Economic
and Monetary Community of Central Africa, held at
Libreville on 2 October, concerning the deployment in
Bangui of a multinational African contingent of 300 or
350. It endorses the appeal for assistance to troop-
contributing countries aimed at enabling that operation
to stabilize the Central African Republic to be carried
out successfully. The United Nations must shoulder its
responsibility in that regard.

Experience teaches us that peace, once restored,
must be consolidated if it is to be regarded as
definitively re-established. Progress achieved at the
political level must go hand in hand with financial
assistance for disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and economic recovery in the States of
the region. Without the proper means, the
implementation of any political agreement is doomed
to failure. Political will in itself is not sufficient. This
phase will require the direct involvement of the
Economic and Social Council, in accordance with its
mandate, as well as that of the agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations system.

Furthermore, we must acknowledge that even
though subregional organizations often have an
economic mission, they have gradually expanded their
jurisdiction to include questions of security and
peacekeeping. In these two areas, the United Nations
should provide for close, harmonious and efficient
cooperation.

Bearing in mind the interdependent nature of the
conflicts in that subregion, my delegation proposes
setting up a United Nations regional office in Central
Africa responsible for the integrated management of
conflicts, following the example of the one in Dakar
for West Africa. Such a new partnership will make it
possible to strengthen cooperation between the United
Nations on the one hand, and on the other, the States of
the region, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Council for Peace and Security
in Central Africa.

Finally, my delegation remains convinced of the
urgent need to hold an international conference on
peace, security, democracy and sustainable
development in the Great Lakes region. Such a
conference would be an opportunity to evaluate the
progress achieved in the implementation of bilateral
agreements and to reflect on a comprehensive approach
to the resolution of outstanding problems in Central
Africa. In that perspective, the United Nations should
provide guidance for the resulting programme of
action. That would require a dispassionate, efficient
and future-oriented preparatory process.

