Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
1 would like to begin by congratulating the Russian
Federation on organizing this open debate and by
thanking you, Mr. President, for the concept note prepared
on this important topic (S/2014/384, annex). We also
thank the Secretary-General for his observations. As a
former member of the Council and a troop-contributing
country, we consider it essential to hold a discussion on
the recent trends in peacekeeping operations under the
United Nations flag.

My delegation offers the following observations.
First, in general we support complex multidimensional
mandates, including those contemplating a wide range
of tasks designed to stabilize countries in conflict.
However, the increase in the number of tasks that
lack clear prioritization could potentially fragment or
overburden the work of troops on the ground, thereby
limiting and even diverting their attention from the main
goal of their presence. Therefore, we have insisted that
all peacekeeping operations have clear, achievable and
verifiable mandates adapted to each specific situation.

Secondly, we remain seriously apprehensive about
the implications and scope of the so-called robust
peacekeeping operations, as noted in our explanation
of vote when the Council considered resolution 2098
(2013) on the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in March 2013 (see S/PV.6943). The deployment of
peace-enforcement forces raises various questions, in
particular, how to reconcile their functions with the
basic principles of peacekeeping.

Thirdly, although we recognize the added value
of the use of modern technologies, such as unmanned
aerial vehicles, as part of the efforts to protect civilians
in peacekeeping operations, we also recognize the
risks involved, especially in the application of the basic
norms of international humanitarian law in the context
of maintaining the distinction between combatants and
non-combatants, and the distinction between using those
technologies for the maintenance of peace in contrast
to peace enforcement. It is therefore essential that the
use of modern technologies adhere to the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.

Fourthly, regarding inter-mission cooperation,
while we recognize its relevance, we also believe
that it is necessary to consider issues of timing, the
requirements that must be met, the impact on the
missions affected and their effective implementation.
In that context, we believe that the Council should be
careful, when using that tool, to respect the mandates
of each of the missions, as well as the memorandums of
understanding that troop-contributing countries signed
previously with the United Nations in relation to each
operation.

Finally, my delegation considers it necessary to
carry out a cost-benefit analysis of the implementation
of each one of those issues. The analysis should devote
particular attention to the lessons learned, as well as to
the legal, operational and financial policy implications
imposed on troop-contributing countries.

In conclusion, I reiterate the central role of United
Nations peacekeeping operations for the maintenance
of international peace and security, as well as the
importance that we attach to strengthening their
operational capacity and organizational structure.
We stress the importance of maintaining the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations as the only
forum for discussing the Secretariat's policies on
matters relating to peacekeeping operations. We call
for improved coordination and consultation among
the Security Council, the Secretariat and the troop-
contributing countries in the decision-making process,
and we affirm that we will continue to provide
personnel meeting the highest standards of efficiency,
competence, discipline and integrity for peacekeeping
operations.

