Mr. Palsson (Iceland): The resumption of direct
peace negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority earlier this autumn was a long-awaited
event, raising hopes around the world that the parties
might finally make progress on the final status issues.

Now, after a very short interval, there is a serious
risk that the peace process might stall once again.
Israel must assume the greatest part of the
responsibility for that, having refused to renew its
moratorium on settlement construction in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.

It is important to recall that the settlements are
not simply a distraction or an obstacle to peace. They
are illegal under international law, a product of the
occupation and designed to further entrench the
occupation. To call on Israel to immediately cease all
settlement activity is therefore a legitimate request and,
indeed, the international community's obligation.

Iceland remains deeply sympathetic towards the
plight of Palestinians, now in the public eye due to the
dire humanitarian situation in Gaza and the raid on the
flotilla in international waters earlier this year. The raid
was condemned by my Government and drew strong
public reaction. Experts, mandated by the Human
Rights Council, have now concluded that Israel
violated international law by attacking the flotilla. We
urge the Israeli authorities to work with the United
Nations on the follow-up to the report (A/HRC/15/21).

Israel and the Palestinian side should also
conduct independent and credible investigations,
meeting international standards, into the serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law reported by the United Nations Fact-Finding
Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/l2/48).

The Government of Iceland strongly believes that
the blockade of Gaza is contrary to international
human rights and humanitarian law, inflicting
collective punishment on the Gaza population.
Accordingly, the Government of Iceland calls upon the
Government of Israel to bring the blockade to an end
and to ensure that the overall needs of the population
are met.

Finally, Iceland firmly supports a peaceful
resolution to the conflict and the two-State solution. A
sustainable and just peace will not be achieved in the
Middle East without the realization of the two-State
solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by side in
security.

