Mr. Neewor (Mauritius): First of all, I would like
to thank you, Sir, for your initiative to hold an open
debate of the Security Council on the important subject
of protection of civilians in armed conflict. We are
grateful to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report of 30 March on this subject. We also thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for introducing the report
this morning and the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Mary Robinson, for her presence and her
statement.

This is an occasion to remind ourselves that the
United Nations came into being precisely to prevent
the recurrence of the horrible cruelties that millions of
human beings suffered during the Second World War.
The founding fathers of the United Nations, tormented
by the death and destruction they had witnessed during
the long years of the War, concluded that enough was
enough and decided to create the institution of the
United Nations in the hope that it would help end
forever wars that had inflicted so much suffering on so
many people. They acted to stop the killing of soldiers
and civilians. They gave us the United Nations in order
that their dream of lasting peace and security for all
peoples of the world might be secured.

The question we must ask ourselves today, half a
century later, is whether we have lived up to that
dream. Obviously, we have not. Instead, we, the
Members of the United Nations, have either closed our
eyes or stood callously by as despots, such as Pol Pot
in Cambodia, Idi Amin in Uganda and other self-
seeking individuals - for example, in Rwanda, in the
Balkans and, more recently, in Sierra Leone - have
engaged in terror and genocide against millions of their
own people. We all have to search our consciences and
come up with our own conclusions as to whether we
have failed the millions of men, women and children
who have died in the past few decades in civil conflicts
in different parts of the world.

Armed conflicts not only bring about death and
destruction, but also produce large-scale populations of
refugees and internal displacements of men, women
and children. These are people who are forced to live
in misery and deprivation for years on end away from
their native lands. The number of refugees and
internally displaced persons around the world today has
reached alarming proportions and continues to grow.
These victims of armed conflict need the greater
attention of the international community, for they
cannot exist as forgotten people forever.

The countries that host masses of refugees in
Africa are themselves poor and needy and undoubtedly
stretch themselves to the outer limits of their
possibilities in having these unwanted guests
unendingly on their soil. These countries should
receive the special attention of the community of
donors.

We believe that there are two interlinked aspects
to the problem we are addressing here. As long as there
is armed conflicts, there is going to be human suffering
as a consequence. We need therefore to look not only at
the humanitarian dimension of armed conflicts, but
also at the prevention of conflicts. The Secretary-
General's report on the causes of conflict in Africa is a
well-researched document that clearly identifies the
root causes of conflict in Africa; it is also an important
guide on how to prevent such conflict. We need to act
on this important document. We suggest that an
international conference be held at the summit level in
the near future to address the questions raised in the
Secretary-General's report. Such a conference should
help define a package of measures that must be taken at
the national and international levels for the prevention
of armed conflict.

With regard to the humanitarian aspect, the
Secretary-General's report of 30 March has made a
number of recommendations, which need to be
implemented by the United Nations system. The
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council have important roles in the implementation of
the recommendations, but, in our View, the most
effective way to protect civilians in armed conflict is to
provide for the prosecution of those who perpetrate
crimes against civilian populations. We believe that the
International Criminal Court can be an important
instrument in this regard. The perpetrators should know
that there is no sanctuary for them anywhere and that,
sooner or later, they will be held accountable for their
crimes in an international tribunal.

We further believe that regional and subregional
organizations have an important role in preventing
conflicts, which invariably lead to human tragedies. In
this regard, we have the examples of action by the
Economic Community of West African States in the
conflicts in Liberia and Sierra Leone. Another
important example is the action of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization in the Balkans. Unfortunately, the
regional and subregional organizations, in Africa in
particular, do not always have the resources to
intervene in conflicts in their regions. They need to be
provided with the necessary means so that they may
take timely action when conflicts loom in their areas.

We all know that it takes the United Nations
generally too long to intervene in conflict situations.
This is particularly true with regard to conflicts in
Africa. A glaring example is the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, where the deployment of the United
Nations Organization Mission, approved by the
Security Council almost two years ago, has been only
partially achieved even today. In such situations, it is
the civilian populations that suffer prolonged agony.
This is a problem on which we should reflect very
seriously. We also believe that all peacekeeping
operations must have a human rights component to
ensure strict compliance by the protagonists with all
existing humanitarian laws.

Last but not least, the local and international
media, as well as national and international non-
governmental organizations, should be encouraged to
be more proactive in exposing violations of human
rights and humanitarian law in conflict situations.

The conflicts that we have to deal with today are
much more complex than those in the early days of the
United Nations. But the response mechanisms of the
United Nations in conflict situations have remained
unchanged. This situation undoubtedly affects the
effectiveness of United Nations intervention in present-
day conflicts. We believe that the time has come to
revisit and review the response mechanism available to
us to address conflicts around the world.

