Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to offer my condolences to the families
of the victims of the attacks in Kabul yesterday. The
Afghan civilian population has once again been
challenged by tragic circumstances.

I thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed for her briefing and especially for her visit
to Afghanistan last week, which sent a strong message
on the participation and protection of women. I would
also like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her
briefing and Ms. Jamila Afghani for her commitment
to the inclusion of women in Afghan politics.

Finally, I thank Peru, Germany and Indonesia
for taking the initiative to organize today's meeting.
Equality between women and men and the participation
of women are a priority in French diplomacy, as
championed by President Macron in Europe, within
the Group of Seven and at the United Nations. We
are pleased to have the opportunity to discuss this
issue today.

Today I will make two main observations. First,
with respect to the issue of the protection of women,
they remain, as the last 24 hours have once again
highlighted, the first victims of the conflict. We must
not lose sight of the fact that women continue to be
subjected to the worst forms of violence, particularly
in Taliban-controlled areas. France reiterates its full
support for Afghanistan and the Government's ongoing
efforts aimed at protecting Afghan women from
violence, including sexual violence.

We especially welcome the commitments
undertaken to fully implementing the women and peace
and security action plan and call on Afghanistan, with
the support of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the international
community, to pursue this objective. We recall the
importance of the European Union-United Nations
Spotlight Initiative in strengthening the fight against
violence against women and thereby in promoting the
empowerment of women and equality between women
and men.

Secondly, the participation of women in the
peace process and Afghan political life must, more
than ever, remain at the heart of the concerns of the
Afghan Government, UNAMA and the international
community. To be sustainable and meet the expectations
of the entire Afghan population, the peace process
must be inclusive. It is essential that women participate
directly and meaningfully in peace discussions.

France welcomes the progress made at the Doha
meeting held on 7 and 8 July. We hosted a delegation of
15 Afghan women in Paris in June to discuss their role
in the peace process and receive training on negotiating.
Nevertheless, there is still a long road ahead, and the
preservation and consolidating of Afghanistan's human
rights achievements, including women's rights, must
remain an absolute priority.

With two months to go before the presidential
elections, it is also essential to continue efforts to ensure
the full participation of women in Afghan politics and
electoral processes. Progress has been made, with
women constituting 35 per cent of the electorate in the
upcoming presidential elections in September, an 8 per
cent increase over the October 2018 parliamentary
elections. We encourage the Afghan Government to
take all measures to allow all Afghan women to vote.
It is regrettable that no women are running in the
elections of 28 September. Women continue to face
too many obstacles, ranging from intimidation and
physical threats to lack of financial resources. It is
therefore crucial that we lend our support to UNAMA
and beyond.

Let me conclude by reaffirming the three priorities
on which our efforts must focus in this pivotal period:
redoubling efforts to protect civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel, and meet
humanitarian needs; bringing to fruition efforts to
achieve a negotiated and lasting peace in Afghanistan;
and ensuring the successful holding of presidential
elections. It is imperative that the international
community, and in particular the Security Council,
continue to support Afghanistan on its path towards
peace, democracy and development.

