Mr. Kasse (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me,
Mr. President, to begin by expressing my country's
satisfaction at seeing your great country, France,
preside over the work of the Security Council for the
month of March. At the same time, I commend the
initiative of convening this open debate on children and
armed conflict, including child victims of non-State
armed groups. In the same vein, I would also like to
congratulate the delegation of the People's Republic of
China for its outstanding leadership of the Council's
work over the past month. I congratulate the Secretary-
General for his briefing and take this opportunity to
reiterate my Government's gratitude to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for her
constant commitment to protecting children's rights
in countries in situations of armed conflict. Lastly, I
thank Ms. Julie Bodin and Mr. Junior Nzita for their
briefings.

It should be recalled that, on 20 November 1989
here in New York, Mali, co-presided over the special
session of the General Assembly at the end of which
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Mali signed
the Convention on 26 January 1990 and deposited its
instrument of ratification on 20 September of the same
year. Since that time, all succeeding Governments have
implemented bold reforms, including concrete action to
protect and promote the rights of children throughout
the country, including in the northern regions of Mali.
Those actions, it must be recalled, were focused on
several areas, including education, health, the fight
against female genital mutilation, early marriage,
begging, trafficking and the exploitation of children.

While children of Mali have been the subject of all
those programmes and initiatives, their fate has reached
a dramatic turning point following the unleashing of
the rebellion and occupation of the northern parts of
our territory by terrorist armed groups. According to
the Secretary-General's report (S/2014/267) on children
and armed conflict in Mali published in April 2014,

"armed groups operating in the north of the country,
including the Mouvement national pour la liberation
de l'Azawad, Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,
Ansar Dine and the Movement for Unity and Jihad
in West Africa, resorted to the most serious human
rights violations relating to the recruitment and the
large-scale use of children, mutilation, killings,
collective and individual rape of women and girls,
forced marriages, the deprivation of fundamental
freedoms, the destruction of schools and health
facilities, the refusal to allow the delivery of
humanitarian aid."

Those archaic atrocities have resulted in the massive
displacement of women and children to neighbouring
States and within the country, jeopardizing the access
of thousands of children to education.

The children of Mali, like those elsewhere, are the
first victims of the criminal and asymmetrical actions
of non-State armed groups. In the light of that situation,
the Government of Mali has made a solemn commitment
here to act in a manner consistent with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the decisions
and recommendations of a number of subregional
and international entities, including the Economic
Community of West African States, the African
Union, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the
Non-Aligned Movement and the European Union.

In its quest for peace for the benefit of civilian
populations and future generations, the Government
of Mali has participated in the peace process in good
faith. That process began in Algiers on 16 July 2014,
and resulted in an agreement for peace and national
reconciliation in Mali on 1 March 2015. That document,
which was signed by the Government of Mali, the
movements of the platform, all members of the
international mediation team and France, is the result
of eight months of intense efforts by the international
community.

In a surprising turn of events, despite the
commitment made on 9 June 2014 in Algiers to
peacefully resolve the conflict in northern Mali
through a comprehensive and final agreement with
the Government; despite numerous calls for dialogue
launched by the Security Council through its relevant
resolutions and statements on the situation in Mali;
despite the working visit carried out by the international
mediation team on 17 March in Kidal, the Coordination
of Azawad Movements unfortunately decided to remain
on the sidelines of the Algiers process by refusing to
Sign the agreement for peace and national reconciliation
in Mali. That refusal to sign the document, which was
submitted to the parties by the mediation team, is an
invitation to armed terrorist groups and narco-jihadist
groups to continue to rage in northern Mali and
throughout the Sahel region.

Following that refusal, which is also a gesture of
defiance to the international community, the delegation
of Mali calls on the mediation team to assume its
responsibility as guarantor of the peace process. Along
the same lines, we call on the members of the Security
Council to exert the necessary pressure to bring the
armed movements that have not yet done so to initial
and sign the agreement as soon as possible.

By initialing the draft agreement, the Government
of Mali has once again shown its good faith in the quest
for peace, adhering to the compromise proposed by the
mediation team, and this in strict compliance with the
founding principles of the Republic of Mali and the
ideals around which our nation was built. At this stage,
I would like to reaffirm that the Government of Mali
remains committed to the spirit and the letter of its
statement of 18 March 2015, a copy of which was sent
to the members of the Security Council.

We are all aware that the signing of the final
and comprehensive peace agreement in Mali will not
only mark an important step in the process to protect
child victims of armed conflict and to ensure their
social reintegration, but also to bring the perpetrators
of crimes committed against children before the
appropriate judicial authorities. Similarly, the signing
of the agreement will enable the Government of Mali to
continue, undisturbed, its efforts to promote and protect
the rights of children, who should have their rightful
place within the family, at school and playgrounds, and
not in an armed group or on a battlefield.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
commitment of the Government of Mali to scrupulously
comply with its international obligations, including
international legal instruments and the relevant Security
Council resolutions on the protection and development
of children. They represent the most vulnerable segment
of society, but also the hope and future of the country.

