Mr. Ebner (Austria): I would like to welcome
Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Foreign Minister of Serbia, and
Mr. Skender Hyseni, Foreign Minister of Kosovo, and
thank them for their statements. I also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for his presentation of the
report before us (S/2010/401). Let me reiterate
Austria's full support for the continued efforts of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) to facilitate dialogue between all
parties.

Austria welcomes the fact that the security
situation in Kosovo was largely calm during the
reporting period. As set out in the Secretary-General's
report, in total we have seen a decrease in security
incidents. We appreciate the fact that the security
forces - including the Kosovo Police, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and
the Kosovo Force (KFOR) - have been working
effectively to prevent clashes in volatile situations. At
the same time, we clearly condemn isolated acts of
violence due to tensions between both sides. Austria
fully supports the important work of KFOR and
EULEX and will continue to keep up its commitment
to both missions.

We welcome the progress made by EULEX in
particular with regard to monitoring, mentoring and
advising, trials and the processing of cases, the
continued scanning of data on commercial traffic at
gates l and 31, and in its cooperation with both sides.
We welcome the European Union's accelerated efforts
to enhance its visibility and presence in the North and
hope that cooperation with both sides will lead to
further progress, including in the establishment of
mixed panels in the Mitrovica district court and the
restoration of full customs control in northern Kosovo.

Austria would also like to highlight the valuable
contributions made by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe mission in Kosovo in
monitoring, protecting and promoting human rights,
including community rights. We also value its support
to democratic institutions, in particular independent
and higher education institutions that work to the
benefit of non-majority communities.

We share the Secretary-General's assessment that
the lack of progress in reconciliation between the
communities, coupled with the prevailing economic
difficulties, continues to present a challenge and to
foster the risk of unrest. Austria therefore believes that
we must not lose our focus on areas such as economic
development, good governance, the rule of law, and the
fight against corruption and organized crime, as well as
with regard to the situation in northern Kosovo. We see
a need for reports to the Council to cover all those
areas.

Austria welcomes the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice delivered on 22 July on
the question of whether the unilateral declaration of
independence in respect of Kosovo is accordance with
international law. We believe that the advisory opinion
provides an opportunity for a positive turning point in
the relations between Kosovo and Serbia, as well as
with regard to the European aspirations of both States.
This opportunity should not be missed.

The Court has made it absolutely clear that
Kosovo's declaration of independence of February
2008 did not violate general international law,
resolution 1244 (1999) or the constitutional
framework. We hope that the opinion, which was
issued in response to a request of the General
Assembly and specifically addresses the situation of
Kosovo, will enable Kosovo and Serbia to ultimately
overcome their fundamental disagreement regarding
basic legal and territorial questions.

First and foremost, however, the advisory opinion
permits the authorities of Serbia and Kosovo to adopt a
pragmatic approach and to start a process of dialogue
on practical problems affecting the daily lives of
people of both ethnic backgrounds living in Kosovo.
Pragmatism must now also apply with regard to finding
arrangements for the participation of Kosovo in
regional and international forums, in consultation with
the respective organizations.

The European Union - in reaction to the
publication of the advisory opinion - has reached out
to both Serbia and Kosovo. In her declaration of
22 July, delivered on behalf of all 27 States members
of the European Union, High Representative Ashton
made it clear that the future of both Serbia and Kosovo
lies in the European Union. We therefore appeal to
Serbia and Kosovo to work with the European Union in
good faith and to redouble their efforts to turn
European values of dialogue and cooperation into
reality for the sake of the populations of Kosovo as
well as Serbia, irrespective of their ethnic
backgrounds. We fully support the approach of further
enhancing coordination and cooperation between the
United Nations and the European Union in order to
promote dialogue aimed at addressing issues of
common concern between Belgrade and Pristina.

