Mr. Chevalier (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
wish first of all to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your initiative to convene this thematic debate on
security sector reform (SSR). The fact that you are here
in person - and your person is an imposing one -
illustrates the importance you attach to this critical
issue. We are also honoured by the presence of the
Secretary-General.

I believe that this is an excellent opportunity to
delve into a concept that is susceptible of diverse
interpretations. Better understanding will undoubtedly
contribute to better implementation and coordination
on the part of the actors concerned. Belgium considers
that any concept of SSR should be adapted to local
circumstances. There is no single standard concept of
SSR; there are as many interpretations as there are
situations. Local ownership will be key to the success
of any SSR programme.
In our view, SSR is an integrated and holistic
process, whose success clearly depends on the capacity
of the various institutions - military, police and
judiciary - and on the relationship among them, with
a View to ensuring lasting security and justice in the
country concerned.

At this meeting I wish to consider in detail two
aspects of the issue. The first is the time frame: the
sequence of the successive phases of an SSR process.
The second relates to the crucial importance of
coordination and interaction among all actors.

We must all understand that it is not only in
countries where peacekeeping operations are deployed
that security sector reform is an issue. But I wish to
concentrate my remarks today on situations involving
peacekeeping operations. In preparing a peacekeeping
operation it is important to integrate SSR dimension as
soon as possible: during the planning stage. During the
initial post-conflict phase, the country will face the
challenge of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR); in that phase the best possible
coordination should be ensured between DDR and
SSR - which, as we all know, are closely interrelated.
At that point, local ownership is limited, because of the
institutional shortcomings seen in all countries
emerging from conflict. But local ownership must
become more important - indeed decisive - in the
transitional phase, when armed groups have been
demobilized or reintegrated into the regular army.

Experience has shown that great efforts must be
made to bring about a transition from rebel group to
regular army in order to build well-disciplined,
effective military and security forces. Security sector
reform changes during that phase: the role of
Government becomes central and longer-term strategy
replaces short-term actions.

I turn now to the need for good interaction and
coordination among the actors involved in the process
of security sector reform: who does what, and when
they do it. In principle, peacekeeping operations cover
the short term and the medium term; they play an
important role in SSR because of the great fragility of
the countries in which they are deployed. Clearly, the
time required for complete and successful security
sector reform far exceeds the mandate of a
peacekeeping operation. Long-term engagement
requires involvement of other actors beyond the
peacekeeping phase, in particular regional

organizations and bilateral actors, to help the
Government with successful security sector reform.
Good interaction and coordination among the
peacekeeping operation, the Government concerned
and other actors is key for the success of any reform.
The Peacebuilding Commission could, as required
during this post-conflict phase, ensure consistency in
the actions undertaken by external actors.

I turn briefly to the issue of the financing of SSR
programmes. The current criteria of the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development sharply
limit the possibility of reporting the financing of SSR
programmes as part of official development assistance.
But in many cases SSR is a precondition for the
reconstruction and sustainable development of States
emerging from conflict. Recognizing funding for SSR
programmes as official development assistance would
unquestionably help ensure the financing of these
programmes.

I renew my thanks to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate, and I assure you that my
country is committed to an ongoing discussion of this
topic.

