Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): Mr. President, I would
like at the outset to convey my best wishes on your
presidency, which I would say has been extremely
prolific and successful so far. I thank you for having
initiated this open debate and for letting me share with
the Council our views on the issue under consideration.
I wish also to thank this morning's briefers.
First, it might seem awkward for the Security
Council to take into consideration the effects of
climate-related disasters and climate change on
international peace and security. The Security Council
has numerous issues on its agenda, and a great deal
is expected of it in terms of action and efficiency in
preventing conflicts and resolving existing ones. We
might think that it is natural for the Council to focus on
them rather than on opening new, undefined territories
for consideration.

Second, we believe that the link between climate
and international peace and security is not remote, and
we are witnesses, including in my geographical area,
to the fact that climate change has without a doubt
had negative and dangerous effects in Africa and the
Mediterranean region, considered as hot spots by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.

Third, I want to point out specifically that while
Africa, our continent, is the least responsible for
anthropogenic climate change, it is the continent
that suffers the most from such perilous hazards as
desertification, land degradation, drought, sea-level
rise and ocean acidification. Not only regions such
as the Sahel but also small island developing States
are directly impacted by such adverse consequences.
Ignoring that the situation has had repercussions on
those already poverty-prone populations would be a
tragic mistake. Humankind fought for food and shelter
in ancient times, and humankind will continue to fight
for water, food and shelter when these are rare and
when access to requirements to meet basic needs is for
any reason denied.

Fourth, it is obvious to us that this situation of
poverty and scarcity of resources is an open door to
all maleficent groups, including terrorist and criminal
groups, to thrive as they are doing in the Sahel. It is clear
also that this dangerous situation will continue to push
the various peoples affected to leave their dwellings and
embark on a forcible migration, generally north-bound,
where they believe resources are richer and the land
more secure, giving rise to all the tragedies that we are
all witnessing today, such as that in the Mediterranean.

Fifth, the situation is a complex one and involves a
large number of stakeholders. For the Security Council,
the question is simple: do climate-change-induced
natural disasters provoke conflicts, or do conflicts
prevent us from tackling environmental issues and
development in the areas concerned?

Sixth, it is our view that it is not illegitimate to
think that the Security Council has a role, a mission
and a responsibility that are yet to be defined. In fact,
the Security Council embarked on this journey in
2011 with its first presidential statement on this issue
(S/PRST/2011/15), and I remind Council members that
it rightfully pointed then to the responsibilities and
mandates of the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council. I cannot but recall that we have
committed ourselves, as the international community,
to tackle the issue through the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change. It is important to recall that the 2011
presidential statement mentioned that the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
had a role and responsibility as "the key instrument
for addressing climate change" (S/PRST/2011/15, third para). It is still our view that the Paris Agreement
under the UNFCCC is the best framework to address
the issue through commitments that must be respected.

Seventh, my country continues to advocate for
the prevention and solution of conflicts by tackling
their root causes, be they political, economic, social
and - yes, today it has to be said as clearly as
possible 4 environmental roots. The question at
stake is multifaceted. It is true that we are still at odds
when it comes to defining the notion of "impacts of
climate-related disasters on international peace and
security", which has to clearly be clarified in some way.
In the meantime, work at this juncture - and, I should
say, our homework - must start through prevention
and cooperation and always bear in mind that no one
is immune from the effects of inaction or indifference.

I would cite as a blatant example the case of my
continent, Africa. It has been rightfully mentioned this
morning that there is a link between the depletion of
Lake Chad and terrorist-related activities. It is obvious
that terrorist and criminal groups have found fertile
terrain. The scarcity of resources leaves no other way
to the populations than forced migration or falling
into the hands of the rogue groups. At this juncture,
the legitimate question is: What we can do and what
specific role does the Security Council have to play?

First, we must rely on and cooperate and act jointly
with regional organizations, and in our specific case
the African Union. The mechanisms are now in place. I
strongly suggest that in the Security Council's meeting
with the African Union Peace and Security Council, an
agenda item on the effects ofclimate-related disasters on
peace and security be discussed. Secondly, with respect
to prevention, mechanisms like the African Union,
but also such subregional entities as the Economic
Community of West African States and peacekeeping
operations, are perfectly fit for the purpose of at least
informing the Security Council of what they believe
to be the effects of climate change. Thirdly, we have
to rely on the work, including the analytical work,
of the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Environment Programme, and the
Resident Coordinators of the new United Nations
Development System.

I would finish by calling for a clear stocktaking
defining ways to move ahead with the issue.

