Mr. Strnmmen (Norway): Let me start by
expressing my delegation's appreciation of the
presence here of Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and of my
friend Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta. I would also like to
thank them both for their excellent statements on the
latest developments in and the future of East Timor.
Those statements bring to mind the achievements that
have been made, but they also remind us that the task
at hand has still not been completed.

Norway welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) (S/2001/7l9).
Let me underline our satisfaction with the report's very
clear recommendations with regard to a future United
Nations presence in East Timor.

To ensure peace and the establishment of vital
institutions, it is of crucial importance that the United
Nations remain in East Timor until such institutions
have been put on a solid footing. Norway therefore
fully supports the recommendations put forward by the
Secretary-General with regard to a successor mission to
UNTAET, mandated by the Security Council and
containing both a military and a civilian component.

UNTAET has provided a platform for a
successful transition in East Timor. In order to ensure
that this process is seen through to a logical
conclusion, we believe assessed funding is the only
viable approach. Needless to say, the mission should be
carefully designed to reflect the exact needs and
challenges of a newly independent East Timor.

As to the issue of a future exit strategy, we
believe that instead of trying to fix a date for the
withdrawal of United Nations personnel, the Council
should seek guidance from resolution 1272 (1999)
regarding establishing certain benchmarks for
withdrawal.

The period leading up to the elections on
30 August - as well as the immediate post-election
period, including the drafting of the constitution -
will be of great importance for the future State of East
Timor. A lot has been invested, and a lot is at stake.

Norway reiterates the importance of free and fair
elections. In this regard we are encouraged by the
innovative approach adopted by UNTAET in the pre-
election phase. Let me also underline my Government's
appreciation of the fact that the pact of national unity
has now been signed. We consider this to be of great
importance for optimizing the framework for a
peaceful and democratic East Timor.

Norway was among the international observers at
the recent registration of refugees in West Timor. My
delegation approves of the technical manner in which
the exercise was carried out. The preliminary results
suggest that the majority of the refugees currently
prefer to remain in Indonesia. However, in our view it
is likely that many will reconsider and opt for
repatriation at a later stage.

Norway attaches great importance to the
instigation of criminal proceedings against individuals
responsible for serious international crimes. We
reiterate our stand that prosecution by national courts is
a far better approach than the setting up of an
international tribunal, which should always be the very
last resort.

We note with satisfaction the increased East
Timorese participation in the Administration. However,
we are still not at a satisfactory level, and we therefore
urge UNTAET to use the remaining months of the
transition to intensify these efforts.

My Government is impressed by the work already
done to create conditions for a sustainable independent
East Timor. We would therefore like to stress the
importance of continued economic support for
UNTAET, the World Bank and the humanitarian and
development agencies working in East Timor. For its
part, my Government remains committed to providing
its share of the overall costs.

Finally, my Government takes note of the
peaceful and democratic transition of power in
Indonesia. It is of vital importance for both security
and stability in the region that strong and peaceful
relations between East Timor and Indonesia are
established. Reconciliation and enhanced cooperation
between the two countries are fundamental
prerequisites.

Let me conclude by once again paying tribute to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Vieira de Mello, and his staff, both international
and East Timorese, for undertaking such a difficult task
in a manner that gives hope for a smooth transition to
an independent East Timor.

