Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I asked for
the floor to reply to the two meaningless statements
of rhetoric made by the representatives of the Israeli
regime this morning and afternoon in the Council.
They were statements imbued, as always, with baseless
allegations and exaggerations against my Government
and now, it would seem, all members of the Non-Aligned
Movement. They were statements basically designed
to divert attention from the atrocities, agressions
and violations that Israel always commits against the
Palestinian population.

Recent bigoted statements by the Head of the Israeli
regime against the Arab residents of Israel and his
words about the so-called peace process and the two-
State solution were of great importance, as they took
the mask off and bared their face for the whole world to
see. In that way, they fully showed their racist, bigoted
nature, on the one hand, and their nefarious intentions
in pretending to talk to Palestinians about peace for the
past two decades, on the other hand.

It is indeed very ironic and appalling that a regime
famous for its apartheid policies and war crimes, which
is well documented by different United Nations organs
and agencies, which has failed to comply with many
United Nations regulations and resolutions and has
for many decades occupied lands belonging to other
people, can allow itself to accuse other countries in
such a sinister way. It is also preposterous that the
same regime, with a well-known record of developing,
producing and stockpiling different kinds of inhumane
weapons, including nuclear weapons, ventures to falsely
accuse others of others trying to acquire the same type
of weapon.

While they always claim to be concerned about the
Iranian nuclear programme, which is fully peaceful and
under international supervision, we in the region and
across the globe are fully right to worry about the nuclear
weapons in the hands of this regime, which has shown
time and again its capacity and propensity for killing,
with the latest example being the rampage in July and
August 2014 against defenceless Palestinians. Can we,
or any other people, believe that the representatives of
Israel mean anything other than to divert international
attention away from the crimes that their regime is
committing against its neighbours with pyromaniacal
intensity?

The Israeli regime has always tried hard to sabotage
and disrupt the earnest and serious negotiations that
my Government has been engaged in during the past
two years to address any genuine concern that the
international community may have about the Iranian
nuclear programme. We have no doubt that not only
the progress achieved in these negotiations but also
Israel's resounding defeat in obstructing the way to an
agreement are a severe cause of anxiety and distress
for them. The rant we heard today in the Council is

a nervous reaction to the rebuff they receive in this
respect.

