Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
you, President Bachelet, for presiding over this
critically important meeting and for Chile's leadership
on these issues and many others in the Council and
around the world. I thank you as well for your lifelong
efforts, including during your tenure here as Director
of UN-Women and as Chilean President, to advance the
causes of development and peace. I also thank Nobel
Peace Prize Laureate Leymah Gbowee. We can all see
why she has made the difference that she has in Liberia
and well beyond. She is truly formidable. And I thank
the Secretary-General and Ambassador Patriota for
their very important contributions.

As threats to international peace and security
have evolved, so has the Council's conception of them.
Consider two of the great crises we face today: the
Ebola epidemic and violent extremism. While neither
represents the kind of risk that may have been imagined
by the architects of the United Nations, each threatens
the stability and prosperity of multiple countries. And
both highlight the way that underdevelopment can pose
a risk to peace and security.

One of the main reasons that Ebola spread as
quickly as it did in West Africa and has killed such a
high proportion of the people that it has infected is the
acute underdevelopment of the public health systems in
the affected countries. As President Obama observed in
his remarks before the General Assembly in September,
violent extremist groups have found their most fertile
recruiting grounds

"in the Middle East and North Africa, where a quarter
of young people have no job, where food and water
could grow scarce, where corruption is rampant and
sectarian conflicts have become increasingly hard
to contain." (A/69/PV6, pp. 12-13).

The connection between development and peace
and security extends beyond Ebola and violent
extremism. The average civil war sets back a medium-
sized developing country more than 30 years in terms
of economic growth. Trade levels after major violence
take an average of 20 years to recover. And the
global economic impact of stemming such violence is
estimated at $9.5 trillion, or approximately 11 per cent
of the gross world product. These figures show what
should be clear to all: the economic and social health
of countries is intrinsically linked to their ability to
secure and maintain peace. More than 80 per cent of
extremely poor people * those who survive on less $1
a day - are expected to live in countries affected by
conflict and chronic violence by 2025. We know that
this is not a challenge we can ignore. We have to do
something more.

One place to start is with women and girls. Leymah's
story is testament to the critical role that women can play
in advancing peace and security. In the middle of the
second brutal civil war in Liberia, she rallied thousands
of women to pray for peace and founded a group that
staged weeks-long non-violent protests calling for an
end to the conflict. The activism of women helped
build grass-roots pressure on then President of Liberia,
Charles Taylor, to engage in peace talks with rebels.
When those talks faltered, she and 200 women formed
a human chain to prevent the Government and the
rebels from leaving the negotiating table. Of course the
Government and the rebels could have pushed their way
through that chain, but the symbolic demand of those
women for peace, together with international pressure,
helped keep both sides at the negotiating table, and
within weeks they reached a deal.
If we agree that international peace and security
is bound up with inclusive development, it follows that
one of the best ways for the international community to
consolidate peace and to help end conflict is to bridge
enduring development gaps. That is why, in addition
to investing unprecedented resources - including
the efforts of more than 3,000 American engineers,
epidemiologists, doctors and others on the ground,
mainly in Liberia - in stopping the Ebola outbreak
at its source and in leaving the affected countries with
stronger public health systems than they had before the
outbreak, President Obama has launched the Global
Health Security Agenda.

The Global Health Security Agenda is aimed at
preparing countries to prevent, detect and rapidly
respond to outbreaks before they become epidemics.
During a meeting with President Obama last September,
43 countries joined us in annoucing more than 100
specific commitments to strengthen global health
security, together with the World Health Organization
and other international institutions. That is why we have
invested so much time in the post-2015 development
agenda, which aims for inclusive and equitable
development that leaves no one behind in any country,
developing or developed, and not only in terms of gender
equality and global health, but across other areas such
as education, water and sanitation, sustainable energy,
and inclusive and responsive governance.

That is why the United States has strongly advocated
draft goal 16, which focuses on promoting peaceful and
inclusive societies, providing access to justice for all
and building accountable and inclusive institutions at
all levels. If we can achieve this goal through reducing
corruption, promoting universal, free and legal identity
and ensuring public access to information, we can
ensure that the next United Nations development agenda
will help empower those who need it most.

That is why in Afghanistan we have invested
robustly in ensuring that women and girls are more
fully integrated into Afghan society. Since 2001, school
enrolment there has increased tenfold, with nearly
10 million children now signed up, 40 per cent of whom
are girls. Maternal mortality has fallen from 16 per cent
to 3 per cent. And today, women hold 28 per cent of the
Afghan Parliament seats, a higher proportion than in
my own country. All of these investments, all of this
progress, not only make women more equal partners in
Afghanistan's future, they give Afghanistan far brighter
prospects for a more secure and prosperous future.

Today, as has been said, we commemorate the life
of another Nobel Peace Prize laureate and one of the
world's greatest human rights champions, Dr. Martin
Luther King, Jr. In one of his last speeches, Dr. King
spoke of what he called "the other America" - a
country he contrasted with the America of opportunity
and equality. The other America, he said, had a "daily
ugliness about it that transforms the buoyancy of hope
into the fatigue of despair". Dr. King spoke of men
without work, families living in miserable conditions,
children denied access to a quality education; and he
spoke ofhow such inequality posed an enduring obstacle
to American prosperity, calling on all Americans to
bridge these gaps.

It has been nearly 50 years since Dr. King spoke of
the need to address these gaps in the United States, and
yet so many of them persist, here in the United States
and around the world. His call to action is as resonant
and urgent today as when he first made it. We must do
everything in our power to do our part to fulfil it.

