Mr. Kobler: I am honoured to present to the
Council today the first report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/848) pursuant to paragraph 6 ofresolution 2061
(2012) on the activities of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). I shall also brief Council
members on the most recent developments in Iraq.

As 2012 draws to a close, it is pertinent to take stock
of the progress Iraq has made during the past 12 months.
During that time, Iraq has made committed efforts to
enforce law and order following the withdrawal of
United States forces. Reclaiming its rightful place at
the diplomatic table, it successfully hosted the twenty-
third Arab Summit in Baghdad in April. And in May, it
hosted talks between Iran and the permanent members
of the Council plus Germany.

In terms of strengthening State institutions,
the Human Rights Commission was established in
April and a new Board of Commissioners of the
Independent High Electoral Commission was elected in
September. The latter resulted in agreement on a date
for Governorate Council elections in April next year.
This progress, however, is endangered by two factors:
first, the stalemate between Iraq's political leaders; and
secondly, developments in the region.
I regret to report to the Council that strained
relations between Iraq's political leaders have endured
throughout the year. One manifestation of this is the
Arab-Kurdish rift. The lack of trust arises from a
number of pending issues of contention, including
power-sharing, security and tense relations between the
Central Government and the region of Kurdistan. The
resulting political deadlock is preventing the progress
and reform necessary to consolidate Iraq's transition.
Attempts to defuse the stalemate have most recently
focused on a package of political reforms that appears
to be stalled.

The Government of Iraq's decision to establish
the Tigris operations command responsible for overall
security in Kirkuk, Salahadin and Diyala governorates
was heavily criticized by members of the Kurdistan
Regional Government. A military standoff ensued,
incorporating the armed forces of the respective
Governments. The militarization of the situation has
resulted in the regrettable death of one civilian. I should
like to take this opportunity to call on the parties to
exercise all due restraint at this time of increased
tensions. I count on the political leadership of Iraq to
resolve its differences through political dialogue and in
accordance with the constitution.

In that regard, I welcome the recent efforts of
Parliament Speaker Usama al-Nujaifi. I also welcome
the convening of a meeting between the Iraqi Army
and the Peshmerga at the technical level earlier this
week in Baghdad. It is a step in the right direction. I
encourage both sides to keep the door of dialogue open
and to implement the understandings reached. UNAMI
stands ready to facilitate any possible agreement that
would de-escalate the situation and promote confidence
among the various communities .

Over the past few days, dozens of Iraqi security
personnel and civilians, including worshipers, have
been killed and many other dozens injured in Baghdad,
Kirkuk, Karbala and Fallujah. Extremists use the
political differences of the leaders to ignite either
sectarian or ethnic violance and tensions in Iraq.
Immediate resolution and compromise on the part of
all political leaders should be the response to these
attempts.

The tense political standoff is thus testing Iraq's
internal fault lines. August and September were the
deadliest months in the past two years. A particularly
atrocious series of attacks on 27 October targeted
pilgrims during the holy Eid al-Adha observance.
Left unaddressed, the political impasse will leave Iraq
vulnerable to the second threat to its stability - namely,
the spillover from violence in the wider region.

Iraq finds itself in an increasingly unstable
regional environment generated by the Syrian civil
war. The Syrian conflict has exposed a complex web of
interconnected and conflicting interests that threatens
to engulf the region in violent conflict. With no
immediate solution to the crisis in sight, there are real
risks of spillover, violence and destabilization.

At the domestic level, the conflict across Iraq's
border in Syria has had a significant humanitarian impact
on Iraq. The crisis has also impacts had an impact on
Iraq's relations with its neighbours. Iraq's relationship
with Turkey has also grown increasingly tense in recent
months, with an escalation in the rhetoric exchanged on
both sides. The divergent positions between Iraq and
other States in the region on how to address the Syrian
crisis have also further strained their relations.

Within this challenging context, however, it is
possible to identify opportunities for UNAMI to
continue to assist Iraq's transition process. Indeed,
notwithstanding the lack of progress between Iraq's
political leaders in resolving their differences, Iraq's
expectations of UNAMI continue to grow. UNAMI's
assistance, pursuant to its Council mandate, is focusing
on two priority tracks: advancing national reconciliation
and dialogue, and tackling regional issues.

Since my last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.6747), UNAMI has continued to encourage
political leaders to engage in inclusive dialogue to
resolve their differences, in the spirit and framework of
the Constitution. I have continued to conduct frequent
visits to Erbil and Sulaymaniyah to promote such
dialogue. I have also conducted intensive discussions
both in Baghdad and Kirkuk, focusing on the holding
of the long-overdue governorate council elections in
Kirkuk.

UNAMI's support to the Council of Representatives,
on the basis of sustained facilitation and technical
advice, contributed to the selection of the new Board
of Commissioners of the Independent High Electoral
Commission in September. A proficient and genuinely
independent Commission Board is essential at this
juncture, as Iraq prepares for nationwide governorate
council elections on 20 April next year and legislative
elections in 2014.

During Iraq's busy electoral calendar ahead, the
stakes will be high, not only for Iraq's political leaders
competing for electoral support, but also for the
consolidation of Iraq's transition. The elections must
be conducted credibly. Working with the new Board of
Commissioners, UNAMI will continue to coordinate
United Nations support for the development of a
sustainable, self-reliant and professional Independent
High Electoral Commission.

UNAMI also continues to facilitate political
dialogue between representatives of all components
in the disputed areas. UNAMI is working to facilitate
consensus amongst the components of Kirkuk in view
of the provincial council elections in the governorate.
It has established an informal forum for dialogue with
the political representatives of Kirkuk's components,
with proposals in each of the following four main
areas: power-sharing, determining the date of elections,
security arrangements, and the review of the voter
registry. So far, there has been no agreement on
conducting the elections for Kirkuk provincial council,
which have not taken place since 2005 due to differences
on the voter registry. Elections in Kirkuk could be a
stabilizing factor throughout the governorate.

Whilst relations between Baghdad and Erbil have
deteriorated in some ways during Iraq's political
stalemate, as highlighted in the Secretary-General's
report, there is also some cause for optimism. In
particular, the agreement reached to resume official
oil exports from the Kurdistan region and the steps to
adopt a hydrocarbons use and management framework
deserve encouragement and support.

Legislation on the management of hydrocarbons
and revenue-sharing has been blocked for a number of
years. It has become a major source of tension between
the central and Kurdistan regional Governments,
and a hindrance to overall socioeconomic progress.
The approval of such legislation would significantly
advance the resolution of the question of the disputed
internal boundaries, since a large number of unexplored
oilfields lie within these areas. It would also contribute
significantly to improving relations between Baghdad
and Erbil.

UNAMI is also strengthening its efforts to
support Iraq's legislative agenda, as mandated by the
Iraqi Constitution. In addition to the hydrocarbons
legislation, we are continuing to provide technical
advice and assistance on the establishment of the
Federation Council, the reform of the judicial system,
and the adoption of laws on minority communities and
political parties.

At the regional level, Iraq continues its
re-emergence onto the international stage. Earlier
this year, Iraq demonstrated renewed commitment to
meeting its remaining obligations under Chapter VII
of the Charter and to improving its bilateral relations
with Kuwait. However, progress will depend upon the
restoration of confidence between both sides. Over
the past few months, I stepped up my engagement
with Iraq and Kuwait to see how the United Nations
could best facilitate the resolution of outstanding
issues in accordance with the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council. In that context, I recently held
high-level meetings in Iraq and Kuwait in which I was
encouraged by the strong commitment that both Prime
Minister Al-Maliki and the Amir of Kuwait expressed
to normalizing relations between their two countries.
I very much hope that they will now be able to move
quickly. They can count on the United Nations in that
regard.

I am happy to report to the Council today that I spoke
to Foreign Minister Zebari this morning. He informed
me that, first, his Government had today nominated the
names for the technical team of the border maintenance
project and that, secondly, the Government would start
immediately to update the list of farmers entitled to
compensation. A meeting with the farmers will take
place as soon as possible. I welcome those steps and
call on the Government of Iraq to initiate work on the
border maintenance project without further delay.

I also appeal to the Government of Iraq to continue
to demonstrate the goodwill necessary to fulfil Iraq's
other outstanding obligations, in particular with regard
to missing persons and property. The commitment of
Iraq to fulfil those obligations will be conducive to the
normalization of relations between the two countries.
I also equally call on the Government of Kuwait to
continue to act in a spirit of flexibility and reciprocity,
as reflected earlier this year by the important reciprocal
visits of the Amir to Baghdad and the Prime Minister
to Kuwait.

On a different note, I remain fully committed to
continue to work with both Governments to resolve
bilateral issues, at their requestI am hopeful that
agreement between Kuwait and Iraq on the cancelation
of pending lawsuits against Iraqi Airways and on
navigational rights in the Khor Abdullah waterway
will facilitate improved relations between the two
neighbours.

Iraq is a rich country, in both natural and human
resources. But I am concerned by the investment
climate, the impact of Iraq's red tape and the role of
the public sector. Iraq's State apparatus continues
to be affected by corruption and capacity shortfalls,
which undermine governance and limit the delivery of
services. That is exacerbating discontent, in a context
where natural resources are abundant and the public's
expectations for better standards ofliving remain partly
unfulfilled.

In support of Iraq's efforts to build its institutions
to provide good governance and the rule of law,
UNAMI and its partners in the United Nations country
team intend to increase their efforts to strengthen
the independence and capacity of State institutions,
including the Federal Supreme Court, the Independent
High Commission for Human Rights and the Ministry
of Human Rights.

UNAMI and the country team continue their
efforts to strengthen the High Commission for Human
Rights, which has yet to become fully operational,
as well as the Ministry of Human Rights and civil
society organizations. Those are key partners in
monitoring the implementation of the National Action
Plan on Human Rights - a milestone document that
represents the Government's commitment to implement
recommendations from the universal periodic review
process under the auspices of the Human Rights
Council.

To date this year, 123 people have been executed
in Iraq, 53 of them since July. The latest executions
were carried out on ll November, when 11 convicts
were executed, including one Egyptian. I continue to
reiterate the Secretary-General's call in his report for
the Government of Iraq to consider a moratorium on
all executions, in accordance with the relevant General
Assembly resolutions.

As I indicated to the Council in my last briefing,
UNAMI will continue its close partnership with the
country team, with a particular focus on three key
areas with important political, developmental and
governance implications, namely, youth, women and
the environment.

Youth is a critical, but neglected, demographic in
Iraq. The National Development Plan and the current
development assistance framework highlight the
importance of investing in youth. Despite that, indicators
point to high education dropout rates, while Iraqi youths
continue to suffer from an unemployment reate of
almost 20 per cent and low levels of civic participation
and engagement. To address those worrying trends, I
have established a youth advisory group and appointed
two young Iraqi youth ambassadors to strengthen
United Nations advocacy, including through social and
media outreach activities.

To generate and mobilize the Government's
commitment, we are also promoting youth-orientated
initiatives, including a youth parliament and a national
human development report on youth for 2012, led by
the United Nations Population Fund and the United
Nations Development Programme, which has included
a consultation process with 1,800 youths in all
governorates.

We will also sustain our efforts to promote gender
mainstreaming and the empowerment of women.
For example, we are supporting access to justice for
women, as well as training police officers to provide
legal assistance to women survivors of gender-based
violence.

The exploitation of the environment and natural
resources has far-reaching implications for the future
of Iraq, which encompass political, security and
developmental priorities. In particular, the generation
of harmful dust storms continues to increase, bringing
with them associated health hazards and hampering
economic activity. UNAMI and the country team
continue to work closely together on that important
issue. I have attended several meetings to promote
regional approaches to such transboundary issues, and
I am actively working with the Government of Iraq and
the United Nations Environment Programme to hold
a symposium on dust storms in southern Iraq in early
2013.

Complementary efforts by UNAMI and the country
team have ensured a timely and effective response to the
humanitarian dimension in Iraq of the ongoing conflict
in Syria, including a range of protection and relief
activities. The flow of refugees has already exceeded
projected numbers. As of 26 November, there were
more than 50,000 Syrian refugees in Iraq. In addition,
alsmost 55,000 Iraqis have returned from Syria since
18 July. We anticipate that the influx will continue,
thereby swelling the numbers of those displaced.

The United Nations is working closely with the Iraqi
Ministry of Displacement and Migration to respond to
the situation. The humanitarian country team continues
to monitor the situation, and coordinates regularly
with partners and Government authorities to ensure
preparedness and an efficient and timely response.
It has developed contingency plans in-line with the
United Nations Syria regional refugee response
plan, which are continuously updated in response to
emerging developments. Efforts are also taking place
to ensure that camps are fully equipped and prepared
for the coming winter and that necessary equipment is
distributed to refuges and returnees, such as blankets,
kerosene and prefabricated structures instead of tents.
I also call on the Government of Iraq to reopen the
Al-Qaim crossing point so that vulnerable people in
need of protection be able to leave Syria.

Only 30 per cent of the third refugee response plan
is covered, and many refugees continue to pour into
Iraq on a daily basis. I therefore appeal to all Member
States to step up and cover the remaining 70 per cent
of the plan.

Finally, I wish to emphasize that Camp Hurriya
was only meant to be an interim facility. As the process
is now well in progress, I should like to take this
opportunity to reiterate the Secretary-General's appeal
to Member States to offer resettlement opportunities
to former residents of Camp Ashraf. Without such an
undertaking, there can be no sustainable solution for
the residents. Currently, only 100 residents remain in
Camp New Iraq, while more than 3,100 residents have
been peacefully transferred to Camp Hurriya, near
Baghdad. The Government of Iraq insists on closing
Camp Ashraf in the next few days. It has requested that
the last 100 residents to be relocated to Camp Hurriya.
For obvious reasons, UNAMI cannot be directly
involved in negotiations on the Camp Ashraf property.
My colleagues and I, however, have spared no efforts
over the past weeks to facilitate meetings between
various merchants and the Government of Iraq.

Regretably, to date those efforts have been
unsuccessful, leading to a stalemate over the past
weeks. The Government of Iraq considers that stalemate
as an attempt by the residents to delay the relocation of
the remaining 100 persons. The Government of Iraq's
patience is therefore wearing thin. I call on the residents
of Camp Ashraf to cooperate with the Government
of Iraq on solving all outstanding questions related
to property. We have already come a long way. I also
call upon the Government of Iraq to continue the
peaceful relocation of the residents, as stipulated in
the memorandum of understanding, to demonstrate
restraint and to be as flexible as possible when it comes
to resolving property-related issues.

The United Nations monitors in Camp Hurriya
monitor the human rights and humanitarian situation
of the residents on a daily basis. However, they are
often denied access to certain areas of the camp by
the residents. That hinders the performance of their
duties. They are working hard in an impartial manner
under very difficult circumstances. They have my full
confidence. Iurge the residents to engage constructively
with the Government of Iraq and the United Nations
so that Camp New Iraq can be closed peacefully and
efforts can focus on the residents' resettlement to third
countries.

In conclusion, in the face of the many challenges
ahead that I outlined earlier in my briefing, it is
imperative that Iraq stay the course to complete its
transition to an inclusive democracy, provide stability
and prosperity for its people and exercise a positive
influence in the region.

With the support of Member States, UNAMI will
continue to assist the people and Government of Iraq in
those truly worthy endeavours. I regret to say that the
substantial cut of $30 million to UNAMI's budget next
year will require that we do more with less.

I know that I can continue to count on UNAMI's
dedicated staff to work on members' behalf towards
those goals. I would particularly thank the Government
of Iraq for its cooperation during this year. I look
forward to another year of good cooperation in 2013.
Last but not least, I thank the Security Council for its
continued support throughout the year.

