Mr. Motoc (Romania) (spoke in French): I thank
the President of the Council for organizing this timely
and important debate. The Romanian delegation would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
interesting presentation this morning. We also welcome
the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Ghana and of the representative of the African Union.
Romania associates itself fully with the statement to be
made shortly by the presidency of the European Union.
We are pleased with the fundamental vision as
well as the content of the report of the Secretary-
General concerning ways to approach the subregional
and cross-border problems in West Africa. The reports
lends a more pragmatic character with respect to the
progressive emphasis that the Council is putting on the
regional dimension with respect to crises and how to
resolve conflicts in West Africa.

With three United Nations peacekeeping missions
now deployed at different stages in West Africa - the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL),
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) and
the United Nations Mission in Cote d'Ivoire
(MINUCI) - it would appear that we have reached a
critical United Nations mass in the region. That means
that, in the given situation, there is a stronger impact in
combating the different sources of cross-border
instability, in particular the movement of mercenaries,
of child soldiers and armed groups, as well the
trafficking in small arms and light weapons.

Still, the consolidated and better coordinated
presence of the United Nations on the ground is but
one piece of a much broader system. The United
Nations is supposed to act with more congruence in
following up on synergies achieved with the other
actors, in particular, national Governments and
subregional organizations, as well as the donor
community, including the European Union.

Against that backdrop, we were very interested to
read the recommendations which are part of the 12
categories analysed in the report of the Secretary-
General. With respect to the comprehensive and
composite approach in the report, we find no fewer
than 33 recommendations which provide a useful
inventory of general strategies and specific measures
that could, when implemented, add value to the entire
effort.

At this time we would like to commend
Mr. Ahmedou OuId-Abdallah, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa, for the exceptional work he has done. We must,
however, be realistic with respect to the prospects for
each recommendation. Some of them seem more
practical for quick implementation. Others will need
some time to materialize because they require the
adoption of institutional and legislative measures, both
nationally and regionally. In any case, the
encouragement and assistance by the Council and other
major components of the international community will
be critically important to the issue.
We are also of the view that the new logic of the
regional approach, emphasizing cross-border problems
in West Africa, will, as usual, require the use of
different approaches, such as international sanctions,
the usefulness of which has been proven in the practice
of the Security Council, or procedures such as "name
and shame". One could add the contribution of civil
society to that approach, in particular, from women's
organizations.

(spoke in English)

My second point relates to the regional
spearheading role that the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) is expected to keep on
playing in West Africa. ECOWAS seems to be involved
in the implementation of part of the recommendations
laid out in the Secretary General's report.

In view of the complexity and diversity of the
present cross-border and subregional challenges in
West Africa, we consider this the right time to express
renewed confidence in the capacities of ECOWAS, as
one of the most relevant partners of the United Nations
in Africa. We therefore welcome the measures
envisaged by the European Union in order to provide
ECOWAS the support it requires to strengthen its
profile as a regional player. Of particular interest will
be the follow-up of the recent European Union-United
Nations joint mission to ECOWAS aimed at endorsing
a strategic approach to conflict prevention in West
Africa. Eventually, the present recommendations of the
Secretary General could become an integral part of
such a strategy.

We consider it necessary to strengthen
international cooperation in supporting full
implementation of the ECOWAS arms Moratorium,
including by providing technical expertise and
capacity-building for registration of small arms and
light weapons, as well as disarmament, demobilization
rehabilitation and reintegration at subregional and
national levels. Support for West African countries in
building institutions and institutional capacities for
good governance through better policing and security
reform should also take priority on the agenda of
international and regional organizations.

Romania joins the other Security Council
members in welcoming the upcoming comprehensive
study on these issues undertaken by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa in conjunction with the Executive Secretary of
ECOWAS and Member States concerned.
We also take note of the references to the Mano
River Union made in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2004/200). Meanwhile, effective efforts and
assistance aimed at re-energizing the Mano River
Union could prove worthwhile in the fight against
cross-border threats and regional destabilizing factors.
We firmly support concrete actions to that end, such as
the establishment of joint border patrols in Sierra
Leone, Guinea, Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire in
conjunction with the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL), the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL) and the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI).

(spoke in French)

Finally, I would like to emphasize that our
support for the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report stems from our firm
conviction that there is exceptional potential for
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. In this regard, I would quote an African
proverb: those who make the trip in the same canoe
will all end up in the same place.

We are also considering the possibility of
organizing, during the Romanian presidency of the
Security Council, an open debate on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in stabilization processes. We therefore invite Council
members to continue to think about new
recommendations and about practical contributions that
would help increase the effectiveness of the regional
approach and the development of specific solutions for
the challenges and needs of the region.

