Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation thanks you, Sir, for convening
this briefing and presenting us with a detailed report
(S/2017/672/Rev.l) on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which you are chairing effectively and objectively.

The Senegalese delegation would like to join
previous speakers in expressing its appreciation to the
Group of Experts for their outstanding work in drafting
the report, which was submitted to us. That work is
especially precious since it was carried out in particularly
difficult and painful circumstances, clouded this past
March by the murders of two members of the Group,
Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalan, whose families are
honouring us with their presence at today's briefing. I
would like to take this opportunity to reiterate to these
family members and to the members of the Group our
heartfelt condolences, profound sympathy, solidarity
and support during this trying time, which they are
undergoing. Our same heartfelt feelings go out to the
delegations of the United States and Sweden.

I would like to welcome the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. His presence is an additional illustration of
the resolve of his country to pursue its constructive
engagement with the international community, in
particular with the security Council, to respond to
the security, political, economic, humanitarian, and
development challenges, which concern us all.

Today's meeting also makes it possible to highlight
the work that the Group of Experts achieved in a
particularly difficult environment, marked - as I
have just said - not only by the deaths of two of their
own, but by the heightened level of threats, particularly
security threats.

The decrease in cases of violence linked to the
electoral process throughout the country, mentioned
in the report, in addition to the progress noted in
voter registration are encouraging developments that,
by their nature, are conducive to a positive dynamic
leading towards peaceful, democratic and transparent
elections. In that context, we call once again on the
Congolese political stakeholders to resolutely step up
their commitment towards a peaceful political transition
by consensus that is respectful of the aspirations of the
Congolese people within the framework of the rules and
laws of the country. I would nevertheless also like to take
this opportunity to urge the international community
to provide the Democratic Republic of the Congo the
necessary and pledged resources - especially financial
resources - with a view to implement the political
process launched following the political agreement,
which was signed on New Year's Eve 2016.

With regard to the final report of the Group of
Experts under consideration, it need be noted that
the situation with regard to the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains a matter
of concern with the active presence of armed groups,
which remain the primary source of insecurity and
threats for civilians. Such resilience on the part of those
groups, which moreover tend to multiply despite the
combined efforts of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the armed forces of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, concerns us
and reminds us that, in addition to military efforts,
methodical and far-reaching work remains to be done
so as to cut them off from their main sources ofrevenue
and various outside sources of support.

In that regard, the investigation of the Group of
Experts is particularly informative in noting possible
contributions by the diaspora to armed groups
covered by the sanctions regime through websites. We
encourage the Group to continue in that direction so as
to establish the scale and extent of those operations and,
depending on the situation, make recommendations
aimed at ending their financing. In that regard, we
would underline that the cooperation of Member States
is essential for the full implementation of sanctions, in
particular in this specific case.

In that context, the Senegalese delegation would
like to point out the resurgence of the ex-Mouvement
du 23 mars, detected since mid-January, in order to
stress the importance of strengthened regional and
subregional cooperation so as to definitively eliminate
the threat of that armed group's reconstitution. The
same concern arises with regard to the remobilization
of the Mai Mai groups involving former combatants
who participated in the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme.

As the Group of Experts has recommended, we
must also stress the need to assess and recalibrate
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, especially with regard to the reintegration
component. Indisputably, although the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is primarily
responsible for that, the work cannot be properly carried
out without the renewed contribution of partners,
including MONUSCO - which implies financial,
logistical and technical support.

The issue of natural resources play a prominent
role in the final report of the Group of Experts and is
a recurring theme. In particular, the illegal trade and
exportation of natural resources continue to provide
considerable income to armed groups and fuel the
instability and insecurity in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, while, at the same
time, financing criminal networks inside and outside of
the country. Accordingly, that important issue was the
timely subject of a meeting of the Committee pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which you chair, Sir, held on
4 August at your initiative. It was a very informative
meeting that allowed for discussion on specific aspects
of the sanctions regime with key stakeholders and
partners, namely, the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region and the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the region.

At that meeting, through those exchanges, it
became clear that cooperation on the international,
regional and subregional levels can and must play a
role in the various mechanisms to combat the illegal
exploitation and commerce of natural resources, and
that the capacity of the region and the Conference
must be strengthened so as to implement effective and
integrated control and traceability systems. As the report
notes, the effectiveness of the traceability systems and
the implementation of due diligence rules have halted
the aims of armed groups that seek to profit from the
exploitation of tin, tantalum and tungsten - the famous
three Ts. Henceforth, although the system remains to
be perfected in connection with dealing with cases of
corruption and fraud, the same efforts and cooperation
that were effective in dealing with the three Ts must
also serve as a model for the gold-mining sector, which
is considered the most lucrative source of income for
armed groups and criminal networks.

As we know, trafficking in natural resources is
not the only challenge facing us in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region. For there is also
the illicit trafficking of weapons in violation of the arms
embargo, which is one of the main causes of insecurity.
In that regard, the solution could also come from
strengthened cooperation on the international level and
among countries of the region so as to dismantle the
trafficking network and the supply chain of weapons
and ammunition to negative forces. Strengthening the
capacities of those countries in connection with the
storage and management of their arsenals, as well as
improving traceability systems, is an important part of
the response to those challenges.

With regard to cases of violations of international
humanitarian law, my delegation would like to reiterate,
as stated in the report, that the unconscionable killing
of the two experts mandated by the Security Council
constitutes an attack on this body and against the
United Nations itself. It is a serious violation of
international humanitarian law. Senegal, in the light
of its involvement in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, can only express its deep concern at the
threats to the United Nations personnel on the ground.

In this regard, my country supports the investigative
and procedural efforts of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in collaboration
with the United Nations and other interested parties,
in accordance with Congolese legislation, in order to
shed full light on these two murders and to bring the
perpetrators to justice. In the same vein, with respect
to vulnerability, particularly of women and children,
in the prevailing atmosphere of insecurity, especially
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Kasai region, my delegation recalls the provisions of
resolution 2360 (2017), adopted last June, which calls,
inter alia, for

"all those responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law and violations or abuses of human
rights including those involving violence or abuses
against children and acts of sexual and gender-
based violence, to be swiftly apprehended, brought
to justice and held accountable" (resolution 2360 (2017), twenty-fifth preambalar paragraph).

In that regard, my delegation wishes to hail and
encourage the leadership of the Deputy Secretary-
General, who spoke to us a few days ago about her
joint visit with the African Union, highlighting the
timeliness of reconciling efforts the United Nations,
on the one hand, and the Congolese authorities, on the
other, in order to prevent and stop the recruitment and
use of children as well as violence, including and sexual
violence, perpetrated against them, while combating
impunity of perpetrators of such acts (see S/PV.8022).

