Mr. Jevremovic' (Serbia): Before I proceed to
make my statement, I would like to express my respect
for His Excellency Mr. Miroslav Lajeak, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and His
Excellency Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I have read
with due attention the latest report of the High
Representative (S/2008/300, annex, enclosure) and
have listened to the statements made and the views
expressed here today.

Serbia has aligned itself with the statement made
on behalf of the presidency of the European Union
(EU), but I should like to make a few observations as
the representative of a neighbouring country that is a
guarantor of the Dayton Peace Accords.

Let me reiterate that Serbia fully respects the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in accordance with the Dayton Peace
Accords and the provisions of Security Council
resolution 1785 (2007), which reaffirms its
commitment to the political settlement of the conflicts
in the former Yugoslavia, preserving the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all States there within their
internationally recognized borders.

Serbia also fully respects the obligations
emanating from the Dayton Peace Accords. We believe
that their immediate implementation and strict
compliance with all their provisions are of the utmost
importance.

We have consistently supported all efforts aimed
at stability, democracy and social and economic
prosperity in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Serbia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina are both committed to
European principles and values on their road towards
EU accession. We welcome the results achieved during
the past six months, as pointed out here today.

We firmly believe that bringing to justice those
who perpetrated the most heinous crimes in recent
history is the common moral and political obligation of
all countries affected by the tragic conflict in our
region. We cannot but disagree with the statement
made by the High Representative in his report, dealing
with cooperation with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, and we disagree with his appeal, in
paragraph 29 of the report, to the relevant organs of the
United Nations to "find a way to ensure that Serbia
meets its legal obligations under both international and

domestic law to arrest the fugitives" indicted by the
Tribunal. Asking only Serbia, but not other States in
the region, to arrest fugitives implies that all indictees
are in Serbia. However, even in the 27 February 2008
declaration of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council, annexed to the report, both
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia are asked to abide
by their obligations under international law and to
cooperate fully with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia in apprehending all remaining
indictees. Therefore, we cannot agree with the wording
in paragraph 29.

Furthermore, in the section on Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the region, paragraph 63 states that
judicial cooperation among Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina is not entirely adequate, particularly
over war crimes prosecutions. It is suggested that the
main problem is that Serbia has done nothing to
implement the verdict of February 2007 of the
International Court of Justice in regard to indicted war
criminals.

There is no doubt that regional cooperation in this
field among the judicial institutions of those countries
is essential. The regular meetings of the prosecutors of
Serbia, Montenegro, Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina are held in the context of continuous
cooperation in this field. As a result of regional
cooperation and the joint action of the authorities of
Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Montenegro, two
high-ranking fugitives were located and arrested.

Serbia invests continuing efforts in strengthening
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia. In doing so, it has been
guided by full respect for the international standards
related to the individual responsibility of persons who
committed war crimes. It is also proof of our genuine
acceptance of the values that underpin European
societies and modern human rights standards.
