Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his briefing
this morning. We also thank Foreign Minister Yun
Byung-se for presiding over today's Council meeting
and commend Ambassador Oh Joon for his very
effective leadership of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

Resolution 1540 (2004) establishes obligations on
States to enact and enforce effective measures to prevent
and suppress the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons to non-State actors. Over the past
decade, it has filled a gap in international law to prevent
non-State actors from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction, helped create an elaborate architecture
of national laws, regulations and administrative
measures, and raised awareness about the complex
nature of the threat we face. Enjoying the support of
the wide membership, the resolution has placed the
United Nations at the centre of the non-proliferation
effort. The 1540 Committee has been a strong catalyst
in preventing proliferation. It supports many treaty
regimes and, even without being a treaty regime itself,
ensures compliance through voluntary measures.

The Committee has worked closely with the
International Atomic Energy Agency and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and is becoming an essential tool for the Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, its 2005
amendment and the International Convention on the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. The three
nuclear security summits have recognized the key role
being played by the 1540 Committee to strengthen
nuclear security.

The 1540 Committee's immediate challenge is
to persuade some two dozen States to file initial
implementation reports. The Committee plays an
important part in mobilizing assistance. It should
enhance its match-making role by mapping assistance
needs and working as a clearing house between
assistance providers and recipients. The Committee
and its Group of Experts could focus even more sharply
on outreach, awareness-raising and complementarity.
Increasing awareness and encouraging action in the
field of emerging cyberthreats, as well as advances
in chemical agents and synthetic biology, should be
given priority. In those areas, Governments, industry
and research and academic institutions should work
together. To broaden the base of ownership and deepen
cooperation, the Committee should organize an annual,
open and interactive briefing in New York. It is also
advisable to enhance the Committee's cooperation and
coordination with the Councils' subsidiary bodies, as
well as with international, regional and subregional
organizations.

The possibility of non-State actors acquiring or
using WMDs is a shared concern. Pakistan, as part
of international efforts to address that contemporary
challenge, has contributed constructively to advancing
the aims ofresolution 1540 (2004), including during our
last two terms on the Security Council. Pakistan has put
in place a comprehensive export control regime. The
legislative, regulatory, administrative and enforcement
measures of that regime are on a par with the standards
followed by the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the Missile
Technology Control Regime and the Australia Group.
Our export control regime has an elaborate
institutional set-up compromising a dedicated Strategic
Export Control Division, an oversight board and a
standing inter-agency coordination mechanism. The
Strategic Export Control Division has twice notified
and published national control lists, making them
enforceable by Pakistani customs and other relevant
agencies. Those lists, revised last in 2011, are classified
on the basis of the European Union's integrated system.

Our national detection architecture includes the
use of detection devices at several entry and exit points,
as well as other random checkpoints to deter, detect and
prevent the illicit trafficking of nuclear and radioactive
materials. We have also established a centre of
excellence that conducts specialized courses in nuclear
security, physical protection, material control and
accounting, transport security and personnel reliability.
Our Parliament is considering a bill to strengthen and
streamline our legislative and regulatory regime to
meet our obligations under the Biological Weapons
Convention. Our national authority for implementation
of Pakistan's obligations under the Chemical Weapons
Convention has been in place since 2000. Pakistan
works closely with the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons in that field.

As a party to the International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, Pakistan
has enacted an anti-money laundering law, established
a financial monitoring unit in the State Bank of
Pakistan to track suspicious financial transactions,
and frozen hundreds of bank accounts. Pakistan has
engaged international export control regimes. Pakistan
fully qualifies to become a member of the Nuclear
Suppliers Group, where we can share our experiences
and expertise and benefit from the good practices of
other States. As we revive our economy, we look to
international cooperation and assistance for nuclear
energy under the safeguards of the International Atomic
Energy Agency.

