Mr. Laro (Nigeria): Mr. President, the Nigerian
delegation thanks you for convening this meeting. We
also thank our briefers for their briefings.

Concerning the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), we have carefully studied
the twenty-second annual report (see S/2015/585),
which provides detailed information on its work during
the period under review. We commend the Tribunal's
commitment to completing its proceedings expeditiously
and in accordance with due process. We note the
important work done by the Registry in coordinating
the practical arrangements necessary for the ongoing
process of downsizing the Tribunal's operations and the
transfer of responsibilities to the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.

The ICTY outreach programme has made
significant contributions to transitional justice and
post-conflict recovery in the former Yugoslavia. That
is a noteworthy legacy of the Tribunal. We commend
the ICTY media office for facilitating the work of
journalists covering the activities of the Tribunal,
which has helped to promote transparency in its work.

Concerning the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), we are pleased to note that as of
15 November the Tribunal had completed its work at
the trial level for all 93 accused and transferred its
final outstanding cases to other competent judicial
authorities in preparation for its closure. The fact that
the judgement in the sole remaining case on appeal will
be delivered on 14 December is a significant indication
of the progress made by the Tribunal in completing its
work.

We note that the ICTR is on course to formally
cease its activities on 31 December. The progress made
in implementing its completion strategy attests to that.
The smooth handover of most judicial and prosecutorial
functions to the Mechanism is laudable. It is particularly
significant that the Mechanism has already assumed
full responsibility for monitoring cases referred to
national jurisdictions for trial, tracking fugitives,
responding to requests for mutual legal assistance and
supervising conditions of detention for the 28 persons
currently serving sentences imposed by the Tribunal.
We encourage States Members of the United Nations
to offer their full cooperation to the Mechanism in the
attainment of its mandate.

In conclusion, we may tribute to our distinguished
briefers for their astute leadership and assure them of
our continued support.

