Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, I would like
to welcome the Special Representative ofthe Secretary-
General, Mr. Jan Kubis. I extend my thanks to him for
his briefing and for his team's dedicated work in support
of the Afghan people. I also appreciate Ambassador
Tanin's presence with the Council today.

My Government aligns itself with the statement
just delivered on behalf of the European Union.

Afghanistan has taken major steps on its path of
political and security transition over recent months. At
the Tokyo Conference, the Government of Afghanistan
and the international community reaffirmed their long-
term partnership and agreed on the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework. Germany considers
the comprehensive and timely implementation of
the Framework to be key in achieving a peaceful
and prosperous future for Afghanistan. It is also
paramount in securing the continued support of the
international community. Those mutual commitments
were reaffirmed at the senior officials' meeting held in
Kabul on 3 July. Since then, further progress has been
achieved in many areas.

We particularly welcome the establishment of a
legislative framework for the presidential and provincial
elections to be held in April 2014. The appointment of
new members to the Independent Election Commission

and the Independent Election Complaints Commission
has been another decisive step. We are now awaiting
the announcements of candidates who will run in those
historic elections, which will result in apeaceful transfer
of power. On the other hand, more remains to be done
to ensure that the elections are transparent, credible
and inclusive, in particular regarding the participation
of women in the election process. Germany will further
support Afghanistan in its continued preparations for
the elections and will contribute overall more than
$14 million to that end.

While focusing on the preparations for the elections,
we must not forget that there are many other challenges
ahead for Afghanistan. Preserving and consolidating
gains in the protection and promotion of human rights
is of the utmost importance. Sustained action to
implement statutory safeguards, first and foremost the
Law on the Elimination of Violence against Women,
is a key requirement in that regard. Furthermore, we
are confident that the Government of Afghanistan will
continue to ensure the independence of the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission according to
Afghan law and the Paris Principles.

The most recent visit ofPresident Karzai to Pakistan
and the subsequent release of members of the Taliban
from prisons in Pakistan open up new opportunities in
the peace and reconciliation process. We encourage all
sides to further pursue the path of an Afghan-led and
-owned peace process, despite potential setbacks ahead,
as we believe that there is no reasonable alternative.

The Afghan security forces continue to face serious
challenges. That is demonstrated by the attack on the
United States Consulate General in Herat last Friday
and the killing of the chief of the Independent Election
Commission in Kunduz yesterday. Germany condemns
those heinous terrorist attacks in the strongest terms.
Germany remains confident, however, that, with
evolving but persistent international support, the
Afghan security forces will continue to prove capable
of responding to such challenges.

Let me conclude by underlining that Germany will
continue to support the Government of Afghanistan,
including after 2014. Our particular focus will remain
on the implementation of the mutual commitments
stemming from the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework.

