Mr. Alam: (Bangladesh) I thank the President
for inviting us to this high-level open debate in the
Security Council. We look forward to a successful
French presidency of the Council under his leadership
this month. I also thank the briefers for their thought-
provoking observations today. We look forward to the
Secretary-General's report on the organization-wide
response to the Agenda for Humanity, including on the
protection of civilians.

Only a few days back, as we do every year in our
capital, we observed the International Day of United
Nations Peacekeepers in a fitting manner. It was a
sobering occasion for recalling the invaluable role
played by our peacekeepers, often in difficult situations
where there is no peace to keep.

I had the opportunity last year to attend the
International Conference on the Protection of
Civilians in Kigali, Rwanda. Earlier in the year, we
had the chance to interact with the members of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,
as we hosted them in Dhaka for their Asia-Pacific
regional consultations.

It has been personally quite rewarding to follow the
developments concerning the protection of civilians in
the context of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
In Bangladesh, we have embraced the notion of
protecting civilians in terms of our contribution to
United Nations peacekeeping operations as a matter
of principle and pragmatism. We have the haunting
memory of 3 million of our people killed during our
War of Liberation in 1971, which we do not wish to see
repeated anywhere else in the world. It is unacceptable
to think that civilians come under armed attack in a
situation where our peacekeepers remain deployed. Our
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina therefore never thought
twice when, at the peacekeeping summits that she has
co-chaired over the last two years, she committed to the
mainstreaming of the protection-of-civilians mandate
in peacekeeping training for our troops and police. As
a lead troop-contributing country, we consider it our
responsibility to lead by example and, at times, venture
into untested territories. Our endorsement of the Kigali
Principles on Protection of Civilians was largely
guided by that perspective. Our initiative to take steps
forward with our personnel- and capability-readiness
arrangements has been prompted by our continued
efforts to strive for the better.

In line with our value-driven engagement in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, Bangladesh wishes to
remain one of the first responders to the United Nations
call for troops, police and capabilities. We commit
ourselves to discharging the tasks mandated by the
Council without any caveats. We remain aware of the
growing and complex challenges in the environments
in which we operate. Yet we make it a point to stand our
ground, as we continue to do in Mali and in the Central
African Republic.

We see the real need for intelligence and
technologies to serve our troops' Vital interests on the
ground, particularly so as to enhance their capacity for
protecting civilians and ensure their own safety and
security. We stand ready to constructively support the
work of developing an enabling policy and operational
frameworks on those issues in a transparent and
consultative manner.

As has been noted, much work has already been
done on developing a set of norms and guidelines for
protecting civilians in peacekeeping operations. But
there remain certain gaps between policies and practice.
It has often been a challenge to get the mandates
spelled out in clear terms, which leaves them open to
interpretation in the field. It is therefore important for
the Council to occasionally review the mandates in
close consultation with host Governments, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the United Nations
Secretariat. In that context, we wish to thank the
French delegation for holding informal consultations
with the troop-contributing countries concerned in its
capacity as the penholder for resolution 2227 (2015)
on the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali.

It is crucial that mandate design and review be
guided by the strategic analysis and assessment of
the threats to civilians, based on real-time feedback
from the field. On the other hand, there must be
sufficient leverage for field missions to develop their
respective strategies and targets within the broader
framework of the mandates set by the Council.
Mission leaderships need to be empowered enough
to ensure coherent mission-wide approaches to
protecting civilians. The protection mandate demands
a corresponding investment in building the capacity of
missions, including for situational awareness, threat
assessment, strategic planning, timely information
and communication, and needs-based training. It is
important that the necessary resources and capabilities
be made available to missions to enable them to fulfil
their mandated tasks.

It would be quite impractical, however, to expect
that United Nations peacekeeping operations would
be the only answer to protecting civilians. That would
hardly be fair, since peacekeeping missions must operate
within certain principles, parameters and limitations.
It may be justified to hold peacekeepers responsible if
they fail to deliver in a given circumstance, but it is
neither feasible nor perhaps desirable for peacekeepers
to bear the burden of protecting civilians when that is
essentially the responsibility of national Governments.
It is important that peacekeepers be made aware of
whom to protect, where to protect and in partnership
with whom. The Council and mission leaderships
have a shared responsibility to manage expectations
and disseminate the right information so as to avoid
confusion, especially among local populations.

There is often room for peacekeeping missions
to contribute to building the capacity of national
authorities and other local actors in protecting
civilians. There may also be potential for working in
collaboration with relevant regional or international
actors deployed on the front lines. Such scenarios need
to be carefully mapped out and worked through in the
course of mandate design and implementation.

It is critical for peacekeepers and humanitarian
actors to work in tandem in a protection crisis so as
to be able to respond to the particular needs of those
affected, especially women, children and the elderly. We
resolutely condemn any disruption of or barriers against
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to civilian
populations under any pretext. The commitments
made in that regard at the World Humanitarian
Summit last month must be followed through in a
coherent, coordinated and inclusive manner among all
concerned actors.

That also brings us to the bigger question of
considering the role of peacekeepers in protecting
civilians within a focused and far-reaching political
approach to sustainingpeace. Peacekeepers canbe tasked
with firefighting in the case of an emergency, but the
threat of such protection crises will continue to remain
as long as the underlying political drivers of conflict or
breaching of peace are not effectively addressed.

The Council must remain seized with such broader
political issues in order to prevent a recurrence of
protection challenges and to lend credibility to ission
mandates on a sustained basis.

For us, protecting civilians in the peacekeeping
context is something much more fundamental and
serious than mere mandate implementation. I recall
my visit to the Genocide Museum in Kigali and the
harrowing tales and reminiscent of the international
community's failure to protect innocent civilians from
mass atrocity crimes. We must continue to use such
powerful memorial tools to renew our commitment to
protecting civilians, and doing it right:

Bangladesh pledges to do its part as best it can.

