Ms. DiCarlo: Since I last briefed the Security
Council a month ago (see S/PV.8527), violence in
north-west Syria has continued unabated as parties on
the ground try to advance militarily. Our unflagging
efforts to mediate a political solution that meets the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people cannot move
forward in an environment of open conflict. Our efforts
will stall if Russia and Turkey cannot uphold their
ceasefire agreement. Our efforts will suffer if members
ofthe Security Council, as well as the Astana group and
the small group on Syria - many of whom sit around
this table today - cannot find a way to work together
in common support of the Special Envoy's efforts to
implement resolution 2254 (2015).

The United Nations understands very well the
positions of the guarantors of the Idlib memorandum, an
agreement which until a few months ago had delivered
relative calm to the people of Idlib. For Russia, the
presence of Security Council-designated terrorist
group Hayat Tahrir al-Sham in the de-escalation zone is
not tolerable. For Turkey, time is required to effectively
isolate and address Hayat Tahrir al-Sham's most hard-
line fighters.

As the Secretary-General said a few hours ago, the
situation in Idlib is especially dangerous and, yet again,
civilians are paying a horrific price. Air strikes continue.
Barrel bomb use and cluster munitions and exchanges
of mortar and artillery fire are ongoing, resulting in
civilian casualties and massive displacement. Population
centres and civilian infrastructure, including schools
and medical facilities, have been attacked, mostly
inside the de-escalation zone. It is imperative that we
address Hayat Tahrir al-Sham without triggering the
humanitarian catastrophe that we see unfolding before
our eyes, with hundreds of thousands on the move,
being pushed closer to Turkey's border.

Despite all this violence, the front lines have hardly
shifted, suggesting a stalemate. But if that is the case, it
is plainly turning out to be a bloody and quite pointless
stalemate with devastating humanitarian consequences
that far outstrip any damage done to Hayat Tahrir
al-Sham. Undoubtedly, the situation in Idlib is complex.
But, as we have repeatedly said, counter-terrorism
cannot overtake obligations under international law to
protect civilians and the obligation to strictly observe
the principles of distinction and proportionality. The
problem posed by Hayat Tahrir al-Sham will need to
be dealt with in a more effective and suitable way, one
where civilians do not pay the price. That can begin
only with the restoration of calm.

The Secretary-General, the Special Envoy and I
have been pressing for the need for a solution in Idlib in
all of our engagements at all levels. We welcome Russia
and Turkey's continued efforts to contain the violence,
most recently in their working group meeting on 16 and
17 June. However, if a solution is not found, then the
consequences will be unimaginable - and not just in
humanitarian terms. Let us remember the international
players involved and the potential for escalation.

Over the weekend, Turkey announced that one of
its observation posts had been shelled by Government
forces intentionally and that it had retaliated with
heavy weapons. That was the second such incident in
less than a week that impacted a Turkish observation
post - defensive positions meant to maintain the lines
agreed in the September memorandum. Today Syrian
Foreign Minister Walid Al-Moualem assured that Syria
did not want to see an armed confrontation between
its forces and Turkey. These close military exchanges
underscore how Idlib is notjust a humanitarian issue; it
also poses a grave risk to regional security.

As we look to the upcoming Group of 20 meeting,
where world leaders who can contain this conflict will
be present, we stress the need for diplomacy to produce
an outcome in Idlib that can create the necessary
conditions for the political process to advance. We
call on international stakeholders - in particular the
Russian Federation and Turkey, as guarantors of the
September 2018 memorandum of understanding on
Idlib - to exert the efforts needed to end the violence
and restore calm. All that is required is political will.
As the Secretary-General also stated today, there is no
military solution to the Syrian crisis. It was clear at the
start and it remains clear more than eight years later:
the solution is political.

The Syrian people have paid a high price for the
failures of the international community to end this war.
More than half the population is displaced and in need.
More than 5 million refugees are uncertain of when
it will be safe to return. Hundreds of thousands have
paid with their lives. Tens of thousands are detained,
missing, tortured. Are we really asking them to pay
more? We must collectively work together to ensure the
answer to that question is no.

