Mr. ngowe (Botswana): The Declaration of
Principles on Interim Self-Govemment Arrangements,
signed in Washington, DC, on 13 September 1993, and the
Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement on the West Bank and
the Gaza Strip signed in Washington, DC, on 28
September 1995, made Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization partners in the search for durable peace in the
Middle East. These agreements constitute the foundation for
peace and are an attempt to fulfil the common desire of the
Israeli and Palestinian peoples to end years of bitter
confrontation and establish, in its place, a new era of
mutual recognition, peaceful coexistence and cooperation.
These are noble objectives which enjoy the strong political
and moral support of Botswana. We urge the Government
of Israel and the Palestinian National Authority to remain
unwavering in their commitment to the peace process.

Recent events have shown that it takes courage and
bravery to make peace. It is those who do not fear living in
peace with their former enemies and neighbours who will
be ready to walk the extra mile in pursuit of peace. It is
obvious - at times painfully so - that the road to peace
in the Middle East has been and will be fraught with many
obstacles, pitfalls and dangers. There are still many enemies
of peace in that region: assassins, suicide bombers, fanatics
- you name them - who are bent on the use of force
where others have opted for peaceful coexistence and the
establishment of good-neighbourly relations as the best
path to a prosperous and mutually beneficial future
between the peoples of Israel and Palestine. It is clear that
the overwhelming majority of the peoples of Israel and
Palestine fall into the latter category. They should
therefore derive strength and fortitude from each other
and work tirelessly in the face of all odds for the
fulfilment of their hopes and aspirations for a better
tomorrow.

They cannot afford to be panicked by threats or to
surrender to the machinations of the enemies of peace.
The peace that so many have yearned for, for so long,
cannot be allowed to unravel at the point of its
consummation due to the unguided activities of a few.
The difficulties facing the peace process are truly
undeniable. Tackling them requires unity of purpose and
commitment by the peacemakers.

Botswana recognizes the limited but difficult choices
before the Government of Israel to guarantee the safety
and security of its people. The brutal terrorist attacks
which took place in Jerusalem on 3 March and in Tel
Aviv on 4 March, which claimed several lives and caused
colossal suffering to many people, are a grim reality that
the Government had to contend with and respond to in
the best manner it saw fit. These heinous crimes could
only have been perpetrated by the enemies of peace
against innocent and unsuspecting civilians. The
peace-loving people of Palestine shared the pain of their
Israeli brethren. They honestly commiserated and
sympathized with the people of Israel following these
horrid and merciless suicide bomb attacks. They
understood and fully appreciated that such despicable acts
were not directed only at the people of Israel but at the
Palestinians as well, because the disruption of the peace
process could be nothing but a dagger pointed at the
people of Palestine.

My delegation has noted the letters dated 1 April
1996 (S/1996/233) and 2 April 1996 (S/1996/235)
concerning the impact of the measures taken by Israel
against the people of the Palestinian territories. The
measures adopted by the Government of Israel are clearly
a blunt instrument which does not distinguish between the
guilty and the innocent. They are a form of collective
punishment which hurts the peace-loving people of
Palestine, against whom they should not have been aimed
in the first place. No impression of desperation or panic
should be created, because that is exactly what the
enemies of the peace process hope to see and work hard
to achieve.

 

It is therefore a matter of profound importance that the
Government of Israel do everything it possibly can to avoid
alienating the majority of the Palestinian people, who, in
free and fair elections, recently expressed their desire for
peace by reaffirming their support for the Palestine
Liberation Organization, the partner of Israel in the peace
process in the Middle East. The capacity of the border
closures to damage the peace process, poison the political
atmosphere and reduce the pace of the implementation of
the Agreements should not be underestimated. The safety
and security interests of the Israeli people should be
weighed against the human rights and welfare of the
Palestinian people as well as the overall objective of
establishing a durable peace.

It is important that in all its efforts to guarantee the
genuine security interests of its people, Israel should at the
same time avoid taking measures which would harm the
spirit and letter of the historic and solemn agreements it
entered into with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Equally, the Palestine National Authority should do
everything it can to help stem the tide of terrorist attacks
against the State of Israel. No effort should be spared to
preserve and advance the peace process.

