Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Sir, for calling for
this important debate and for the attention given by
France to the ongoing deliberations on the future of
United Nations peacekeeping operations and on
addressing their challenges. I also thank you for the
concept paper prepared by your Mission (S/2010/67) as
a basis for this debate on strengthening the drafting of
Security Council mandates by providing resources and
capabilities, developing exit strategies, and achieving
the smooth and gradual transition from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding and the long-term sustainable
development of countries emerging from conflict.

I would like also to thank the Secretary-General
for his statement early in the debate and the Under-
Secretaries-General for Peacekeeping Operations and
Field Support for their briefings. I also thank Japan for
its efforts to enhance the interaction of the Security
Council with troop-contributing countries through the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations.

In our capacity as the Chairman of the
Non-Aligned Movement, we fully associate ourselves
with the statement made by the representative of
Morocco on behalf of the Movement.

While the United Nations is proud of the steady
increase in the number of its peacekeeping troops and
police, that increase also reflects the weak ability of
the Organization to reach successful political
settlements of existing disputes in host countries. It
also reflects in most instances a lack of interest in
developing the dimensions of peace settlements,
through cooperation with United Nations organs and
other entities, to create urban communities that provide
decent lives for belligerent forces and persuade them to
lay down arms and devote themselves to building their
country and to preventing it from descending yet again
into conflict.

Unfortunately, this phenomenon is most clear in
peacekeeping operations, at least 75 per cent of whose
budgets is allocated to reimbursing troop and
equipment costs, leaving less than 25 per cent to
development activities, to promoting peaceful
settlement efforts and to strengthening peacebuilding
efforts on the ground. That is a perfectly unacceptable
ratio that does not reflect the required balance between
peacekeeping, peace settlement and post-conflict
peacebuilding.

Egypt has repeatedly stressed the need to prevent
peacekeeping missions from being transformed into
missions that manage rather than settle conflicts. Egypt
has also indicated the importance of focusing on
building the national capabilities of host countries from
the outset of a peacekeeping operation through parallel
efforts in peacebuilding. That will contribute to ending
the growing reliance of host countries on the role of
peacekeeping missions in support of national capacities
in the areas of defence, security and the rule of law,
particularly in the light of the consequences of
prolonged peacekeeping missions in the absence of a
national alternative capable of performing the same
tasks and of protecting and consolidating whatever
stability has been achieved. All of these issues must be
taken into consideration in our search for a vision of
sequential transitions, with defined phases, from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding, based on the need to
achieve comprehensive economic development as a
basis for such transitions.

In a contribution to defining a number of
elements that can be addressed in the context of
developing and implementing transition and exit
strategies for peacekeeping missions, I wish to stress
several important aspects that can be helpful to
formulating a new strategy in this regard.

First, there is a need to focus greater attention on
strengthening the Organization's political efforts, from
preventive diplomacy, mediation and reconciliation
through peacekeeping, peacebuilding and support for
the development capacities of host countries, in
cooperation with United Nations organs and
international financial and economic institutions, to the
organized end phase of missions. That should be done
within a framework of respect for the basic principles
of peacekeeping operations reflected in the consent of
the parties, national ownership, impartiality, and the
non-use of force except in self-defence or to implement
a Security Council mandate.

Second, the Security Council must draft mandates
that are clear, achievable and based on a technical
assessment and sound political and military planning.
The Council should also indicate precisely what goals
are to be achieved and the role of each component of
the mission in achieving them. This must be done in
such a manner as to guarantee the required gradual
transition from peacekeeping to comprehensive
peaceful settlement, and in the light of clear
development plans for the transition to post-conflict
peacebuilding and the withdrawal of the United
Nations in coordination and cooperation with the host
country once it is able to assume its responsibility for
defence, security and enforcing respect for the rule of
law. The strategy should also take into account the
evaluation set out in the Brahimi report (see S/2000/809) regarding the need for multidimensional
10

United Nations peacekeeping operations to launch a
limited number of critical peacebuilding activities,
pursuant to a phased plan for the smooth transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.

Third, we must enhance trust between
peacekeeping parties represented in the Security
Council, the troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat, and strengthen coordination on the ground
between the Security Council's special political
missions, regional organizations, and financial and
economic institutions operating in host countries in
order to ensure unity of purpose and consistency in
addressing the political, military, economic and
development dimensions.

Fourth, institutional cooperation between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council
must be consolidated in order to take advantage of the
Commission's advice in planning the peacebuilding
activities of United Nations peacekeeping missions,
taking into consideration the results of this year's
upcoming review of the Peacebuilding Commission.

Fifth, we must pursue the development of
relevant Secretariat bodies and increase coordination
and interaction among them within the two
Departments of the peacekeeping sector, and with the
Department of Political Affairs and the Peacebuilding
Support Office, in order to achieve an integrated and
coherent vision that ensures unity of purpose and
action on the ground, in consultation with Member
States and within a framework of transparency and
ongoing dialogue aimed at overcoming problems
related to insufficient personnel and equipment and at
ending the lack of coordination of United Nations
activities on the ground.

Sixth, we must enhance resort to regional and
subregional organizations in addressing post-conflict
peacekeeping issues, without prejudice to the Security
Council's competence but within a framework of joint
efforts to achieve peace and stability. Foremost among
such organizations is the African Union, which already
plays a lead role that deserves appreciation and
support.

Seventh and lastly, we must avoid addressing
peacekeeping and peacebuilding issues from the
perspective of reducing costs and disputing the
competences of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, represented respectively by the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the
10-23924
Peacebuilding Commission. The Economic and Social
Council also has to play a more dynamic role in
strengthening the capabilities of countries emerging
from conflict to relaunch the sort of effective economic
activities that guarantee an end to conflicts and
promote development.

