Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
want to thank you, Sir, and your delegation for
organizing this discussion, which has proved to be
quite interesting and informative, I hope, to members
of the Council and to our guests here today. It has
certainly given us a great opportunity to hear the views
of non-members of the Council on the Security Council
summit, the work of the Security Council itself and our
follow-up. It also gives us a chance to talk seriously
and substantively about what the Security Council has
done since September 2000.

The Security Council summit highlighted the
need for action, I think, in two broad areas. One is
peacekeeping, especially in Africa, the need to
strengthen United Nations capabilities and the absolute
necessity of doing a better job. It also addressed the
need for more openness and engagement with the
broader United Nations membership and with regional
organizations and other international actors. Among
some, I think, there was a sense that we could all do
better. I think that the last six months or more have
shown that we have made progress in that regard.

During a recent open debate, the representative of
one Member State remarked that peacekeeping
successes were not made public often enough. That is
equally true when it comes to meeting the goals we
have set for ourselves and our successors. We have
made significant progress towards achieving the goals
elaborated in the Security Council millennium
declaration. I think we are on the road to doing even
better.

On peacekeeping, the declaration clearly
addressed the need for the Security Council to enhance
its effectiveness, especially in dealing with internal
conflicts in Africa. The Council marked the need to
adopt clear, credible and achievable mandates and, in
fact, is doing so, most recently in adjusting its
approach to new circumstances in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The declaration's commitment to the safety of
peacekeepers and to credible, capable peacekeeping
has marked the way forward in Sierra Leone. The
Council acted quickly on the Brahimi peacekeeping
recommendations within its purview. We have taken
specific steps to strengthen cooperation with troop-
contributing countries, especially under Singapore's
presidency. The United States has strongly endorsed
this activity. The model used with countries
contributing troops to the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone has, by now, more or less been endorsed
by all Member States and we are operating on a new
level there. And the new Working Group on
peacekeeping operations is considering ways to make
the interaction between troop contributors, the Council
and the Secretariat even more meaningful. We have
pushed that and are committed to seeing that effort
succeed.

The United States has honoured the summit
declaration's call for international action to prevent the
illegal flow of small arms into areas of conflict through
the joint declaration of the United Nations and the
Southern African Development Community on small
arms. In a true innovation in its work, the Council is
addressing trafficking and exploitation of high-value
commodities with important work on conflict diamonds
and an effort, made earlier today, to address the way
blood money fuels further conflict and instability.

The declaration calls on us to bring to justice
those who commit serious violations of international
humanitarian law, and the recent international efforts to
establish a war-crimes tribunal for Sierra Leone and to
expand the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda honour that call.

Another provision of the declaration emphasized
the determination to continue to sensitize peacekeeping
personnel on the prevention and control of HIV/AIDS.
In January, our public debate on HIV/AIDS intensified
the work begun with Security Council 1308 (2000).

There has also been significant progress in
working more closely with regional organizations,
particularly in Africa, Latin America and Europe. The
Secretary-General recently convened a meeting of
regional organizations that was a truly innovative
effort, and just recently the Council met with
representatives of the Economic Community of West
African States, the Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization.

We have also made strides in improving the
working methods and transparency of the Council; the
working methods of the Council have changed
considerably - perhaps more than many people
realize - from the first time I was here 10 years ago.
There is much more effort to find consensus, much
more openness to exchange with other organizations
and actors, much more transparency and a much
greater recognition of the need for partnerships - I
stress the plural - to be effective. Important elements
of Security Council reform, which were supported by
so many countries during the Millennium Summit, and,
indeed, which have been mentioned by many speakers
today, are becoming a reality.

As to future steps, Council members, meeting at
head of State level on 7 September last, laid out a clear
road map. This is a road map of actions - things we
should and must do. We have received a strong
message from the Secretary-General, repeated in the
documents that the delegation of Ukraine circulated for
this open debate. To paraphrase that message, only
action that is prompt, united, effective and pursued
with skill and discipline, can halt conflict, restore
peace and maintain confidence in the
United Nations - a worthy goal, I would say. That is
certainly the right way to look at it. We must not
become overly absorbed in looking at our own
processes; we need to be very absorbed in looking at
our actions and their results. We must not become prey
to political theatre, which leads away from or impedes
action.

How do we move from intentions to actions? The
Council needs to address real problems, as we did
yesterday with regard to Iraq, Afghanistan and the
Balkans, and today with regard to West Africa.
Furthermore, an essential concrete step- actually, a
precondition - would be to demonstrate our collective
support for the Brahimi implementation process and
make that a reality, and to continue the progress we
have made. We need to examine closely the
comprehensive review of the resources of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations when it comes
out in May, in order to make informed, well-justified
decisions to further enhance capabilities. Additionally,
enhancing the capacity of the United Nations to plan
for and manage civilian police operations would
greatly contribute to lasting security in post-conflict
States. This has to become an important component of
the work of the United Nations for addressing earlier
stages of conflict and also for addressing post-conflict
situations.

Many speakers today called for Council action to
be more rapid and more effective, and for the Council
to enforce its decisions and support international
legitimacy and international law. That is certainly
correct. But for that to happen, the Council and the
membership must realize that the Council is not solely
its own master. It needs stronger instruments,
especially as outlined in the Brahimi report, but in
other areas, too, that we have discussed in the recent
past. Very importantly, it needs the support of, and
implementation and follow-up by, the international
community. It needs to recognize- we all need to
recognize- that the ultimate responsibility for
resolving conflict and building peace lies with the
parties, as set out in the Council declaration in
September.

The United States firmly intends to proceed down
the path we opened - or, rather, clearly defined - last
September. Moving forward vigilantly on this agenda is
the best way to make our intentions more real - the
topic we set for ourselves today.

