Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): It is a pleasure to welcome
you, Mr. President, and to see you presiding over
today's meeting. I thank Special Coordinator Robert
Serry for his briefing, and the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine for their statements.

We meet again to discuss the situation in the
Middle East in the midst of unprecedented
transformations in the region. Unfortunately, those
transformations have so far failed to bring change to
the Israeli-Palestinian situation.

The Palestinian aspiration to statehood is not an
abstraction. It is the cornerstone of democracy, dignity,
freedom and human rights for the Palestinian people.
We regret that, apart from the disagreements between
the two sides, the main partners in the peace process
remain unable to help the parties overcome the current
impasse.

In this context, it is not surprising that the
Palestinian leadership has announced its intention to
request the United Nations to recognize the Palestinian
State, based on the pre-June 1967 lines and with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and to apply for full
membership of the Organization. The absence of a
peace process adds to the legitimacy of the Palestinian
request.

Resorting to the United Nations cannot be seen as
a unilateral move. It is the exact opposite. The very
concept of a two-State solution arises ultimately from
the multilateral system, as the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon has just reminded us.
General Assembly resolution 181 (II) of 1947 endorsed
the plan of partition. The recognition of a Palestinian
State is the completion of this 64-year-old promise.

Having had an important role in the General
Assembly session that legitimized the State of Israel,
Brazil feels it is time for the United Nations to grant
the same vote of confidence to the Palestinian people's
capacity to build a peaceful, democratic and prosperous
State of its own. The Palestinian State, although under
foreign occupation, is already a reality on the ground,
as we have heard from the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process.

Palestinian institutions are now sufficient for a
functioning State. International recognition can help
reduce the asymmetry that characterizes relations
between the parties. It can help realign the debate on
the application of international law in the occupied
Palestinian territories. It can also help to advance
negotiations on core issues in a more fair and just
manner. In the letter in which Brazil recognized the
State of Palestine, we reiterated our understanding that
only dialogue and peaceful coexistence with its
neighbours can truly advance the Palestinian cause.

Resolutions 1850 (2008) and 1860 (2009)
encourage intra-Palestinian reconciliation and the
formation of a Palestinian Government committed to
the Quartet principles and the Arab Peace Initiative,
and that respects the commitments of the Palestine
Liberation Organization. The Palestinian reconciliation
agreement signed in Cairo in May is a first step
towards this important goal, which will provide the
Palestinian people with a united and coherent
representation.

We urge the Palestinian leaders to fully embrace
non-violence, human rights and democracy as core
principles of their struggle to end occupation. We
expect them to fully commit to the security of the State
of Israel and to the right of Israel to exist in peace and
harmony with its neighbours.

A new Middle East is in the making before our
eyes. The legitimacy of the movements that seek
transformation lies in the democratic character of their
demands and in the peaceful nature of their actions. In
each national context, these forces will find their
particular political expression in the face of different
strategic, security, social, ethnic and economic
conditions. Challenges will be manifold. Genuine
change, in line with the aspirations of the people, can
only come from within.

We condemn once more, in the strongest possible
terms, the use of lethal force against unarmed
demonstrators. Repression is likely only to strengthen
the will of those struggling to exercise basic, universal
rights. As we stand in solidarity with those peacefully
demonstrating for democracy and social justice, we
must pursue avenues to peaceful political solutions
leading to meaningful reforms. Sustained international
engagement will be needed, in order to ensure that
those transformations are followed by a more equitable
development and a better life for all citizens in the
region.

