Mr. Jingree (Mauritius): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Steiner,
for his comprehensive briefing this morning. We also
thank Deputy Prime Minister Covic' for his useful
statement.

Mauritius is encouraged to see the general
positive development taking place in Kosovo. The
formation of the provisional institutions of self-
government, with full representation from all ethnic
communities, shows the determination of all
communities to work together in the best interest of the
Kosovo population. We note with satisfaction that
minority communities are also being represented in
functional committees, in line with the Constitutional
Framework. We have also noted that the concerns of
the minority communities are often not taken into
account by the Assembly. We call on the Kosovo
Assembly to be more open to representation from
minority communities and to ensure that future
decisions of the Assembly enjoy the full support of all
members.

Likewise, we have noted the encroachment on
UNMIK responsibilities by the Kosovo Assembly,
something that warranted the Special Representative's
intervention and subsequent action by the Security
Council. We call on the Kosovo Assembly to
concentrate on the competences entrusted to it and to
follow the guidelines established recently by UNMIK
regarding the distribution of responsibilities between
the provisional institutions of the self-government and
UNMIK. Trust and confidence should be the
underlining principles of the relations between UNMIK
and the provisional institutions of self-government.

We were pleased to hear from Mr. Steiner that
preparations for the October municipal elections in
Kosovo are on track. We hope to see full participation
of minority communities in those elections. My
delegation notes with satisfaction the various steps
taken by UNMIK in the preparation of the municipal
elections. Of particular importance is the signing of the
Memorandum of Understanding by the institution-
building pillar of UNMIK, with, respectively, the
Commissariat for Refugees of Serbia and the
Montenegran authorities, aimed at encouraging Kosovo
cities and those who have taken refuge in those areas to
vote during those elections. In this context, the
contribution of political leaders is also significant. We
call on them to positively influence the participation of
all minority communities.

On the issue of return of minority communities in
the homeland of Kosovo, we welcome the various steps
taken by the Kosovo Government to integrate all
minority communities in its provisional institutions.
We encourage the Government to facilitate the return
of refugees and internally displaced persons. We also
encourage UNMIK to continue its various projects
aimed at supporting minority returns throughout the
province.

The abolition of visas by the Government of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia for holders of
UNMIK travel documents will indeed be a significant
boost to the freedom of movement and will contribute
to mutual confidence-building across borders. UNMIK
should continue to help Kosovo normalize its relations
with its neighbours in this respect.

We believe that two important issues still need
serious attention in order to bring long-lasting and
sustainable peace to Kosovo.

First, the need for Kosovo to be able to get
financial and economic support to develop its capacity
in the various sectors of Government administration
and police. Secondly, the need to combat organized
crime, transport of terrorism and smuggling, which
have not yet been totally curbed. In this respect, we
call on neighbouring countries to collaborate with the
provisional institutions of self-government and
UNMIK in order to address this issue.

Finally, we would like to express our appreciation
to the Special Representative and his team for the good
work being carried out in fulfilling their mandate in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).

