Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing, and I would
like to join others in welcoming the Peruvian Foreign
Minister back among us once again today.

Today marks a milestone for the United Nations
engagement in Haiti - the end of United Nations
peacekeeping and a fundamental reconfiguration of
United Nations assistance. I would therefore like to
start by commending the efforts of the United Nations
personnel who have worked to support Haiti and the
Haitian people over the past 15 years, as well as, of
course, the Haitian partners of the United Nations.

With the support of the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), the Haitian
National Police has assumed sole responsibility for
the provision of security, and important benchmarks
have been met with regard to pre-trial detention and
the institutionalization of human rights instruments.
However, there has also been a lack of progress in
critical areas, including in tackling impunity and
rolling out reforms in thejustice sector. Just 2 ofthe 133
priority actions in the 2017-2021 strategic development
plan on policing have been completed to date.

More broadly, the United Kingdom, like those
around the table today, is acutely aware that the
political, security and economic situation in Haiti today
is highly volatile. The continuing political crisis give
serious cause for concern, and I would like to reiterate
the United Kingdom's call to all parties to resolve their
differences peacefully.

MINUJUSTH and its predecessor, the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, made important
contributions in Haiti, but external security assistance
and technical support are not capable on their own
of resolving the political and governance problems
undermining the country's stability. The establishment
of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH) now provides an opportunity for Haiti and
the United Nations to embark on a fundamentally new
relationship - one that focuses on national ownership,
political engagement and the forging of strong
partnerships for achieving stability and development
in Haiti.

There are three priorities that I would like to
highlight in particular. First, immediate progress
towards an inclusive national dialogue is an essential
first step towards political stability, as are concrete
measures to address impunity, corruption and human
rights violations. I urge the Haitian leadership to
be bold in taking such steps. Secondly, with support
from BINUH, Haiti and its partners should continue to
invest in the development of the Haitian National Police
at this critical time. Thirdly, I would urge for further
momentum on human rights issues, including justice
for victims, in anticipation of Haiti's Universal Periodic
Review in the Human Rights Council in 2021.

With regard to the transition process from
MINUJUSTH to BINUH, I would like to welcome
the progress made by the United Nations with regard
to the first two phases of its reconfiguration. Given its
importance in setting the initial direction of the new
mission, as well as the working relationship between
BINUH and the United Nations country team, it is
vital that the third phase be completed in a timely
and effective manner. The co-location of the United
Nations entities should help to facilitate achievement
of this objective.

The United Kingdom also welcomes the use of
distinct core and contextual benchmarks for BINUH,
as indicated in the bottom left-hand corner of the
handout that I join others in commending. We urge that
the indicator targets and any revisions or additions to
the current benchmarks should not only be realistic and
robust, but also nationally owned.

I would like to conclude by thanking Special
Representative of the Secretary-General La Lime and
her team for their work. In this new generation of
Haitian-United Nations cooperation, I would like to
urge all actors to work together in search of bold and
creative solutions to Haiti's challenges

