Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): Allow me to extend to
you, Mr. Minister, my sincere congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I am confident that your diplomatic skills and
vast experience will lead the work of the Council to a
successful conclusion.

I should like to take this opportunity to pay special
tribute to your predecessor, His Excellency Ambassador
Denis Dangue Rewaka of the Republic of Gabon, and to
the members of his delegation for the exemplary manner
in which they steered the work of the Council in the

 

previous month. May I also take this opportunity to
welcome the presence of His Excellency the Minister of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya as well as the seriousness shown
by him and his Government during the deliberations in this
important debate of the Security Council.

The Security Council is convening today to consider
a very crucial matter regarding the Lockerbie crisis, which
claimed the lives of hundreds of innocent people on board
a Pan Am plane. Having expressed its deep concern over
the occurrence of such a tragic event, the Sultanate of
Oman firmly condemns all forms of terrorism and stands
beside the efforts of the international community aimed at
eliminating this dangerous phenomenon, which targets the
lives of innocent people. There is no doubt that the security
and the safety of civilians and of civil aviation are of
paramount importance.

The international community expressed its deep grief
and sympathy towards the victims of this tragic event. For
its part, the League of Arab States, as one of the
international forums responsible for achieving peace and
security in the region, has expressed its firm readiness to
cooperate with the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and with the Security Council to reach a peaceful solution
to this crisis through mandating the Committee of Seven to
follow up the developments of this crisis, to exert every
effort to prevent its escalation, and to find a just and
peaceful solution to this problem in accordance with
relevant international law.

In his statement, the Permanent Observer for the
League of Arab States to the United Nations explicitly
stated the position of the League in this regard. Other
regional groups such as the Organization of African Unity,
the Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference have also supported the position of the
League of Arab States in this regard and have exhibited a
similar concern towards alleviating the humanitarian
sufferings of the people as a result of the sanctions imposed
against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

The increasing worldwide attention given to this
matter reflects the profound concern and preoccupation of
the international community with the gravity of this crisis.
While reaffirming our commitment to the principles of the
relevant international laws and resolutions of the Security
Council regarding prosecuting the perpetrators of these
crimes, we would like to call the attention of the
international community to the initiative proposed by the
League of Arab States and the Organization of African
Unity in this regard.

Justice must be served for the families of the victims
and in the achievement of a solution deemed acceptable
to all parties concerned. Over the past seven years of this
crisis several initiatives have been made with the goal of
achieving a peaceful solution to this problem. However,
this crisis is still going on, with all its negative impact on
the people of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, on the families
of the victims, and on the neighbouring countries as well.
We would like to take this opportunity to commend
Libya's readiness to cooperate with efforts to combat
terrorism and to attain a peaceful settlement to this crisis
through constructive dialogue and by ensuring the
prosecution of the suspects of these tragic events before
neutral and impartial tribunals.

Finally, in concurrence with the initiatives and
proposals submitted by the Organization of African Unity
and the League of Arab States - and in view of the
humanitarian sufferings of the people of Libya as a result
of the continuation of the economic sanctions imposed
against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and of the families of
the victims in the aftermath of this crisis - we believe
that the time has come for the Security Council to
suspend its sanctions regime, in light of the two
Judgments of the International Court of Justice. Moreover,
special consideration should be accorded urgently to the
humanitarian needs of the Libyan people to exercise, at
this time, their religious rights and to have access to
facilities for medical treatment abroad, along with other
urgent matters. We also call upon all parties concerned to
show more flexibility and wisdom towards reaching a just
and peaceful settlement to this crisis.

