Mr. Brahimi: I am honoured to have been asked
to come once again before the Council to brief
members on the situation in Afghanistan. It is also an
honour for me, Sir, to speak under your presidency.

The General Assembly and the gathering of
senior ministers from more than 20 nations last Friday
in support of Afghanistan offered a timely opportunity
for the international community to renew its
commitment to Afghanistan and to reflect on what has
been achieved and, more important, on what still must
be done. Careful stock-taking is required as the
Transitional Authority initiates its two-year mandate
and begins to grapple with the challenges of
consolidating peace in Afghanistan.

The assassination attempt on President Karzai on
5 September and the car bombing in Kabul the same
day once again illustrate the difficult security
environment that the Transitional Administration is
facing. It is also a fact that the people of Afghanistan
expect real improvement in their daily lives. The
prestige and legitimacy of the Transitional
Administration will depend, therefore, on its ability to
address effectively the most pressing security and
recovery needs. Should it fail, fragmentation will
become more entrenched, extremism will rise, and then
foreign countries, groups and individuals may be drawn
once again into the fray and the resumption of
widespread violence will most likely ensue.

Nevertheless, Afghanistan has come a long way.
It would have been inconceivable just a year ago to
imagine an Afghan President, elected by secret ballot,
standing before the General Assembly and outlining a
vision of an Afghan State determined to modernize
itself, building on the rich heritage of Islamic
civilization to promote justice, the rule of law, human
rights and freedom - an Afghanistan determined to
promote tolerance and achieve prosperity. These are
noble and worthwhile objectives, but President Karzai
knows better than anyone else - and he said so
himself last week on every occasion - that
Afghanistan will not achieve these goals without
committed, sustained and generous support from the
international community.

Facing the twin challenges of security and
recovery is not something that the Transitional
Administration can achieve alone. It simply does not
have the resources. Major infrastructure projects - in
transport and roads, energy and telecommunications,
mines and industry, water and agriculture - that can
bring jobs, improve economic and trade prospects and
facilitate foreign investment require a very significant
financial and technical input from outside Afghanistan.

Last week's announcement of a $180-million aid
package from the United States of America, Japan and
Saudi Arabia for road construction is an extremely
positive development. We are also heartened by the
European Union's pledge to rehabilitate the Kabul to
Jalalabad road.

But we must remember that, today, the
Transitional Administration in Afghanistan lacks the
very modest budget required to meet its basic recurrent
costs. I hope that the donors have heard President
Karzai's urgent appeal and I hope that we all remember
the comments made in Tokyo by the Secretary-General
to the effect that today's millions are worth tomorrow's
billions.

It is also important to note, again with President
Karzai, that most international funding is still going to
humanitarian assistance, which is necessary but not
quite sufficient to bring back peace and stability to the
country. Without massive job creation, the country
cannot handle some of the most immediate peace-
building tasks. Hundreds of thousands of jobs have to
be created to enable impoverished Afghans to earn a
living and climb out of debt, and to accommodate the
flow of returning refugees, mainly from Pakistan and
Iran. Hundreds of thousands more jobs need to be
created for comprehensive disarmament and
reintegration to be achieved or for viable alternatives to
poppy cultivation to be offered. In a stable and safe
society, employment-generation on this scale would be
expected to result largely from private investment. In
the context of Afghanistan today, there is no immediate
alternative to international public investment. This may
seem an ambitious undertaking. It is, however, the
price that, I hope, the international community will
help Afghanistan pay for peace and stability.

One way of achieving this is through a concerted
strategy that links assistance priorities to the
requirements of political reconstruction and stability. It
is necessary to accelerate the implementation of
nationwide programmes, such as the World Bank-
supported National Solidarity Programme, which aims
to inject income into communities through large
labour-intensive and cash-for-work schemes. The focus
of these projects will be on essential economic and
social infrastructure, such as the rehabilitation of
feeder roads, local water works, schools and health
centres.

The Transitional Administration needs urgent
financial assistance at the moment for its ambitious
project of introducing a new currency. Much work has
been done already and, if all goes well, the operation
will begin early next month. The United Nations
believes that the initiative will have a very positive
impact on promoting national unity, economic stability
and social cohesion. As part of this process, the
Government of Afghanistan will also address the
revitalization of the financial and banking systems
throughout the country. The United Nations is
supporting this process by assisting in the procurement,
logistics, planning and monitoring of the operation. I
urge the international community to respond positively
to the Afghan Administration's request for donor
support for this very important nationwide exercise.

The Transitional Administration is taking a
leadership role in planning for the future and the
United Nations is committed to supporting the
Government in the development of the national
development framework and the national budget in the
coming month. Ministers have been encouraged to
establish their own vision and priorities. The Minister
of Education, for example, has already set the priorities
for education for the next 18 months, reinforcing a very
simple message: a roof for every school, a textbook for
every child, and tables and chairs for every classroom.

One aim of the United Nations is to support and
help develop the capacity of the Government. The
Afghan cabinet and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) are working
together to accelerate the development of the
Government, to decentralize assistance and develop
sub-national programmes tailored to the needs of
individual provinces, and to develop a more integrated
and cost-effective United Nations response.

Progress has already been made and the United
Nations is helping national authorities to assume an
increasingly central role in the coordination of
assistance. An increasing number of United Nations
personnel are being located in Government offices to
support the Transitional Administration in the
development of its policies and activities. The United
Nations is supporting Government institutions to
develop national information, vulnerability analysis
and nutrition surveillance systems and to track donor
support and aid flows. These are functions that the
United Nations itself was performing alone less than 12
months ago. In the coming months, this support should
be further developed with an overall capacity-building
plan that focuses on civil service reform and the
increasing decentralization of integrated United
Nations assistance at the provincial level.

The communique which was issued by senior
ministers last week after the high-level ad hoc meeting
on Afghanistan signalled the international community's
recognition of the most serious challenge facing
Afghanistan today - security. President Karzai and the
Secretary-General, along with almost everyone in
Afghanistan, have repeatedly called for the expansion
of the International Security Assistance Force. This has
not been possible. As a result, people in Afghanistan,
as well as in neighbouring countries, are disappointed
and concerned. But there is now a growing realization
that the efforts of the Afghans in the field of security
need to be supported more directly and more
effectively and I very much hope that focused
discussions will soon take place on this issue in Kabul,
with the participation of Afghan authorities, the United
Nations and key members of the international
community. The rationale behind the need for
international cooperation in that regard is very simple:
Afghanistan does not have a national army; it does not
have a national police; and it will take some time to
build both.

The Afghans themselves realize that they need to
do much better than they have done so far in this
regard and a significant part of the work of the
Government, in cooperation with the United Nations
and other partners, must concentrate in the weeks to
come on these issues. Before the end of the year,
Afghanistan should have a credible and achievable
agenda to build a national army and a national police
that will progressively take over from the present
factional and de facto forces all over the country. This
requires demobilizing many of the currently armed
elements and helping them to reintegrate into civilian
society. It also requires training and inducting new
elements, and it requires reorganizing and reforming
the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of Interior, and
the intelligence services.

The first two months of the Transitional
Administration have seen a proliferation of local
conflicts and violence. The United Nations itself has
been the target of terrorist acts on three separate
occasions these past two months. Two of these attacks
were reported in previous briefings to the Council -
that is, the grenade thrown into the compound of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations in Kandahar on 3 August, and the bomb placed
against the wall of the United Nations guest house in
Kabul on 25 August. The United Nations Children's
Fund's compound in Jalalabad was the target of a
rocket attack just two days ago. In these three
incidents, a little Afghan girl was wounded in Kabul,
and a security guard also suffered injury in the recent
attack in Jalalabad.

Only once in the past was the United Nations the
target of violence in Afghanistan, and that was when
Colonel Calo, a military advisor for the United Nations
Special Mission to Afghanistan (UNSMA), was
assassinated in Kabul in 1998. The United Nations is
serving the people of Afghanistan. It is feeding the
hungry, providing clean water to families, attending to
the sick, helping kids go to school, and helping
refugees and internally displaced persons to return
home. It is also working with all Afghans to rebuild
what has been destroyed by 23 years of conflict.
Afghans of all walks of life understand fully the
importance of the United Nations for them and for their
country. That is why they spontaneously come, after
each incident, to express solidarity and sympathy and
to condemn these acts, which they consider as being
directed at the people of Afghanistan as a whole.

These incidents are of some concern, as is the
continuing violence across Afghanistan. While there
have been recent sporadic localized clashes in several
parts of the country, the situation is now, however,
calmer compared to previous weeks. Tensions had been
particularly acute in the north and the south-east, but
within the last few days there have been positive
developments in those troubled and troublesome areas.
The two main rival factions in the north, Jamiat and
Jumbesh, agreed to establish a joint force to tackle
violence and instability. The force would disarm all
parties involved in fomenting conflict. The long
awaited demilitarization of the main northern city of
Mazar-e-Sharif started last week. All major
commanders present in Mazar have withdrawn outside
the city boundaries with their weapons and
ammunition. Controls by the police and members of
the Security Commission are ongoing, and have
resulted in the disarmament of the remaining small
detachments. The leaders of Jumbesh and Jamiat in the
area, Generals Dostum and Atta, announced that in the
future there would be no place for small commanders
who fight for personal benefit.

In the south-east, Pacha Khan Zadran, who has
been a thorn in the Government's side, declared his
opposition to President Karzai and his Government's
appointed local representatives, but was forced out of
Khost when the local governor launched an offensive
that succeeded in removing Zadran's forces from the
city. Several people died, unfortunately, when the city
was rocketed by Zadran's retreating troops, but fighting
subsided after three days, on 10 September. The United
Nations has now been able to resume its operations in
the area.

In the last briefing to the Security Council on
Afghanistan, the question of transitional justice was
raised in relation to the publicity surrounding the site
of a mass grave in Dasht-e-Leili, near Shiberghan. I
think it is fairly certain that a large number of people
died in - to say the least - suspicious circumstances.
Nonetheless, the leaders of the major factions of the
north have issued a statement jointly rejecting the
allegations that Taliban prisoners suffocated in
containers on their way to Shiberghan prison. They
also expressed their willingness to cooperate with any
investigations, provided that they were carried out by
experts in an objective and impartial way. UNAMA's
human rights team travelled to the north to seek further
information from the signatories of the statement. The
Transitional Administration and the Afghan Human
Rights Commission have agreed that an investigation
of several sites, including one or more where the
bodies were presumed to be the victims of the Taliban,
should now take place. UNAMA has been in touch
with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights to ask for assistance in identifying the forensic
teams needed to carry out this task. Additional security
will be needed from the Government, local authority
and the international community to help the
investigators carry out this work. A word of caution,
however: it will probably - probably - be possible to
do the forensic part of the investigation. Whether and
when it will be possible to actually conclude the
investigation is another matter. Ensuring the security of
potential witnesses, as well as the security of the
investigating teams, is, of course, of paramount
importance, and, as things stand at the moment, by no
means certain.

In the face of the many difficulties along the path
to the restoration of security and prosperity in
Afghanistan, I have been advocating that the
international community should show neither panic nor
complacency. We have been very lucky in Kabul
during the first six months of 2002. None of the rocket
attacks recorded between April and June caused any
casualties. The people of Afghanistan showed great
patience and enthusiasm throughout the Loya Jirga
process, in spite of uncertainty about security and
economic hardships. This may have bred a little
complacency and a sense that the peace process in
Afghanistan can be achieved at low cost to the
international community. Let the near miss of the
attempt on the life of President Karzai, the tragedy of
the car bombing in Kabul on 5 September and the
expressions of frustration from ordinary Afghans
concerning recovery be a wake-up call for all of us,
Afghans and internationals alike. The oil tanker
carrying explosives that was captured near Kabul on 14
September reconfirms that there are people out there
who are intent on continuing the deadly cycle of
violence.

To borrow from the statement of the Secretary-
General after the assassination attempt on President
Karzai's life and the car bombing, we trust that these
setbacks will only strengthen the resolve of the
international community and the legitimate Afghan
authorities to bring security and stability to
Afghanistan.

We owe a debt of gratitude to the international
community for its sustained interest and its support for
Afghanistan, but time is of the essence. In the months
following the anniversary of the ll September attacks
and in the few weeks before the anniversary of the
Bonn Agreement, I hope that the international
community will turn its undoubted commitment to
Afghanistan into more forceful action.

