Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Aleksandar Vucie, President of the
Republic of Serbia, and His Excellency Mr. Hashim
Thaci, President of the Republic of Kosovo, at today's
meeting. I would also like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his valuable briefing.

The State of Kuwait acknowledges the sensitivity
of the measure taken by the Assembly of Kosovo. We
reaffirm that every State has the full, sovereign and
inherent right to establish its national institutions in
line with its national Constitution and legislation. We
recognize that the decisions recently taken by the Kosovo
Parliament could be a source of concern to the friendly
Republic of Serbia, given the recent developments in
the relationship between the two States.

We hope that such developments do not undermine
the political process under the auspices of the European
Union. We believe that the decision of the Republic of
Kosovo does not contravene resolution 1244 (1999). We
thank the President of Kosovo for the reassurances that
he provided in the Chamber earlier, in which he stated
that the measure does not constitute any threat to the
minorities in Kosovo or the neighbouring States.

We call on both sides to exercise self-restraint and
to take all necessary measures to calm the situation
and to decrease tension. We urge them to continue to
deal with issues of concern through dialogue and to
demonstrate the necessary political will in order to
ensure the full normalization of relations between the
two sides.

Kuwait affirms that the high-level European
Union-facilitated dialogue in Brussels between
Belgrade and Pristina remains the most appropriate
framework for settling all outstanding issues between
the two sides. It is the appropriate means for reaching
lasting, just and consensual solutions.

We would like to reiterate our full support to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo. We highly value the vital role
that the United Nations has played in helping Kosovo
to build its institutions and to implement the relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
1244 (1999). We call on both sides to fully implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions. We also
welcome the statement by the Secretary-General in
that regard.

In conclusion, it is important that the international
community continues to make efforts in order to urge
Pristina and Belgrade to overcome their differences and
reach consensual, fair and sustainable solutions that are
acceptable to both sides and lead to peace, security and
stability in the region.

