Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Bensouda, for her informative briefing.

Ukraine remains concerned about the continued
violations of international humanitarian law and
violations and abuses of human rights in Libya. We
strongly condemn the indiscriminate shelling of
hospitals, abductions and assassinations of civilians,
attacks on Government officials and judges and the
looting of property; these are acts that are regrettably
still taking place across the country. No less concerned
are we about the reports of torture and other forms of
violence in detention centres and strongly condemn
such practices such hostage-taking and incommunicado
detention, including of foreign nationals, carried out
by non-State armed groups, including those claiming
to belong to the legitimate authorities. We call on
the Government of National Accord of Libya to fully
investigate all of these and other crimes and take all the
steps necessary to ensure that those found responsible
are held to account.

We urge the Government of National Accord
to cooperate fully with and provide any necessary
assistance to the International Criminal Court (ICC),
as required under Security Council resolutions 1970
(2011) and 2238 (2015). This would include seeking
opportunities to resolve the issue of the surrender of
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and enabling the ICC to
undertake investigative activities inside Libya.

Finally, we would like to express our support for the
recommendation of the Office of the ICC Prosecutor
for the creation of an international contact group on
justice issues to ensure that the perpetrators of crimes
occurring in or related to the situation in Libya do not
enjoy impunity. Here, we cannot but fully agree with
Ms. Bensouda and Mr. Kobler, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, that "accountability for the
grave crimes under the Rome Statue is indispensable to
stability and sustainable peace in Libya".

