Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Ijoin
those who have preceded me in thanking Ambassador
Gary Quinlan for his briefing and his efforts as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). I also would like to express my delegation's
appreciation to the Panel of Experts established pursuant
to resolution 1929 (2010) for the valuable support they
provide to the work of the Sanctions Committee.

While it is true that sanctions are not an end in
themselves, it must also be remembered that they were
not imposed withoutjustification. They are the response
of the international community to the fear generated by
the long-concealed development of the Iranian nuclear
programme. Fear is the direct opposite of trust.

The Joint Plan of Action agreed in Geneva on
24 November last year was a crucial milestone on a
path that must lead specifically to the re-establishment
of confidence in the exclusively peaceful purpose of the
Iranian nuclear programme. The great merit of the Plan
is to have revived the dynamics of dialogue between
the parties involved. In that regard, Luxembourg
welcomes the intense diplomatic engagement of the
E3+3, led by the High Representative of the European
Union, Catherine Ashton, with a view to negotiating
a comprehensive agreement that leads to a complete,
negotiated and lasting solution to the Iranian nuclear
issue.

But pending the conclusion of such an agreement,
the sanctions regime established by the Security
Council remains fully applicable. Regarding the work
of the 1737 Committee, we continue to advocate for the
implementation of the recommendations of the final
report of the Panel of Experts (S/2014/394, annex). We
also consider it important to continue to examine the
case of Klos C on the seizure in March of a shipment
of arms from Iran, for which the Panel has found that
there had been a violation of the regime sanctions.

The latest report of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), dated
5 September, notes that Iran continues to proceed
with the development of effective confidence-building
measures, suspending the most sensitive activities in its
nuclear programme, pursuant to the Joint Plan of Action.
That is certainly an encouraging sign. However, we
have not forgotten that the Iranian authorities must also
continue to cooperate with the IAEA on outstanding
issues related to possible military dimensions in their
nuclear programme. On that point, the IAEA report
finds it regrettable that there has been an unsatisfactory
level of commitment on the part of Iran. That attitude
is a cause for concern. It contrasts with the good faith
claimed by Iran as to the purpose of its intentions.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Luxembourg's
full support of current diplomatic efforts between
the E3+3 and Iran. Those efforts have now reached a
turning point. It is our hope that, despite the obstacles
that remain to be overcome, the round of talks to start

this week here in New York will allow a decisive step to
be taken on the road towards the definitive resolution of
the Iranian nuclear issue.

