Mr. Feltman: While the world's gaze of concern
points elsewhere in the Middle East, the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict drifts dangerously in a direction
that must be avoided. Both sides maintain their
rhetorical commitment to a negotiated peace; however,
the creeping realities on the ground and the stalemated
diplomacy portray a more worrying situation. Stated
intentions to adhere to a two-State solution are not
translating into meaningful steps to renewed dialogue
on the core issues to be resolved, and this should be a
matter of great concern to the Council.

We heard a restatement of these intentions during
the speeches of both Prime Minister Netanyahu
and President Abbas to the General Assembly on
27 September (see A/67/PV.12). At the same time, citing
the absence of a political process, President Abbas
announced his intention and initial consultations to seek
an upgrade of Palestine to non-member State observer
status - a move that Israel rejects as unilateral and
an impediment to resuming negotiations. We hope that
this development can be addressed in a constructive
manner, and we remind everyone that a negotiated two-
State solution, to which both leaders are committed,
must remain the highest priority. We fear, however, that
the door for such a solution may be closing before our
eyes.

The Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
Coordination of International Assistance to Palestinians
(AHLC) meeting of 23 September brought into sharp
focus the severe financial crisis that the Palestinian
Authority is experiencing as a result of combined
shortfalls in domestic revenue, tax income and donor
contributions. In his message, the Secretary-General
reiterated the United Nations view that the vision of the
two-State solution and the institutional achievements
of the Palestinian Authority are key elements of
stability. Let me repeat today his call for preserving
those achievements and for ensuring the Palestinian
Authority's fiscal viability by helping to bridge its
immediate funding gap. As we have said before, all
those States that verbally support the Palestinian people
can demonstrate their commitment in a tangible way
by offering financial help that provides the Palestinian
people with jobs, services and security.

The figures speak for themselves. As of 11 October,
the Palestinian Authority had not yet set a date for the
payment of Government employees' salaries for the
month of September. While recent contributions from
Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Japan, the Netherlands and France
are welcome, they do not suffice. A predictable and
immediate injection of new funds is required in order
to finance the deficit, which is currently projected to
reach $1.3 billion by the end of the year.

The AHLC also called upon Israel to help facilitate
the sustainable growth of the Palestinian economy
by taking further steps to improve the movement of
people and goods, development and trade and exports
in Gaza and the West Bank, including in Area C and
East Jerusalem. Such steps ought to include measures
to address the lack of adequate planning for Palestinian
communities, as well as measures to develop
socioeconomic infrastructure, such as support to the
agricultural sector in Area C - an area fundamental
to the contiguity of the West Bank and the viability ofa
future Palestinian State.

The United Nations welcomes the recent approval
by the Government of Israel of 15 schools and health
centres in Area C, and hopes to see similar action in the
processing ofthe 32 master plans submitted to the Israeli
authorities. Indications that plans for six Palestinian
localities may soon be published for ultimate approval
are also encouraging. Yet further progress to address
the planning needs of over 200 Palestinian communities
in Area C remains essential.

Violence and other sources of tension on the ground
make it all the more difficult to overcome the political
stalemate. We remain concerned about security in the
West Bank. Twenty-nine incidents involving settler
violence resulted in injuries to 10 Palestinians, as well
as damage to property. The Dormition Abbey in East
Jerusalem was desecrated with graffiti on 2 October as
part of so-called price tag activities.

The annual olive harvest, which has just begun,
is an important economic, social and cultural event
for Palestinians. However, in recent years, the Israeli
military has limited access of Palestinian farmers to
their olive groves next to settlements to mitigate the risk
of violence. In a particularly disturbing development,
approximately 7,000 Palestinian-owned olive trees
have been destroyed, damaged or harvested by Israeli
settlers since the beginning of 2012. We note that on
4 October, the Israeli police arrested three settlers
allegedly involved in so-called price tag activities.
We urge the Government of Israel to take effective
measures to curtail such acts in the lead up to the
harvest season and, more generally, to hold accountable
those responsible for violence.

Settlement activity continued. Of note, the outpost
of Migron was evacuated to a nearby settlement and
the outpost is now used by the Israeli Defence Forces.
The United Nations position remains that settlement
construction in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, whether on private land
or elsewhere, is illegal under international law and
contrary to Israel's obligations under the Road Map,
and should be put to a halt.

On five occasions between 27 September and
7 October, Israeli extremists entered the Temple Mount/
Haram al-Sharif compound, intending to perform
religious rituals. Clashes with Muslim worshippers
resulted in injuries to five Palestinians, while Israeli
forces arrested a number of Palestinians and Israelis
for violation of visiting regulations and disturbance
of public order. Also, on 4 October over 1,000 Israelis
entered Joseph's Tomb near the city of Nablus to
perform religious rituals. Despite prior coordination,
this move resulted in clashes with Palestinians. The
status of Jerusalem and the religious sites are sensitive
issues that will be fully resolved only in final status
negotiations. In the meantime, we strongly urge all
sides to exercise restraint and safeguard the sanctity of
religious sites.

Palestinian attacks against Israelis were,
comparatively speaking, on the rise during the reporting
period. Four Israelis were injured and material damage
was caused. Incidents of stone and Molotov-cocktail
throwing at Israeli vehicles travelling in the West Bank
were recorded on four occasions. On 10 October, an
Israeli was stabbed and injured near the Gush Etzion
settlement by a Palestinian, who was subsequently
arrested by the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF).

Citing security concerns, the Israeli Defense Forces
had conducted 226 operations in the occupied West
Bank as of9 October, which resulted in 87 Palestinians
being injured and 182 arrested. On 25 September, Israeli
forces uncovered a weapons cache near Hebron. Almost
daily clashes were reported between Israeli forces
and Palestinians at the Qalandiya checkpoint. Most
injuries took place during Palestinian demonstrations,
including against the barrier, which deviates from the
Green Line in contravention to the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice (see A/ES-10/273).
Allow me to say that the right of peaceful protest must
be upheld and that all protests should be kept strictly
non-violent.

Demonstrations also took place on 2 October
to protest the plight of Palestinian hunger strikers in
Israeli jails. The United Nations continues to call for
a reasonable resolution to those cases and recalls its
position that the use of administrative detention must
be exceptional and of short duration.
Palestinian security forces continued their efforts
to preserve law and order in the West Bank. Between
18 and 19 September, they arrested 57 militants affiliated
with Hamas throughout the West Bank, which led to the
discovery, on 23 September, of a Hamas underground
bunker in the village of Urif, near Nablus.

Palestinian local elections are on schedule
for 20 October. The Palestinian Central Elections
Commission has been carrying out preparations in
accordance with the local electoral law and calendar.
Some 4,700 candidates were nominated, nearly a fourth
of them women, and electoral campaigning commenced
on 6 October. Elections will take place in the West Bank
only, as the de facto authorities in Gaza have not allowed
the Central Elections Commission to proceed with
voter registration and related electoral preparations in
Gaza. Meanwhile, in Israel, Prime Minister Netanyahu
recently announced that he will be presenting a bill to
dissolve the Knesset in preparation for early elections.

Turning to Gaza, sporadic eruptions of violence
were recorded during the reporting period. A serious
escalation occurred when, on 7 October, an Israeli air
strike killed an alleged militant and seriously injured
another, as well as eight civilians. Some 50 rockets
and mortars were fired from Gaza into Israel the
following day. Another serious escalation took place
this past weekend when, on 13 October, an Israeli air
strike killed a Salafi leader and his assistant, while
two civilians were injured. Yesterday, two Israeli air
strikes resulted in three Palestinian militants killed and
three injured, including two critically. Overall for the
reporting period, a total of 72 rockets and mortars were
fired into Israel, resulting in some material damage.

During the same period, Israeli forces conducted
three incursions and 11 strikes into Gaza, resulting
in the death of 8 alleged Palestinian militants and
1 civilian, as well as injuries to 5 Palestinian militants
and 17 civilians, including 4 children. That latest
episode demonstrates the continuing fragility of the
situation in Gaza and highlights the vulnerability ofthe
civilian population. We continue to condemn all rocket
attacks from Gaza into Israel. The de facto authorities
have the responsibility to prevent and stop all such
attacks. We also urge Israel to show maximum restraint.

We must all work to ensure that calm is realized,
the closure regime is lifted and the Palestinian divide
ends. Regrettably, there is no new progress to report in
ending that divide.

Lifting the closure regime in accordance with
resolution 1860 (2009) and Gaza's recovery and long-
term economic growth remain fundamental objectives
of the United Nations. In that regard, we note the recent
transfer of an order of school furniture from Gaza to the
West Bank commissioned by the Palestinian Authority.
On 19 September, the World Food Programme (WFP)
transported 1.2 million fortified date bars produced
in Gaza to its West Bank school meals initiative. That
WFP initiative was the first such delivery from Gaza
to the West bank in five years. Those are positive
steps towards reinstating commercial transfers to the
West Bank. However, much more is required. Lifting
restrictions on the entry of aggregate, iron bar and
cement would not only enable the growth of private
sector but also provide an additional source of revenue
for the Palestinian Authority.

In the meantime, a steady flow of approvals
for works involving dual-use material should be
maintained. We welcome the recent approval by the
Government of Israel of an additional $38 million worth
of project work, including schools, shelters and solid-
waste treatment infrastructure, raising the value of
United Nations implemented works involving material
subject to approval to approximately $400 million since
May 2010.

Turning to the region, tensions on the border
between Israel and Egypt raised concern when, on
21 September, three terrorists attacked an IDF position
on the Sinai border, and were killed in the ensuing
exchange of fire. One IDF soldier was also killed, and
another seriously wounded.

A worrying development took place on 6 October,
when a drone penetrated Israeli airspace in the northern
Negev before being shot down by Israeli forces.
Hizbullah Secretary-General Nasrallah has since
claimed responsibility for that incident. We note that,
in comments reported in the Lebanese media, Lebanese
Foreign Minister Adnan Mansour stated that "Lebanon
will definitely assume responsibility for Hizbullah's
recent action, because the country is in a confrontation
with Israel".

The conflict in Syria, now entering its twentieth
month, has reached new and appalling heights of
brutality and violence. Available estimates, which
the United Nations is not in a position to verify, put
the number of people killed at more than 30,000.
Syrian cities and villages - some of which are part
of our world's heritage - are turning into ruins, and
archaeological treasures have been looted and destroyed.
Such violence is creating fertile ground for terrorism
and criminal actions of all kinds. Human rights abuses,
including arbitrary detentions, torture and summary
executions, continue unabated. That includes the
continued captivity by the armed opposition of Iranian
pilgrims abducted in August. The voices ofthe peaceful
protests that emerged so proudly last year have receded
in the tremor of fighting.

Long-standing predictions ofthe conflict spiralling
beyond its borders are coming true, as illustrated by
the recent escalation along the Syrian-Turkish border,
rounds of small arms fire in the occupied Golan,
exchanges of fire into northern Lebanon, as well as a
surge in belligerent rhetoric. The Secretary-General
has expressed his alarm at the heightened tension
between Syria and Turkey following a wave of cross-
border shelling that resulted in the death of several
Turkish nationals, including children. He has called on
the Syrian Government to respect fully the territorial
integrity of its neighbours, as well as on all concerned to
abandon the use of violence and exercise the maximum
restraint.

The Secretary-General has expressed his utmost
concern at the continuing militarization of the conflict.
He has urged the Syrian Government to declare a
ceasefire, to be reciprocated by the opposition armed
groups. To succeed, that must be a collective effort
by all inside Syria, in the region and beyond. All
Governments should desist from supplying arms and
military assistance to any party in the conflict, some
of which may violate Security Council resolution 1747
(2007). After all the deaths and destruction Syria has
suffered, it is plain to see that the conflict cannot be won
militarily. And ifit were, it would be at an excruciating
cost unlikely to lead to a lasting solution that respects
the will of the Syrian people.

Our priority remains a political solution, and that
is what Joint Special Representative Lakhdar Brahimi
is trying to help bring about. The Council heard his
assessment three weeks ago. He is back in the region as
we speak, continuing his discussions with a great sense
of urgency and trying to identify the path to a political
solution. In his current trip, which has taken him so
far to Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Iraq and Iran, he is
reiterating the Secretary-General's call for a ceasefire
and an end to arms transfers to all parties.

Despite growing insecurity and significant
challenges on the ground, the United Nations continues
to expand aid deliveries. We must press all parties to
allow unhindered humanitarian access. As winter
approaches, we are very concerned at the continued
shortfalls in our appeals for funding. As of 11 October,
the $348 million United Nations revised humanitarian
plan for Syria was only 40 per cent funded. We urge
donors to contribute more generously to address the
growing needs of over 2.5 million civilians inside
Syria, including over 1.2 million internally displaced
persons. Those numbers are increasing by the day.
Resources are also urgently required to assist the over
330,000 refugees in Turkey, Jordan, Lebanon and Iraq.

It is important to preserve calm in the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)
area of operations, where there is a risk of increased
tensions, as illustrated by several security incidents
since our last briefing. UNDOF observed an exchange
of weapons between groups crossing the border into
Syria from Lebanon on 27 September. Deadly incidents
involving armed elements from Lebanon and Syrian
security forces were also observed by UNDOF in its
area of operations on 20 and 29 September.

Finally, on 9 October, soldiers from the Syrian Arab
Armed Forces fired shots at two members of Observer
Group Golan in a clearly marked United Nations vehicle
in the northern part of the area of limitation. Syrian
authorities were informed and are investigating the
incident. Separately, while the situation in the occupied
Syrian Golan has remained relatively stable, the Syrian
Arab Republic has sent an official letter complaining
about several incidents, including injuries sustained
by Syrian children from a landmine explosion on
4 October.

Despite overcoming a spate of security incidents
and tensions over the summer, Lebanon continues to
be dangerously exposed to spillover from the conflict
in Syria. Areas bordering Syria remain volatile, with
regular cross-border shelling, including close to
Lebanese villages in the northern region of Akkar,
some of them several kilometres from the border. The
Lebanese Armed Forces stated that it would not allow
any side to use Lebanese territory to draw Lebanon into
neighbouring tensions, and reaffirmed its determination
to confront any violations of Lebanese territory.

However, there continue to be reports of cross-
border arms smuggling. On 25 September, for example,
a truckload of weapons and military equipment was
seized by the Lebanese Armed Forces en route to
the Lebanese-Syrian border. After the release on
25 September of a second member of the group of
Lebanese pilgrims abducted in Syria in May, nine still
remain held.

Of great concern are fresh reports suggesting
involvement by Lebanese political forces in support
of the parties to the conflict in Syria. Moreover,
the explosion on 3 October of an arms depot in the
Beka'a Valley town of Al-Nabi Shayth, in which three
Hizbullah militants were killed and several other people
wounded, was also a reminder of the risk posed by the
presence of arms held by non-State actors.

Lebanese public opinion is deeply polarized
regarding developments in Syria. Against that
backdrop, it is all the more important that the Lebanese
Government and political leaders across the spectrum
continue to work to preserve Lebanon's unity and
stability. Prime Minister Mikati's reaffirmation on
27 September before the General Assembly of Lebanon's
policy of disassociation was welcome (see A/67/PV.14).
We hope that Hizbullah, too, will fully respect the
disassociation policy of the Government in which
Hizbullah participates.

We also welcome President Sleiman's initiative
in the national dialogue on 20 September to present a
first vision for a national defence strategy, including in
respect of Hizbullah's arms, which participants agreed
to consider as a basis of discussion. The next session
of the national dialogue is set for November. We hope
that all Lebanese leaders will seize the opportunity
to overcome outstanding divergences with a view
to realizing such a strategy in the national interest.
In the current regional context, it is in the interest of
Lebanon's continued stability that all Lebanese parties
continue to exercise restraint and work cooperatively in
preparation for the 2013 parliamentary elections.

In contrast with the ongoing volatility in the
region, the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) area of operations remained generally calm.
The number of air violations and mostly inadvertent
ground violations of the Blue Line, however, remained
relatively high. Despite the temporary redeployment of
units of the Lebanese Armed Forces from the UNIFIL
area of operations to address security requirements
elsewhere in Lebanon, the level of cooperation between
the two forces has remained broadly the same. Both
parties have an interest in building on this period of
calm to protect the achievements along the Blue Line
from regional tensions and to take steps to strengthen
the cessation of hostilities.

Let me conclude with a reminder that, amid the
seismic shifts being felt throughout the Middle East,
we cannot afford to be complacent to the persisting
deadlock between the Israelis and Palestinians. Despite
their apprehensions, understandable in part, neither
the parties nor the Council can be impervious to the
warning signs of a fading two-State solution. We were
all sobered by last month's events in the West Bank.
The window of opportunity for taking constructive
action to preserve the two-State solution may now
be becoming more limited. There is no alternative,
sustainable and just solution to negotiated peace. We
must therefore continue to make every effort to work
towards the fundamental goal. We now collectively
need to rediscover with the parties the determination to
forge a credible political path forward. We must not let
the urgency elude us.

