Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, Mexico welcomes your initiative and
that of Belgium of convening a public debate to
consider this issue, which is without doubt a
fundamental aspect of the process of reforming the
Security Council and is of vital importance for all
States Members of the United Nations.

Mexico is concerned to observe that, despite the
praiseworthy endeavours to implement as regular
practice the recommendations in the 63 paragraphs of
the annex to document S/2006/507, important elements
still remain to be tackled. It is imperative to seek the
implementation of all the recommendations and
provide ongoing follow-up on Council practices in
order to continue enhancing its work. The various
elements of the Security Council's daily work need to
be reviewed as stated in the annex to the note by the
President of the Security Council.

In this vein, Mexico welcomes the fact that
significant progress has been made with regard to the
transparency of programme of work thanks to "virtual"
publication and updating of the Council's programme
of work, as well as the dissemination of the monthly
forecast.

With regard to the Council meetings and their
formats, Mexico is convinced that a higher number of
public meetings and briefings should be held in order
to keep all Member States informed of what the
Council and its subsidiary bodies are doing.

On open debates, it must be recognized that in
practice their real utility is questionable, given that we
have not seen them yield results in terms of actions or
initiatives taken by the Security Council. Similarly, we
have not seen prompt follow-up of agreements reached
at such debates or their reflection in initiatives
prompted by Council members. In this regard, it is
imperative to consider again the purpose of holding
open debates and to consider their usefulness in the
light of the need to make them results-oriented. They
should allow true opportunity for participation by
States Members of the Organization.

Although some thematic debates have proved
extremely interesting, the Council has not given the
necessary follow-up to the development of positions
and proposals expressed on the various matters under
consideration. Here, at least a report should be drawn
up which could give rise to specific initiatives.

For Mexico, the question of documentation is
relevant if the membership is to be kept updated on
decisions and regarding other relevant Security
Council information. Mexico believes that the reports
of the Secretary-General and the special Secretariat
briefings to the Security Council are of particular
relevance and a prime source of information about
what is going on in the field. Here, my delegation
acknowledges the significant progress achieved in the
prompt issuance of reports of the Secretary-General, as
well as the inclusion of a specific section on the
recommendations of those reports. We emphasize how
useful they are when it comes to the measures that the
Security Council decides to adopt on a given issue.

Mexico is also convinced of the importance of
reports by the Security Council presidency. In this
regard, we would urge States concluding their
Presidency of the Security Council to continue timely
reporting on their work so that specific follow-up can
be given on issues that continue to be considered in the
following months, so that progress can be made and so
that specific objectives can be achieved. We welcome
the recent meeting convened by the Permanent
Representative of Viet Nam at the end of his
presidency, at which Member States had an opportunity
to express their views on the work of the Council.

Mexico recognizes how important it is for the
Council to interact with States and cooperate with
regional and subregional organizations. My country
therefore believes that continued efforts should be
made to achieve better cooperation with interested
non-members of the Council, as well as with regional
organizations, in order to ensure that the problem or
conflict in question is addressed in a comprehensive
fashion that helps to identify solution.
Similarly, promoting more unofficial
consultations with Member States interested or
involved in a situation under consideration by the
Council, as well as with neighbouring countries and
countries that can make particular contributions, is of
particular importance in dealing with a given issue.
Mexico therefore supports a greater number of
meetings between such actors and the Security
Council. We urge that as far as possible a greater
variety of meeting formats be used, including Aria
Formula meetings.

These measures would be a decisive step towards
enhancing the Council's work, dealing with issues
threatening international peace and security. They
would provide the Council with additional input and
would ensure greater participation by the various actors
involved in the matters under discussion.

Moreover, Mexico believes that even greater
coordination is required among United Nations organs,
in particular the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, in
order to avoid any duplication of work. This could be
achieved through better communication among those
organs, and by holding periodic meetings among the
Presidents of those organs, as indicated in paragraph 51
of document S/2006/507.

On the annual report of the Security Council to
the General Assembly, Mexico reaffirms how important
it is that the document be less descriptive and more
analytical and results-oriented. In particular, my
country believes it indispensable that it contain concise
information on the work of all the Council's subsidiary
bodies, such as the sanctions committees and the
Working Group on Documentation, inter alia, as these
are integral part of the report.

In order to ensure greater transparency in what
the Council's work, Mexico recommends that the
report make mention of situations brought to the
attention to the Council but on which the Council
decided that no action needed to be taken. The reasons
for such decision should be indicated. We also believe
it is important that the report be published in a timely
manner so that Council members have time to
thoroughly study it before it is submitted to the
General Assembly.

Although we acknowledge the progress made
with regard to greater efficiency of the work of the
Security Council, much still remains to be done to
ensure that the discussions are more lively and
transparent. That is certainly a challenge for the
Member States and the Secretariat, who must work
together in order to overcome the shortcomings that are
still in existence here.

Accordingly, Mexico believes that the best way
of ensuring greater efficiency is to ensure better
coordination between Council members and the
Secretariat and better planning of the work, so that
non-Council members can know about forthcoming
meetings and better prepare their participation, should
that prove appropriate.

Mexico firmly believes that the enhancement of
the Council's working methods when it comes will lead
to improvements in its work and decisions and improve
its image in the eyes of the international community
and Member States of the Organization. In order to
ensure that it is better able to tackle the new threats and
challenges to international peace and security and in
order to ensure a Security Council that is able to deal
with all of its responsibilities, a substantive change to
its working methods is imperative and cannot be
delayed.

