Mr. Akahori (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking Prosecutor Bensouda for her briefing.

Japan expresses its gratitude to the Office of the
Prosecutor for its tireless efforts in the fight against
impunity, despite the challenges it faces in Darfur.

Security Council resolution 1593 (2005) explicitly
states that the Government of the Sudan and all other
parties to the conflict in Darfur shall cooperate fully
with the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
the Prosecutor. Japan urges full implementation of
this resolution so that Member States can uphold the
credibility and legitimacy of the Council. We share
the Prosecutor's frustration over the difficulties in this
area. We believe that the Council could do more to
address non-compliance.

While noting ongoing efforts among States parties
of the Rome statute of the ICC to improve cooperation
with the Court, States parties should make further
efforts to prevent future non-cooperation by utilizing
various measures. The tool kit prepared by some States
parties, including Japan and Senegal for this purpose,
is one such available and useful measure. Japan also
takes note of the exchanges between the ICC and
Jordan on the incident in March this year, as well as of
the ongoing proceedings in the Pre-Trial Chamber II
concerning South Africa. Japan will continue to follow
these developments closely.

Japan is encouraged by the improved security
situation in Darfur. However, we are concerned by the
recent fighting between the Government and the Sudan
Liberation Army/Minni Minawi and other rebel forces.
We underline the importance of a permanent ceasefire
based on the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel road map to resolve the conflict in the country.
In this regard, we continue to strongly support the
Joint Special Representative, President Mbeki, and his
good offices.

There are, unfortunately, still 2.7 million internally
displaced persons in Darfur according to the
special report on the strategic review of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(S/2017/437). Japan is concerned that these internally
displaced persons are vulnerable to various forms of
violence, including sexual and gender-based crimes.
Perpetrators of these and other crimes in Darfur
must be brought to justice. Japan emphasizes that the
Government's obligations with regard to the Prosecutor
and the ICC remain unchanged.

I would like to conclude by reiterating Japan's
continued support to the activities of the ICC. Japan
looks forward to concrete progress on this issue.

