Ms. Veneman: I thank members for the
opportunity to join them today as the Security Council

discusses the situation of children affected by armed
conflict. UNICEF appreciates the engagement and
dedication of the Council to the matter of children
affected by armed conflict and thanks the Secretary-
General for his continuous and personal interest and
commitment to this issue. Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
has been unrelenting and very effective in her work on
behalf of children affected by armed conflict.

I should also like to express special appreciation
for the leadership of the Government of Mexico on this
issue. This collective engagement at the highest
possible level is making a real difference in the lives of
children by serving as a strong platform for advocacy
and responses for boys and girls in conflict situations.

Millions of children around the world continue to
be impacted by armed conflict. In fact, for many,
conflict is all they know. Too often, children see their
childhoods drift into turmoil, their family and friends
killed and their lives, health and well-being put at risk.
Sadly, that is the situation today for many children in
Sri Lanka.

It comes as no surprise that under-five mortality
rates are among the highest in conflict-affected
countries. Children are not only the unintended victims
of war; in some cases, they are directly targeted. The
Secretary-General's reports produced by the
monitoring and reporting mechanism established by the
Security Council bear witness to that. Each of the
incidents reported represents a personal tragedy. I have
met boys and girls who have been brutally raped by
soldiers and scarred for life - some having contracted
HIV - and children who were recruited by armed
groups and used as soldiers or sex slaves.

In places such as Afghanistan, schools have been
attacked and teachers, and particularly girl students,
have been targeted by horrendous acts. When I visited
Gaza earlier this year, I saw schools damaged or
destroyed and children suffering from the trauma of
violence and the loss of loved ones. Sadly, as the report
illustrates, disrespect for the sanctity of schools
continues to be the situation in far too many countries.

Children remain the victims of the wars of adults,
but there are also some glimmers of hope. Just a few
weeks ago, 342 children in Burundi were released after
a year of joint advocacy by child protection partners.
Since January 2009, around 1,200 children in North

Kivu, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, have
been released by armed groups and forces.

Dialogue on children's issues with parties to
conflict is an important element and has resulted in
concrete commitments and action plans to prevent and
end grave violations against children. The monitoring
and reporting mechanism has become a key component
of UNICEF's overall child protection strategy of
enhancing the protective environment for children in
situations of armed conflict. Monitoring and reporting
are also important tools in triggering effective
responses and prevention activities.

UNICEF's responses to children who are victims
of grave violations include support for national child
protection systems and survivors of sexual violence,
along with rights training for armed forces personnel
and the reintegration of children used by armed forces.

This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the
Geneva Conventions and the twentieth anniversary of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Just last
December, UNICEF welcomed the adoption of the
Convention on Cluster Munitions. Around 40 per cent
of all civilians killed or injured by cluster munitions
are children. Next year will mark the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, and this
year marks the tenth anniversary of the first Security
Council resolution on children and armed conflict,
namely, resolution 1261 (1999).

Those milestones have contributed to a stronger
protection framework for children in armed conflict,
and we must build on that momentum to do even more.
UNICEF welcomes the eighth report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict (S/2009/158),
and we support its recommendations.

I note in particular the recommendation to expand
the triggers to be listed in the annexes of the report to
parties who commit rape and other forms of sexual
violence against children and, if possible, other grave
violations, such as intentional killing and maiming.
Such a development would be an important step
forward, particularly to address sexual violence. It
would also send a strong signal from the international
community that perpetrators of grave violations, such
as rape and sexual violence, must be held accountable
for their crimes against children.

Although challenges lie ahead, progress has been
made. UNICEF remains committed to working with
and for children in armed conflict, including through
continued efforts to monitor, report and respond to
grave violations. Adherence to international
humanitarian law and respect for children's rights must
be strengthened, and those who commit violations
against children must be held accountable.

