Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): The
delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. 1 would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his insightful report on the situation in Afghanistan,
and Special Representative Kai Eide for his thorough
briefing. 1 wish in particular to thank and to commend
the committed personnel of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), who
have recently suffered grievous losses in the
performance of their duties. Bosnia and Herzegovina
would like to express its deepest sympathies to their
families and to their countries.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has aligned itself with
the statement of the European Union, in addition to my
statement.

Our country deplores the brutal attacks and the
current critical security situation in Afghanistan. The
increase in both the scale and the scope of the violence
since the Secretary-General's last report is alarming.
The upsurge in civilian and military casualties and the
spread of violence into hitherto peaceful areas are
especially worrying. We are aware that this is a critical
conjuncture for peace and security in Afghanistan.

Moreover, the flaws of last year's presidential
elections provoked grave concern. It is encouraging,
however, that that serious matter was also addressed
through Afghan institutions. Bosnia and Herzegovina
welcomes UNAMA's efforts to strengthen independent
Afghan institutions such as the Electoral Complaints
Commission. Stemming from our own experience,
Bosnia and Herzegovina is of the belief that building
such institutions is quintessential for the practice of
democracy. We appreciate the intense diplomatic
endeavours that helped resolve an acute political crisis,
which resonated well beyond Afghan borders.

In view of the forthcoming parliamentary
elections, we believe that holding elections is essential
as the ultimate expression of democracy. So too is the
probity of the electoral process, which confers
legitimacy on the results. Therefore, Bosnia and
Herzegovina strongly encourages the Government of
Afghanistan and the international community to
foresee and forestall weaknesses in that electoral
process.

With those considerations in mind, we share with
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative a
distinct sense of urgency regarding the coordination of
the international effort in Afghanistan. We support
closer coordination between civilian and military
efforts in building peace and security. Bosnia and
Herzegovina welcomes the Secretary-General's call to
link that coordination effort with the Afghan
Government, which will ultimately bear responsibility
for peace and security. Therefore we endorse the
suggestion of a civilian structure that embraces all
stakeholders and is co-chaired by an Afghan minister
and the Secretary-General's Special Representative.

In coming months, we look forward to
participating in the discussions regarding strengthening
of UNAMA.

We concur that the enhancement of Afghan law
enforcement and security agencies is vital for the
strategy for transition to domestically maintained
stability. The projected increase in the training and
numbers of police and army personnel is a prerequisite
for that transition. It may be further advanced by the
Community Defence Initiative's promise of nimble
security forces with local knowledge. We believe that
the development of a transparent institutional
framework to coordinate the security agencies could
only increase their effectiveness. For such security
reforms to reap their greatest harvest, an Afghan-led
national reconciliation process will be significant.
Bosnia and Herzegovina feels particular empathy
for the problems faced by the quarter of a million
displaced persons inside Afghanistan and for the plight
of the refugees who returned in markedly lower
numbers in 2009. The solution to their displacement is
an integral part of long-term stability for Afghanistan.
Against that sober backdrop, it is important to
recognize the positive developments of the last three
months. We applaud the draft law on the elimination of
violence against women currently under consideration
by the parliament. The provincial council elections
drew an appreciable turnout, further evincing the
Afghan people's strong desire for democracy and
peace. An intensive diplomatic effort averted a
constitutional crisis, and a busy schedule of meetings
in the coming months, including the London
Conference, augurs well for the advance of peace and
security in Afghanistan. Bosnia and Herzegovina will
continue to support such advances with all means at its

disposal.

In conclusion, we would like to recognize once
more the significance of the work of UNAMA's
personnel and would like to stress the vital importance
of ensuring their safety. We also thank Mr. Eide for his
service and wish him best of luck for the future.

