Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I too would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kai Eide,
for his frank, comprehensive and convincing briefing
and for his personal commitment at the head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). His determined actions of recent months
have already allowed us to see these concrete results
from the strengthened mandate of UNAMA, as
authorized by the Council last March.

As Chairman of the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions Committee, I would like to thank UNAMA
for its invaluable cooperation with the Committee and
with the Monitoring Team, as encouraged by the
Council in resolution 1806 (2008) of 20 March.

I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for his statement.

Belgium shares the concerns set out in the last
report of the Secretary-General. Allow me here to
make the following remarks.

First, there is a need to recognize the fact that,
despite collective efforts, the security situation has
deteriorated over the past few months. In that regard,
Belgium shares the concerns voiced regarding the
increase in the number of civilian victims, the majority
of whom, we must recall, have been caused by the
actions of insurgents making use of suicide attacks,
attacking humanitarian personnel and using civilians as
human shields.

The Afghan and international forces, for their
part, must make every possible effort to minimize the
risk of claiming civilian victims. Belgium therefore
welcomes the additional guidelines given to the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in
September. My delegation also encourages the United
Nations to continue to cooperate fully to shed full light
on such incidents.

While we welcome the 19 per cent drop in poppy
production this year, efforts must continue, in
particular given the links to corruption and, more
specifically, to the financing of terrorism, a subject to
which the Al-Qaida/Taliban Committee over which I
preside is very sensitive.

The solution is not a purely military one, and we
are all well aware of that. Security is only one aspect
that must go hand in hand with governance and
development. It is not fortuitous that those elements
make up the three pillars of the Afghanistan Compact
adopted in London in 2006. Belgium acts in the context
of such a comprehensive approach. The recent joint
visit in Afghanistan of our ministers for defence and
development cooperation proved that yet once again.

Aside from Belgium's participation in ISAF, my
country is contributing to numerous reconstruction
projects. During the aforementioned visit moreover, the
minister for cooperation announced a 20 per cent
increase in our contributions for the period 2007-2011,
which today totals €36 million over the past five years.

As the Secretary-General quite rightly requests, if
we are to reverse the recent negative trend, there is an
urgent need to honour the commitments made during
the Paris Conference, where consensus was achieved
on taking decisive action, on the one hand, to address
the serious shortcomings in governance and, on the
other, to align international assistance to the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy.

It is indeed critical that Afghan citizens rapidly
see the benefits of the work of their Government and of
the international community. That is all the more
urgent as the humanitarian situation has also
deteriorated and that major elections are planned for
2009 and 2010.

Belgium fully supports the appeal of the
Secretary-General for a change of pace and direction
and for further efforts at the political level. The three
elements mentioned by Mr. Eide in his introductory
statement - the notable improvement in relations
between Afghanistan and Pakistan, the recent
ministerial reshuffle and the reorganization of the
Ministry of the Interior and the police - are strong
signals of hope for the Afghan people and the
international community.

