Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me begin by welcoming you, Mr. Jan Petersen,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway. We are
honoured that you are in the Chair at this meeting. Let
me also reaffirm Colombia's support for your
delegation during its presidency; we know your
leadership is a guarantee of success.

We also welcome Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
Mr. Jacques Klein, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and we thank them for their
informative briefings today. In addition, we are pleased
to welcome Mr. Javier Solana, Secretary-General of the
Council of the European Union; we are very grateful
for his major announcements, which reflect the
European Union's decisive cooperation with the United
Nations and its coordinating and complementary efforts
as a regional body.

As other delegations have noted, this meeting
marks the beginning of a new stage in the work of the
international community in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We welcome the European Union decision of
18 February to create the European Union Police
Mission, which beginning in January 2003 will replace
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) in bolstering the professional development
of the Bosnia and Herzegovina police force and in
establishing institution-building activities and
programmes.

As the Secretary-General has noted in his most
recent report on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (S/2001/ll32), regional actors should
become more active in the successor mission to
UNMIBH with a view to preserving what the Mission
has achieved and to continuing its work in a regional
framework.

Peace and sustainable development in Bosnia and
Herzegovina continue to hinge on joint efforts by
international entities such as UNMIBH, SFOR and the
Office of the High Representative, among others, and
by the Government and the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is therefore important that, before the
official transition between missions next January, there
be coordination among the various bodies in order to
facilitate the transfer of functions. In our View, there
must be close cooperation with the Government and
civil society in Bosnia in order to link them to the
transition process and ensure that it is a concerted
process that will ensure the success of future
programmes.

Mr. Petritsch's work as High Representative has
been key in creating administrative structures and
coordination programmes that have enabled Bosnia and
Herzegovina to attain the political, economic and social
development that today allow it to be a viable
candidate for membership of the European Union;
Mr. Petritsch has made mention of Europeanization as
part of that process. We thank him for his work and
wish him every success in his future endeavours.

We note the appointment of Lord Ashdown as the
new High Representative; we wish him every success
in his work. We welcome the European Union decision
to name the new High Representative as its special
representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, which in
our View will facilitate coordination and exchanges of
information between the new Police Mission and the
Office of the High Representative. It also reflects the
commitment of the European Union to centralizing the
international community's endeavours in Bosnia and
Herzegovina under its leadership.

In the light of that new regional context, the
United Nations is redefining its role in the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Accords. Clearly,
there must be continued commitment to implementing
the agreement, but in this new framework the
responsibility of the United Nations, and especially
that of the Security Council, will change. There must
be agreement on the new cooperation structure as soon
as possible to facilitate the transition.

Among the issues brought out in the introductory
briefings today, what stood out was the need to insist
on bringing to trial those responsible for crimes
committed during the conflict. We share that priority,
and thus we stress the need for SFOR to help capture
those individuals and to send them to The Hague to
appear before the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia. We will therefore continue to
call for greater cooperation by local authorities in
seeing that due justice is done. It is therefore essential
to spare no effort to strengthen the judicial system,
both to effect institutional enhancement and to bring
about true reconciliation.

