Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Allow me to
start by thanking the Secretary-General, State
Secretary Neculaescu and Commissioner Chergui for
their briefings. As I remember saying in Addis Ababa
last September at the Security Council's joint meeting
with the African Union Peace and Security Council, our
relationship is vital and we must continue to strengthen
it ifwe are to have success. It is particularly good to see
Commissioner Chergui in the Chamber today.

The United Kingdom shares the briefers' alarm
at the scale and complexity of violent conflict today.
The costs are mounting, whether they are measured in
lost lives, displaced families, human rights violations,
extreme poverty or peacekeeping and humanitarian
budgets. Our motivations to prevent further conflict and
to sustain peace must be greater than ever. I agree very
much with the Secretary-General on the importance
of human rights in this context, both, of course, as a
warning or trigger of conflict, but not only that: we
believe that activity on human rights at national and
local levels can be an important contribution in and of
itself to stability and conflict prevention.

The United Kingdom very much welcomes
Secretary-General Guterres's vision for peacebuilding
and sustaining peace, and particularly the renewed focus
on conflict prevention set out in his report (S/2018/43).
We also fully endorse the understanding that supporting
countries to sustain peace should be a shared priority
across the whole United Nations system, from peace
and security to development and human rights. Many
of our own Ministries and Governments have come
to this conclusion. The Government of the United
Kingdom has decided that over half of our development
spending will be in conflict and fragile States, as there
lies the greatest challenge in reducing poverty today.
That does not, as some might be concerned, mean that
the respective mandates of different parts of the United
Nations are under threat. In that regard, we welcome the
fact that both the General Assembly and the Security
Council will adopt draft resolutions committing to
further implementation of the sustaining peace vision
agreed in 2016. The United Kingdom has identified
three priorities for future work.

First, we want to see a stronger partnership for
peace developed between the United Nations and the
World Bank. Their combined vision, expertise and
global presence are essential to ensure that multilateral
investments in development tackle the drivers
of conflict.

Secondly, we want to see more effective preventive
diplomacy by the United Nations, in particular
addressing underlying causes. We all know the critical
role that political agreements play and the openings
they create for peacebuilding. I very much endorse
the Secretary-General's words on the importance of
women's participation in such negotiations. We know
from the research done that peace negotiations are
35 per cent more likely to be sustained for at least 15
years if women are involved in them.

Our third priority is ensuring smoother
peacekeeping mission transitions from mission to
non-mission settings. I will say a few words more
about that in a moment. Right from the moment that we
decide to deploy peacekeepers, we should be thinking
about their exit. While recognizing that fragile contexts
will always be prone to risk, we on the Security Council
need a clear vision of what a sufficiently stable end-
state looks like. The Secretariat has a key role to play
in that regard, through generating deeper analyses and
mission-implementation plans with clear benchmarks
towards achieving that end-state. These steps should
then focus resources and allow the Council to track
progress. This approach is being tested at the moment,
of course, in Haiti.
The United Nations development system needs to be
stepping up sooner in mission settings. We welcome the
Secretary- General's suggestion to link development-
system frameworks with mission assessments. As the
Peacebuilding Fund has sought to encourage in Mali,
peacekeepers and United Nations country teams need
to work to the same script, the same deadlines and the
same objectives. Funds, programmes and agencies must
be ready to tackle conflict rather than simply work
around it. Mapping capabilities to do so, as was done in
Liberia, should ensure we are all better prepared to fill
gaps when a mission leaves.

The Secretary-General stressed the importance
of enhancing coherence to support efforts by national
Governments, and not everything is up to the United
Nations. When politically inclusive, national ownership
is what makes transition processes effective and
resilient. We must always consider how missions
implement their hand-overs to national institutions
and actors. Cote d'Ivoire's experience demonstrates
the impact this can have when done well. I think the
salutary lessons Minister Amon-Tanoh put forward
were important for us all, in particular about ensuring
that the United Nations does not take on the functions
of Government and prevent Governments from being
able to carry out their own tasks.

The development of a shared peacebuilding plan
could help pull the mission, the United Nations country
team, donors, the host Government and other national
stakeholders together through and beyond a transition.
That the United States, Sweden and Liberia worked
together so effectively to develop a peacebuilding plan
demonstrates the valuable role that the Peacebuilding
Commission can have, and that is why the United
Kingdom has been one of the largest and longest-
standing donors to the Peacebuilding Fund.

Finally, we need to be creative about what the
residual United Nations country team presence looks
like. The creation ofan enhanced Resident Coordinator's
Office in Liberia is a very promising initiative, and it
reflects the recognition in the report of the Secretary-
General that the United Nations development system
needs enhanced capacities to support countries at risk
of conflict. Transitions from mission settings are just
one dimension of what is a larger agenda for sustaining
peace, but, given that one of the most significant
predictors of future conflict is past conflict, we must
get them right.

As daunting as solving the recurrent challenges
to transitions may be, we do have good examples
of innovative and effective action to draw on for our
inspiration. With the Secretary-General's report on
sustaining peace and peacebuilding, we have a plan
for making change happen. There should therefore
be nothing stopping us in the Security Council from
making change happen.

