Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I shall make only a few
brief remarks. I would like to start by reading the
letter that a group of 10 Council members addressed to
you, Mr. President, in your capacity as President of the
Council on 5 December. The letter stated:

"We the undersigned members of the Security
Council - Australia, Chile, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Republic ofKorea,
Rwanda, the United Kingdom and the United
States - are deeply concerned about the situation
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
"We are particularly concerned by the scale
and gravity of human rights violations detailed
in the comprehensive report undertaken by the
Human Rights Council commission of inquiry
on human rights in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea (A/HRC/25/63), as contained in
document S/2014/276. These violations threaten to
have a destabilizing impact on the region and the
maintenance of international peace and security.

"Therefore, we write to request that the
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea be formally placed on the Council's agenda
without prejudice to the item on non-proliferation
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
We request a meeting of the Security Council on
the situation in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, pursuant to rule 2 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, and request that a
senior official from the Secretariat and a senior
official from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights formally brief the
Council under that agenda item, which will enable
Council members to receive further information
from the Secretariat on this situation and its
implications for international peace and security."
(S/2014/872)

The 10 members of the Council which signed the
letter are first seeking the establishment of a new
agenda item, "The situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea", under which the Council can, as a
matter of urgency and then as necessary, consider the
serious and deteriorating human rights situation in that
country. Given the gravity and systematic nature of the
human rights violations taking place in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and the threat to the
maintenance of international peace and security, we do
not consider that this can be appropriately considered
by the Council on an ad hoc or informal basis.

Secondly, a formal Council meeting under the
new agenda item must take place today. Rule 2 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure provides that
the President shall call a meeting ofthe Security Council
on the request of any one member of the Council, and
it has been over two weeks since 10 Council members
requested such a meeting. We consider therefore that
we should now simply proceed to adopt the agenda,
which has as its substantive item "The situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea".

