Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to begin by thanking Ambassador
Greenstock for his briefing on the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC). Under his leadership, the
CTC has done much fruitful work since its
establishment. It has formulated a pragmatic
programme of work, and its open, fair and transparent
approach has met with the appreciation of the
membership at large.

In its current consideration of national reports,
the Committee is guided by the relevant provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001) and the relevant working
guidelines. With good cooperation and coordination, its
Subcommittees have made good progress. We believe
that this is all due to the able leadership of its
Chairman and Vice-Chairmen, who have the active
cooperation and support of the other Members of the
United Nations. It can also be attributed to the efforts
of the experts and of the Secretariat.

Like other members of the Council, we endorse
the work programme for the third 90-day period
approved by the Committee, and we view favourably
the current composition of the Bureau.

We believe that two points merit the attention of
the Committee. First, there should be a focus on
questions relating to assistance to Member States in
implementing the resolution. We hope that, as soon as
possible, an assistance fund will be set up, within the
framework of the United Nations, that will help
Member States to enhance their ability to implement
resolution 1373 (2001).

Secondly, we should always keep in mind the fact
that the main objective of the CTC is to assist Member
States so that they can improve their own legislative
and administrative capacity to fight terrorism and take
part more effectively in international cooperation
against terrorism. To that end, the review should be
focused; that will help the CTC to conclude its
consideration of the national reports within the
appropriate time frame.

The current international fight against terrorism
has been continuing for more than seven months -
since last September. Some practical problems have
emerged during that fight that have raised concern on
the part of the international community, and the
Council should give due attention to those problems.
The question of whether the CTC should, at an
appropriate time, respond to certain problems, and the
form that such a response should take, merits our
consideration. States Members of the United Nations
hope that the Council will continue to play its central
role in the international fight against terrorism.

