Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. De Mistura for his briefing and
his long service in his position.

Possibly for the first time in the history of the
Syrian crisis, today an overwhelming majority of
the members of the Security Council have made the
important admission that the situation in Syria is really
continuing to stabilize. This trend began in October
2015 when at the request of the Syrian Government the
Russian Federation began a counter-terrorist operation
in Syria. Today we can say that the greater part of
Syrian territory has been cleared of terrorists.

We are worried about the activities of terrorist
groups in Idlib, which are violating the de-escalation
agreements and putting them in jeopardy. A number of
attempts by Al-Nusra militias and groups associated
with them to infiltrate Aleppo have been suppressed.
Civilians in the western part of the city have been killed
by jihadist shelling. The Turks are making serious
efforts under their existing obligations to separate
the moderates from the terrorist groups. That would
be greatly facilitated by having those who prepared,
financed and sent those groups to Syria in the early
stages of the conflict with the aim of ousting the
legitimate Government - thereby crudely violating
the Charter of the United Nations and the principle of
non-interference in States' internal affairs - educate
them on the situation. Believe me, that would be a much
more meaningful contribution to our efforts to reach
a settlement than endless, unfounded questions and
demands on Russia and other States about what to do
and how to do it.

In parallel with progress on the military front,
there has been also been progress on political
cooperation. There is ongoing constructive dialogue
between the Russian and United States specialists.
A significant summit was held in Istanbul at which
leaders from Russia, Turkey, France and Germany
made major decisions, and work is currently under way
to implement them. At the same time processes for
organizing refugees' voluntary return and rebuilding
the country are being established, but it would greatly
help our efforts if our Western partners joined these
processes in a constructive spirit and stopped violating
Syrian sovereignty and illegally occupying its territory.

Another point I want to make is that we are once
again calling on our partners to stop using phrases such
as "the Syrian regime". No one has certified the use
of such definitions or labels anywhere. What should
be happening is that more attention should be paid to
Syria's reports ofindiscriminate coalition air strikes east
of the Euphrates that have killed dozens of people and
should be investigated. In that connection, we share the
concerns of the United Nations about the consequences
for civilians of the military operation is conducted in
that area. We also want to remind the Council of the
results of the coalition forces' bombardment of Raqqa,
where mass graves have been found.

At the end of November, we plan to hold the
next Astana format meeting with our partners in
the process. We are trying to make progress on the
political front with regard to implementing the Syrians"
decision in Sochi to set up a constitutional committee.
Needless to say, it was a decision taken by the Syrians
themselves in response to the prolonged stagnation of
the peace process, and it has given momentum to the
United Nations-led intra-Syrian dialogue that Mr. De
Mistura has been shepherding for the past few years
under resolution 2254 (2015). As the leaders of the
four States said in their joint statement in Istanbul on
27 October, we intend to start the work by the end of
this year, circumstances permitting. As before, we
believe that all the parameters for the committee's
operations, including its structure, composition and
rules of procedure, should be decided by the Syrians
themselves. That is the only way to ensure that it is
effective and fit for purpose. Any attempt to dictate
how or what to do to the Syrians is a sure way to a dead
end. And we suggest that we all get to work collectively
instead of asking each other questions. That would
help us to solve a lot of the problems quickly and really
get the political process moving under the exclusive
leadership of the Syrians themselves.

We hope that as he begins his duties in early
December, Mr. Geir Pedersen, the new Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, who we know is an experienced
and impartial diplomat, will base his efforts on the
robust foundation established in the Geneva, Astana
and Sochi forums.

