The Secretary-General: Before I begin, please
allow me to say a few words on the devastating
earthquake that occurred in Haiti. I thank the members
of the Council for their expression of sympathy,
condolences and solidarity at this time of need.

(spoke in French)

I am deeply grieved by the disaster that has just
struck Haiti. This is a tragedy for the people of Haiti
and for the United Nations. We are prepared to work
together with the international community in order to
provide the necessary assistance and aid to the people
of Haiti.

(spoke in English)

Information on the full extent of the damage
remains scant. Initial reconnaissance and aerial
assessments have been undertaken. It is clear, however,
that the earthquake has had a devastating impact on the
capital, Port-au-Prince, and on the western part of the
country. The remaining areas of Haiti appear to be
largely unaffected.

Buildings and infrastructure were heavily
damaged throughout the capital, and basic services
such as water and electricity have collapsed almost
entirely. The number of dead or injured among the
population has yet to be established, although the
figure is likely to be in the hundreds or even thousands.

There is no doubt that a major relief effort will be
required. I am grateful to those countries that are
sending emergency relief and rescue teams. I urge all
members of the international community to come to
Haiti's aid in this hour of need.

Many of our United Nations colleagues on the
ground are, as yet, unaccounted for. The United
Nations headquarters at the Christopher Hotel
collapsed in the quake. Many people are still trapped
inside, including my Special Representative in Haiti,
Mr. He'di Annabi.

United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) troops have been working through the
night to reach those trapped under the rubble. So far,
several badly injured casualties have been retrieved
10-20793

and transported to the MINUSTAH logistics base,
which remains largely intact. I have been informed that
some of our staff have been confirmed alive and safe,
and that some of them have been transported to
hospital. I will dispatch Assistant Secretary-General
and former Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to MINUSTAH, Mr. Edmond Mulet, to Haiti
as soon as possible.

MINUSTAH has around 3,000 troops and police
in and around Port-au-Prince to help maintain order
and assist in relief efforts. MINUSTAH engineers have
also begun clearing some of the main roads in Port-au-
Prince, which will allow assistance and rescuers to
reach those in need. We will immediately release
$10 million from the Central Emergency Response
Fund.

The Secretariat is following the situation closely.
A more detailed briefing will be provided to the
Security Council at the earliest opportunity. Taking this
opportunity, I would like to express my sincere thanks
to all the countries that have expressed their
willingness and have already taken action to dispatch
rescue teams and relief materials.

Turning to the item on the Council's agenda, I
thank the Chinese presidency of the Security Council
for its initiative to hold a debate on a topic that is so
vital to international peace and security.

Hardly a crisis confronts us that does not require
actors to cooperate at multiple levels - local, national,
regional and global - in the search for solutions. That
is why the relationship between the United Nations and
regional organizations is so important. Those
organizations are part of a new landscape, one in which
the problems we face are so complex and interlinked
that no one can work in isolation and no one can afford
to do without the benefits of cooperation and burden-
sharing.

Around the table today are representatives of
many of the key partners of the United Nations. Over
the past two days, we had a very productive retreat. We
discussed ongoing operations and we explored due
avenues for cooperation. Throughout, there was a very
strong sense that we are only beginning to realize the
great potential of what we can do together.

As members know, the role of regional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security was written into the founding Charter of
3
our Organization. Chapter VIII foresaw a world in
which regional organizations and the United Nations
would work together on all continents, consistent with
the principles of the Charter, to prevent, manage and
resolve crises. By its actions over the years, the
Council has made ample use of its authority to engage
in global and regional partnerships, yet we can and
must go further still.

The United Nations continues to bolster its
capacity to prevent conflicts and mediate solutions. We
continue to improve our ability to deploy more
effective peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
humanitarian presences. These investments have
positioned us to be a better partner to our regional
counterparts.

In Africa, we are cooperating closely with the
African Union and the subregional economic
communities. We have worked hard to provide support
to the African Union Mission in Somalia and to assist
the Somali parties on the political and security fronts.
In the Sudan, we are engaged in joint mediation and
peacekeeping roles in Darfur, in improving the safety
and access of humanitarian workers, and in assisting in
the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. Our collective efforts also extend to the
crises in Guinea, Kenya and Mauritania, and to the
10-year capacity-building programme.

In Europe, we will continue to develop our
wide-ranging relationship with the European Union
and with such partners as the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe in the Balkans and
elsewhere.

In the Americas, we have a strong history of
cooperation with regional and subregional bodies on
Haiti and Honduras, and more recently on climate
change and in combating organized crime.

In the Middle East, Asia and the Pacific, we are
working together on issues as varied as Afghanistan,
Iraq, Fiji, disaster relief and drug trafficking, and on
building up the capacities of such regional partners as
the League of Arab States and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference. Of course, in these agendas on all
these many fronts, our aim is to achieve greater
flexibility and to make the best possible use of each
partner's comparative advantages.

This week's retreat with the heads of
international and regional organizations has given us
both food for thought and specific ideas for
strengthening our cooperation. We identified areas in
which there is room for improvement, including
coordination and communication among our respective
intergovernmental bodies and secretariats. We talked
about the need for better clarity in mediation
arrangements. We agreed that peacekeeping
deployments need to strike the right balance between
flexibility and efficiency. We stressed the importance
of ensuring that humanitarian assistance reaches those
in need in a timely manner and in accordance with
existing principles. And we agreed to increase
cooperation on peacebuilding.

In all of these areas, the political will of Member
States will be crucial. Coordination is not an end in
itself. Our success will be measured not in terms of
process or mechanisms, but in real improvements in
the lives of those most in need. We are all accountable
for delivering on that responsibility.

I look forward to continuing to strengthen the ties
with regional, subregional and other organizations as a
crucial element in our work for a safer, better future for
all.

