Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
begin by thanking Mr. Vuk Jeremic', Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia and
Mr. Skender Hyseni, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Kosovo, for their presence. We have
listened to them with great care. I also commend the
work of Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General who in a very effective and
pragmatic way has implemented the reconfiguration of
the international presence created by the Secretary-
General with the support of the Security Council.

More than a year and a half have passed since
Kosovo's declaration of independence. What lessons
can we draw? Kosovo's independence has contributed
to strengthening security and stability, by putting an
end to two decades of violence and defiance. The rights
of minorities are respected in conformity with the
commitments undertaken by Kosovo authorities by
accepting the plan elaborated by the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Martti Ahtisaari.

This outcome is the result of the work of all the
men and women who have worked within the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) for ten years. It is also the result of the work
of the European Union with the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and its essential
support in helping the authorities in Kosovo to set up a
State of law and solid institutions for the good of the
people of Kosovo. It is also the result of the work of
Kosovars who placed their confidence in the
international community. It is the result of the work of
Serbs who chose the path of reason and of doing their
utmost to ensure that Kosovo would develop in peace
and calm for the good of all its communities.

Of course, difficulties remain. But France
believes that if we take a step back to look at all the
very real imperfections in the field, it can be said that,
generally speaking, the Government of Kosovo has
acted in a responsible way and fulfilled its
commitments. The creation of a Constitution in
conformity with European norms and values and the
adoption of laws promoting the participation of
minorities are all important steps towards a State of
law at the service of all of the inhabitants of Kosovo,
without regard to their community alliances.

The reorganization of the international presence
took place in very good conditions. The European
Union is now providing essential support through
deployment of EULEX which assists in building the
institutions of a State of law in Kosovo in the
framework of resolution 1244 (1999). The European
Mission is pursuing a twofold objective: to help the
authorities in Kosovo to consolidate the institutions put
in place with UNMIK's assistance, and to ensure the
full implementation of the commitments that they have
undertaken concerning the rule of law. In that context,
the role of Serbia is, of course, essential. We welcome
the Mission's technical cooperation with the authorities
of Kosovo's neighbours - including, of course, Serbia -
in the area of law enforcement.

We are aware of what Kosovo's independence
represents for Serbia. Nevertheless, we call on Serbia
to maintain its responsible attitude and to focus its
efforts on its future integration into the European
Union. France, which does not forget a long shared
history, is counting on Serbia to contribute to stability
in a difficult region. The statement just made by
Mr. Jeremic' confirms that intention.

We listened attentively to Mr. Hyseni. The
commitment to the rule of law, the desire to build a
multi-ethnic State that respects minorities, the will to
nurture friendly relations with Kosovo's neighbours
and the pro-European commitment of the Kosovo
authorities that the Foreign Minister just reiterated are
strong commitments that should be commended.

Once again, we have just seen evidence of the
persistence of differences between Serbia and Kosovo.
We regret that a legal and political guerrilla war is
under way that is sterile and does not correspond with
public opinion in both countries in favour of
overcoming the crisis and turning to the future. The
people are sometimes ahead of their Government.

However, we must also highlight the concern
shared by the Serbian and Kosovo authorities to
maintain stability in the region and to preserve the
conditions for a shared future within Europe. We
encourage Belgrade and Pristina to resume direct
dialogue as swiftly as possible. The European Union,
for its part, will remain committed to ensuring a stable
and prosperous future for the Western Balkans as a
whole and to offering a shared future to Serbs and
Kosovars within the framework of our European
adventure.

