The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Algeria, Australia, Benin, Brazil,
Burkina Faso, Canada, C6te d'Ivoire, Egypt, Finland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Mali, Mauritania,
Nigeria, Norway, Senegal, Tunisia and Turkey to
participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Yuri V. Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, to participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Jose Madeira,
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Counter-Terrorism
Cooperation, to participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Her Excellency Ms. Helga
Schmid, Deputy Secretary-General of the External
Action Service of the European Union, to participate in
this meeting.

I wish to welcome the Secretary-General and
Ministers participating in today's meeting. Their
presence is an affirmation of the importance of the
subject matter to be addressed.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/42, which contains a letter dated
2

17 January 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council transmitting
the report of the assessment mission on the impact of
the Libyan crisis on the Sahel region.

I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/20l2/83, which contains a
letter dated 8 February 2012 from the Permanent
Representative of Togo to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.

I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity.

First of all, on behalf of the Togolese
Government and people, I would like to take the
opportunity provided by today's debate to express my
deep appreciation for the support that the Security
Council has extended to Togo since we assumed the
presidency of the Council for the month of February, as
clearly illustrated by the participants' presence here in
New York today.

I should also like to reiterate to the Secretary-
General, to whom I once again extend my best wishes
for success during his second mandate, my heartfelt
congratulations for his ongoing efforts to promote
peace, security and development throughout the world.

The Council's consideration of the impact of
transnational organized crime on peace, security and
stability in West Africa and the Sahel region is of
crucial importance on a variety of fronts, for my
country and for all of the States concerned. First, the
situation concerning peace and security in West Africa
and the Sahel continues to be very fragile, in spite of
the efforts that have been made. There are countries
emerging from conflict that border on States in which
the socio-political situation continues to be precarious.
Secondly, new threats to peace, security and
development, such as piracy at sea, have emerged and
intensified. Such threats undermine the foundations of
States and the efforts made to promote democracy and
social and economic progress in the region. Thirdly, in
the Sahel in particular, the actions of rebel groups,
which are already endangering the stability and
territorial integrity of several countries, have
unfortunately intensified following the Libyan crisis,
which has led to a significant flow into the region of
weapons of every calibre.
1243593

The convergence of all those factors, along with
terrorist activities in Nigeria and the Sahel, have made
both subregions a theatre for all sorts of trafficking,
including in drugs, weapons and human beings. The
latest report of the Secretary-General on the activities
of the United Nations Office for West Africa (see S/2011/811) points out that the two subregions
continue to be a preferred area for trafficking in
cocaine and the production of synthetic drugs. Of
course, Africa and the Sahel are not the only regions
where that problem is an issue. Drug trafficking and
organized crime also pose a major challenge to
democracy, justice and the rule of law in other parts of
the world.

Countries emerging from conflict are even more
vulnerable, given that public order has been disrupted.
Meanwhile, the grip of poverty facilitates corruption
and the infiltration of still weak institutions by
international criminal networks. Moreover, drug
trafficking is increasingly linked to other types of
trafficking in the region, in particular in fuel supplies,
as well as piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.

Considering that the frequency and intensity of
piracy at sea has increased along with the number of
armed attacks in the region, specially along the coasts
of Nigeria, Benin and Togo, as well as the fact that
pirates have access to all sorts of cooperation with
other criminal organizations on land, one can well
imagine the complexity of the challenge faced by our
States in order to contain organized crime. Likewise,
criminal groups have stepped up their efforts when it
comes to the swift and uncontrolled circulation of
weapons of every calibre, as we have unfortunately
seen from the situation in northern Mali.

Transnational organized crime is therefore a
source of great concern for the countries of West Africa
and the Sahel. It continues to be a major obstacle to the
development of our countries' economies, insofar as
security issues require the mobilization of significant
intellectual, human and financial resources that should
be invested in development efforts. It also undermines
the foundations of States and the efforts made to
promote democracy and the rule of law. In addition,
organized crime significantly undermines the positive
impact of the reforms undertaken by our countries to
pull our peoples out of poverty and destitution.

It is for that reason that the Governments of West
Africa and the Sahel region have initiated major
12-23593

political and legal efforts to address the situation. The
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) plan of action for the period 2008 to 2011,
which concluded last year, is an appropriate framework
to combat organized crime in the region. I welcome the
fact that United Nations agencies and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime are working with
ECOWAS to renew the plan.

For several years now, the Government of Togo
has been engaged in a fierce fight against organized
crime in all its manifestations. In addition to
institutional measures, such as the ratification of many
international legal instruments on organized crime and
terrorism, my Government has adopted a
comprehensive national strategic framework to combat
drugs and crime. In developing that framework, we
enjoyed the expertise of several of our partners,
including France, the United States of America, the
European Union and the ECOWAS Commission.

The framework, which covers the period from
2009 to 2013, is structured around five priority pillars,
ranging from strengthening coordination mechanisms
to promoting the capacity of the State in efforts to
prevent criminal activities. In that regard, I would like
to thank all our development partners and to encourage
them to support the efforts of Togo and all the
countries of West Africa and the Sahel region.

It is encouraging to note that the international
community is not indifferent to the issue of organized
crime in West Africa and the Sahel region. The United
Nations, and in particular the Security Council, is
already committed to the fight against the various
criminal activities of organized crime. By devoting a
debate (see S/PV.6233) to drug trafficking in 2009,
endorsed by a presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/32),
and by adopting, on Nigeria's initiative, a resolution on
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea (resolution 2018 (2011)) in
October 2011, the Council has shown its determination
to combat that new threat to international peace and
security through all legal means.

In the same vein, my country welcomes the
Secretary-General's recent deployment of two
assessment missions to the subregion - on the
repercussions of the Libyan crisis on the security of the
Sahel region and on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
There is no doubt that those initiatives make it possible
to have a more coherent and comprehensive approach
that can enable our countries to undertake the desired
3
efforts to prevent the West African subregion and the
Sahel from being consumed by violence and chaos.

Nevertheless, the scope of the battle to be waged
is such that West Africa and the Sahel region will not
be able to undertake that fight without the involvement
of the international community. Our countries need
additional assistance, both material and financial, in
order to face the many challenges posed by the heavily
armed drug traffickers and criminal groups infecting
our region. Security forces must have available
appropriate means to confront and defeat those
criminal groups. To that end, they need to be better
trained and equipped. Similarly, the legal systems of
our countries should be strengthened and should
establish cooperation, among each other and with
INTERPOL, with a view to exchanging information.
We therefore think that a significant and coordinated
joint effort among the States of West Africa and the
Sahel is essential, including firm support from the
international community, so as to defeat organized
crime and associated activities. In particular, major
cooperation is needed both in countries where drugs
are produced and in those where drugs are consumed,
in order to neutralize the related traffic.

I wish to express my gratitude to the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the entire United
Nations system, as well as to the Member States that
have, each at its own level, provided their assistance
and expertise in the day-to-day fight that our respective
countries are conducting against organized
transnational crime.

Our countries are aware of the responsibilities
that fall to them with regard to political and economic
governance and strengthening the rule of law. In the
same vein, they work so that new graduates and the
unemployed can find work and not become easy prey
for organized criminal groups. We believe that the
international community should strongly support the
role of civil society and of non-governmental
organizations involved in activities against illicit drug
trafficking and organized crime.

In order to ensure better cooperation of actions at
all levels, Togo proposes the creation of an
international contact group on organized transnational
crime, similar to the international Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia.
The challenges in the fight against organized
transnational crime are of such a dimension that they
call for intensification of international coordination of
actions against that scourge. In that regard I call for
greater mobilization of the international community
and greater support for the States of West Africa and of
the Sahel region. I am convinced that the Security
Council will spare no effort in continuing to consider
this issue and giving it all the necessary attention.

We should not allow organized crime to
destabilize West Africa and the Sahel, because a lack of
coordinated action could lead to violence and the
destruction of the hard-earned gains of recent years. It
could also cost us the development of our countries.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

