Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Let me begin by
thanking you, Foreign Minister Okada, and the
delegation of Japan for organizing this high-level
debate on the important issue of post-conflict
peacebuilding. I also thank the Secretary-General, the
honourable ministers of Afghanistan, Sierra Leone and
Timor-Leste and the Managing Director of the World
Bank for their statements. We also welcome the
participation of the Foreign Minister of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

This debate, which is taking place during the
review of the work of the Peacebuilding Commission,
is both useful and timely. The United Nations, regional
and subregional organizations and the wider
international community continue to be preoccupied,
and rightly so, with issues of post-conflict
peacebuilding.

Uganda underscore the importance of developing
comprehensive peacebuilding strategies so that
countries emerging from conflict are supported in their
move towards sustainable peace, economic recovery
and development. This comprehensive approach is
essential if post-conflict countries are to avoid a
relapse after peacekeeping operations. For
peacebuilding strategies to be successful, they must be
designed to address a particular conflict situation. We
can never have a one-size-fits-all approach, although
broad parameters for most conflict situations have been
identified.

What is critical is that a comprehensive strategy
should, first, be nationally owned; secondly, address
the root causes of the conflict; thirdly, leverage
national, regional and international resources to
support in a coordinated way the implementation of
identified peacebuilding priorities; and fourthly,
address the provision of peace dividends, including
basic services.

Our experience in Uganda has shown us the
importance of identifying national priorities based on
the country's unique situation and conditions.

One of the lessons we learned is that it is
important to prioritize and sequence peacebuilding
activities, starting with the most urgent and critical
elements, including security sector reform,
reconciliation, economic recovery and reconstruction.
To ensure sustainability, building and strengthening
national institutions and developing local capacity are
key prerequisites.

Peacebuilding is a collective endeavour and a
shared responsibility, in which national authorities,
regional and subregional organizations, the United
Nations and the wider international community have
important roles to play. The need for mobilization of
adequate, flexible and timely funding for peacebuilding
activities does not need to be emphasized again. We
therefore welcome the ongoing strengthening of
strategic partnerships between the United Nations, the
World Bank and other financial institutions.

In conclusion, we reiterate the need to ensure that

peacebuilding activities are considered at an early

stage in conflict situations and that all actors work

within a well-coordinated and coherent framework.

Uganda supports the adoption of the draft presidential
statement on peacebuilding.

