Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov for his briefing.

We note with regret that in addition to the tragic
events of recent days in the occupied Palestinian
territories, on 29 May there was once again a sharp
escalation in armed activity on the border between
Israel and the Gaza Strip. Fighters fired on settlements
in Israeli territory. The Israeli air force retaliated with
missile strikes. It is worrisome that the parties are
increasingly resorting to violence, constantly deepening
their distrust and making the possibility of relaunching
the peace process an ever more distant prospect. The
civilians of Israel and Palestine are becoming hostages
to this developing situation.

We believe that relying on force and rejecting
direct dialogue represent a road to nowhere. That
relates not only to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, but
to any other crisis situation. We call on all parties to
exercise restraint. We have repeatedly said that the
trend to increasing destabilization in the occupied
Palestinian territories is directly connected to the
impasse in the political process. The Middle East
settlement, unresolved for so long, is in a stalemate,
and instead of tackling its fundamental issues, the
Security Council has been compelled to address
the undesirable consequences of the impasse. That
approach is not productive, to put it mildly, and will
not enable us to overcome the massive deterioration in
the situation, which is certainly in nobody's interest.
Nor will it help us to address the chronic problems of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, such as provocative
rhetoric, unilateral actions, outbreaks of violence and
settlement activities.

It will be crucial to mobilize efforts to resume
the political process between Palestinians and Israelis
on the basis of the well-known international law on
the subject, including the decisions of the Security
Council and the principles of the Arab Peace Initiative,
the outcome of which should be the implementation
of a two-State solution and the establishment of an
independent and sovereign Palestinian State with its
capital in East Jerusalem.

Our position on the demonstrations in Gaza
remains unchanged. We affirm the right to peaceful
protest action and firmly condemn the indiscriminate
use of force against civilians and the firing of rockets
into Israeli territory. We call on the parties to refrain
from steps that could lead to further deterioration of
the situation. It will be important to continue intensive
efforts to ease the difficult humanitarian situation in
the Gaza Strip. The continuing hopelessness of the
situation plays into the hands of forces with an interest
in further radicalizing the situation. Widespread
despair is a fertile breeding ground for extremism.
In that connection, we note the important work being
done by the United Nations and particularly by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in the occupied Palestinian
territories. We welcome and support the involvement of
regional actors in the Middle East peace process. We
commend Egypt and Jordan for the role they have been
playing in Palestinian affairs.

In conclusion, we would like to underscore that the
direction of the developments in the situation on the
occupied Palestinian territories once again confirms
that the international community does not have the right
to ignore Palestine while addressing other problems in
the Middle East. We must act. In our View, the Middle
East Quartet is the appropriate and necessary forum, as
endorsed by Security Council resolutions, for ending
the impasse in the Middle East peace process.

