Ms. Zahir (Maldives): The Maldives wishes to
begin by emphasizing the importance of this ongoing
debate in the Council on the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine. Given the
constant evolution of the political dynamics and the
situation on the ground, this thematic debate provides
an important forum to take stock of and assess the
pathway to sustainable peace in the Middle East. I
wish to thank the briefers at this open debate for their
contributions, which have contextualized the present
state of affairs.

Peace in the Middle East can never be realized
without a viable solution to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, which has destabilized the region for 70 years.
Taking note of the report presented to the Council last
month by the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process (see S/PV.8214), the Maldives condemns
in the strongest terms the new wave of violence in the
occupied Palestinian territories.

It is evident from the progressive activities on
expanding settlements that there is a need to respect the
principles of international law and abide by the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. The impunity
with which violence is perpetrated and the continued
violation of international norms set a dangerous
precedent that has far-reaching consequences for the
maintenance of peace and security in future.

The Maldives has always been a strong advocate
for the resolution of disputes and conflict through
peaceful means, by exploring new and innovative
solutions for persistent conflicts and finding common
ground through mutual dialogue. In that regard,
the Maldives welcomes and supports the proposal
by President Mahmoud Abbas to the Council in
February for an international peace conference aimed
at resuming peace talks between Palestine and Israel
( see S/PV.8183). We applaud Palestine's leadership
and willingness to begin that dialogue, and strongly
urge Israel to engage in those talks in good faith. The
Maldives also acknowledges the fact that this is a
dispute that has many dimensions and impacts many
actors in the international community. We therefore
encourage all parties and stakeholders concerned to
contribute to those negotiations, as appropriate, in the
most constructive and conducive manner possible.

In addition to taking assertive political action to
resolve the conflict, my delegation also wishes to
emphasize the importance of enhancing action on the
ground to alleviate the suffering of people. In that
regard, we welcome the relief and aid efforts from the
United Nations, Member States, intergovernmental
organizations, non-governmental organizations and the
private sector. We note with concern the $446 million
funding gap for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, and
urge Member States to address that issue, taking into
account the wide range of support that the Agency
provides to the Palestinian people.

The Maldives reiterates its call for a two-State
solution recognizing the sovereign and independent
State of Palestine, based on the 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital. My delegation urges
the Security Council to take more concrete action to
fulfil its mandate and encourages all Member States
to engage in a form of debate that will deliver the end
results necessary to establish and maintain sustainable
peace in Palestine and the Middle East.

On the question of Syria, we remain concerned.
We need to urgently address the humanitarian situation
in Syria and protect its citizens from further pain, fear
and uncertainty. We remain confident in the ability
of the Council to deliver the result that is required in
Syria - a lasting ceasefire and sustainable peace.
We also remain committed to doing our part, lending
our voice and joining the chorus of actors supporting
lasting peace in the country.

We need to work together to find meaningful
solutions to the many situations of violence and
instability in the Middle East. We need to focus on
sustaining peace, so that societies ravaged by war
and conflict may progress again. State failure has the
potential to derail any peace process. We believe that,
whether it is through strengthening the capacity of State
institutions, the eradication of poverty or addressing
other determinants of conflict, such as a lack of access
to resources, natural and man-made disasters and
climate risk, we need to focus on building the capacity
and resilience of States.

The Maldives will continue to stand with the people
of the Middle East - a region that is close to our hearts
and with which we share many cultural, religious and
historical ties. The Maldives will remain committed
to working with all our partners on that important and
historical issue to find shared solutions, so that the
suffering of people in the various conflict zones in the
region can be brought to an end through peaceful means.
We will work with our partner countries, international
organizations and other important actors to bring
lasting peace to our shared destiny.

