Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
I would like to congratulate you, Sir, for having
convened this important meeting. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). This report tells us about the
activities of that Mission. We also thank above all
Mr. Bernard Kouchner, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his extremely informative
and edifying briefing on the situation in Kosovo.

Kosovo is going through a crucial phase in its
history. For some time this region has seen important
events, both internally and externally, which will no
doubt have direct repercussions on developments in the
situation in Kosovo and require the support and
backing of the international community as a whole. In
this connection I would like to welcome the initiatives
to reconcile the communities in Kosovo and to
encourage political dialogue between the various
parties.

The initiative to convene the Airlie House
Conference in Virginia at which an important
declaration was unanimously adopted inspires the hope
of seeing one day all this hatred and violence dissipate.
It has laid the foundations for a democratic, multi-
ethnic and peaceful society in Kosovo on the basis of
free and transparent elections and has reaffirmed the
right of return of all the refugees. Moreover, we
consider that should the pact proposed by the Special
Representative ofthe Secretary-General be accepted, it
could contribute to protecting the rights of various
ethnic communities. It thereby could pave the way to
self-administration, in particular through the
designation of the responsibilities and powers of the
municipalities and the equitable representation of the
minority communities within these structures.

All these initiatives cannot replace the active
participation of the parties to the conflict. In effect we
consider that all the political leaders of all the
communities in Kosovo must shoulder their historic
responsibilities. It is up to these leaders to promote
tolerance and ensure that the voice of reason is heard.

I would like to take this opportunity to note the
wise decision of the Serb National Council (SNC) of
Gracanica to participate in the work of the Joint
Interim Administrative Structure so as to play a
constructive role in the implementation of several
agreements. It is also to be noted with interest that the
Serb National Council of Mitrovica will be
participating in the work of the joint committee for
returnees.

The completion, on schedule, of the first phase of
the civil registration process and the adoption of the
regulations for the municipal elections are a source of
satisfaction for my delegation. We take this opportunity
to encourage all the communities in Kosovo to take
part in these elections, which will lay the basis for a
multi-ethnic society, which alone can guarantee lasting
reconciliation in Kosovo. We also insist on the
stringent application of the election code of conduct, in
order to avoid any form of violence or intimidation that
might reduce participation in the electoral process. We
believe it important that these elections do not serve as
pretext for exacerbating the ethnic divide and for
promoting exclusion. In this connection I would like to
pay tribute to the Kosovo Force (KFOR) for the
preparation of a plan of action to thwart any violence
during the electoral process.

As we have indicated in our previous statements,
we consider that effective, impartial and independent
justice can strengthen the convictions of all the
inhabitants of Kosovo that there is a common future for
all communities there. The deployment of judges and
international prosecutors to the district courts is a
measure that is building the minority communities"
confidence in the judiciary system. It is also a way of
combating the impunity that reigned in the past and
which permitted the most heinous actions.

This is also why we think that we must encourage
the initiatives taken in the context of the civilian
police, in which my country is proud to be
participating. In particular, we welcome the initiative
to set up a task force to develop measures to combat
ethnic violence, particularly against minorities.

To conclude, I think that the return of peace to
Kosovo is a complex endeavour, but not an impossible
one. The progress achieved since the arrival of UNMIK
in Kosovo is appreciable. The success of the electoral
operation is a crucial phase on the path towards
reconciliation and peaceful coexistence for all the
inhabitants of Kosovo.

I would like to pay special tribute to Mr. Bernard
Kouchner for his tireless efforts for peace and also to
his team and to the entire staff of UNMIK for their
devotion.

