Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
With respect to the situation in Afghanistan, the
reaction that we have witnessed today during this
public debate demonstrates clearly the commitment of
the international community to the Afghan people and
the need to find a lasting solution to the longstanding
crisis in that country.

The people of Canada are deeply concerned by
the current situation and by the need to give full
protection to Afghan civilians, particularly internally
displaced persons and refugees.

(spoke in English)

It is difficult to comment sensibly on such a fast-
moving situation, and it is for that reason that we
particularly commend Special Representative Brahimi
for his extensive and incisive report to the Council and
for the wise counsel he is giving the international
community in this most complex situation.

Like Special Representative Brahimi, we believe
our common goal must be to assist Afghans to establish
a stable, multi-ethnic, representative and neutral
administration in Afghanistan. That administration
must be initiated and supported by a broad spectrum of
Afghans, with the full support and cooperation of
coalition members, bordering States and other regional
players. Easy to say, extremely difficult to do.

We must above all not permit a political vacuum
to develop as a result of our current military actions.
The international community must act promptly. This
will be decisive to the future of Afghanistan. It is also
integral to our campaign against terrorism.

We are much encouraged by the apparent collapse
of Taliban resistance in the north. There are already,
however, very disquieting reports of lawlessness.
Reprisals cannot be a basis for building a new society.
Action is needed urgently to bring an international
presence, including a United Nations presence, to the
liberated areas of Afghanistan, and we are encouraged
that Mr. Vendrell and other United Nations officials are
moving quickly to do so.

At the same time, we must not lose sight for a
moment of our objective - that is, to bring Osama bin
Laden and the Al Qaeda network to justice. That
remains job one.

For the medium and longer term, the challenges
facing the people of Afghanistan and the international
community in supporting them are daunting: to disarm,
demobilize and reintegrate militants; to establish the
rule of law; to create accountable institutions,
including a police force and a judiciary; to establish
broadly representative governance structures; to
promote respect for human rights and tolerance,
including the rights of women and children; and to
develop strategies to address organized crime and the
drug trade.

That said, as others have remarked, the
international community can only foster - not
impose - a lasting, workable solution to this crisis.
We agree with Mr. Brahimi and others that the solution
for Afghanistan lies with the Afghan people, both in
the country and among the extensive diaspora. The
only solution that will be sustainable will be an
indigenous one that is of the Afghan people and for the
Afghan people, but also supported by the international
community.

Success will not come without the financial,
political and technical support of those in a position to
help on peace-building, on humanitarian aid and on
reconstruction. Nor can it succeed without satisfying
the legitimate security concerns of all Afghans and of
Afghanistan's neighbours. Those neighbours bear a
particular responsibility to work together to bring about
the kind of peace that is in the interests of the Afghans
and, ultimately, of each other.

Afghanistan, a much neglected, abused and
abandoned country that has been driven into isolation
by extremists, could not even be ranked on the last
United Nations human development index. We would
like to see a strong central role for the United Nations
under the Secretary-General's leadership and with the
valued input of Special Representative Brahimi. We
need the United Nations to develop strategies for the
stabilization of Afghanistan, including the development
of functioning government structures. We are pleased
to see the creation of an integrated mission task force
for Afghanistan. We think that is a very good idea. We
would like it to operate a bit less opaquely and more
transparently so that we can benefit from it as we draw
up our own policies.

We have pledged to work with Ambassador
Brahimi and other coalition States to support the
Afghan people in the enormous task facing them. The
importance of broadly engaging Afghan civil society,
including women's groups, in the dialogue over
Afghanistan's future cannot be overstated. Afghanistan,
especially in its current circumstances, simply cannot
afford to deprive itself of 50 per cent of its talent.

In addition to broad-based humanitarian
assistance and political institution-building, we believe
that the establishment of a Eurasian security and
cooperation dialogue would fill a void in the region. It
could be an important component of a lasting peace in
Afghanistan.

Last, but not least, we look to the United Nations
to bring together a cooperative management group of
those members of the international community capable
of helping, as well as those with direct interests.
Canada was engaged in providing assistance to
Afghanistan throughout the 1990s, and we are actively
participating in the assistance efforts now. We have
extensive experience in this area and we are ready,
willing and able to help.

