Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Thank you, Mr.
President, for convening yet another meeting on this
item. We come together once again to express our
grave concern over the failure of Israel to implement
Security Council resolutions. Indeed, Israel has yet to
implement Security Council resolutions 1397 (2002),
1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002), and its inaction has
frustrated the efforts of the international community to
achieve a meaningful ceasefire and the resumption of
negotiations. Throughout, Israel has continued to
destroy the infrastructure of the Palestinian Authority
and to place its legitimately elected leaders under
srege.

The wilful disregard of the Security Council
cannot be allowed to continue. The Council must now
take decisive action to ensure full, unconditional and
immediate compliance with its resolutions, as well as
respect for international humanitarian law, in particular
the Fourth Geneva Convention, of 1949. For these
reasons, we support the call by the Secretary-General
for the Security Council to authorize the deployment of
an impartial multinational force, formed by a coalition
of the willing, to work with the parties to end the cycle
of violence. We agree that such a force would need to
have a robust mandate and credible strength, and to be
of sufficient size to carry out that mandate.

I would like to underscore the sentiment
expressed by President Mbeki, as Chairman of the
Non-Aligned Movement, with regard to breaking the
chain of violence in the Middle East. He noted that it is
necessary to end the dialogue of arms to prepare the
way for a dialogue of peace: violence cannot be given
the right to veto peace.

The Non-Aligned Movement is gravely
concerned over reports of the killing of large numbers
of civilians in the occupied territory, in particular in the
Jenin refugee camp, by the Israel Defence Force.
Residents of the Jenin refugee camp have reported
massacres by Israeli solders and the secret burial of
Palestinians in mass graves. Clearly, the time has come
for the United Nations to request the Secretary-General
to carry out an impartial investigation to establish the
full scope of the tragic events that have taken place in
Jenin.

The events in Jenin are, however, only part of a
much larger humanitarian and human rights crisis in
the occupied territory, including Jerusalem. As the
Secretary-General has pointed out, Israeli forces have
widely flouted international humanitarian principles
and human rights standards. The Security Council must
support the Secretary-General's demand that Israel
provide full access for humanitarian agencies and
services.

The Security Council cannot allow the siege of
the headquarters of President Arafat to continue. The
Palestinian Authority cannot be expected to exercise
control while its elected leaders are isolated and its
infrastructure is being systematically destroyed.
Similarly, the stand-off at the Church of the Nativity,
which is sacred to people throughout Palestine and the
rest of the world, cannot be allowed to continue for a
moment longer.

We are also gravely concerned at the detention of
Palestinian civilians and their leaders by Israel. The
continued detention of Palestinian leaders will not
promote peace and political dialogue, and it will be
interpreted by the Palestinian people and the wider
international community as a sign that Israel is not
serious about implementing measures towards a
peaceful negotiated solution.

Members of the Non-Aligned Movement have
already made numerous practical suggestions, which
the Security Council has yet to adopt, on how to
address the situation on the ground. The Non-Aligned
Movement believes that, ultimately, a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East can be
achieved only through a political, rather than a
military, process. We have consistently called for the
deployment of an effective multinational presence on
the ground in Palestine. We share the Secretary-
General's conviction that such a third-party presence is
essential to the process of restoring mutual confidence
and making parallel progress on both the political and
the security fronts.

Therefore, we call on the Security Council to act
to ensure compliance with its own resolutions, to
secure the immediate withdrawal of Israeli forces and
the signing of a ceasefire by both parties, and to
authorize the deployment of an international presence
on the ground. The draft resolution presented by the
Group of Arab States (S/2002/363) addresses the
fundamental concerns that we have just outlined, and it
deserves the Council's unanimous support.

