Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Ijoin other speakers
in thanking Mr. Valentin Inzko for his briefing today
and for his good work as the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have taken note of his
report to the Security Council (S/2013/263, annex). We
welcome in our midst the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Her Excellency Ms. Mirsada Colakovie.

Pakistan is fully committed to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
support all efforts to strengthen the State at the national
level while preserving the rights and prerogatives of all
communal entities.

Let me start with the positive feedback given by
Mr. Inzko. We are glad to know that the State-level
Council of Ministers met regularly and that the budget
for 2013 was adopted. The European Union and NATO
military missions continue to ensure the safety and
security of citizens.

The negative feedback, however, surpasses the good
news. Progress on the political track is unfortunately
stalled. A worsening fiscal situation, poor growth
and high unemployment are compounding social
problems. There is no movement towards European
and Euro-Atlantic integration. The lack of progress
on the implementation of the five objectives and two
conditions necessary for the closure of the Office of
the High Representative is an indication of the lack of
commitment to the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We commend the High Representative for offering
his good offices and engaging political stakeholders to
break the impasse. Pakistan is deeply concerned by the
increasing challenges to the Dayton Peace Agreement
and to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Republika Srpska and its leadership took several
actions during the reporting period that violated the
General Framework Agreement. They included the
adoption of a decree to unilaterally regulate citizen
identification, the non-implementation of the decisions
of the Constitutional Court, and intensified rhetoric
by its leadership, in particular its President, against
the General Framework Agreement. His assertions for
self-determination for the Serbs and his calls for the
dissolution of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina
should be a matter of serious concern for the entire
Council. We believe that statements such as those would
not serve the interests of any community, as they would
vitiate the atmosphere and undermine the prospects
for long-term peaceful coexistence. Challenges to the
Dayton Peace Agreement and divisive rhetoric should
therefore be avoided.

The President of Republika Srpska has also
continued to target the key State institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is undermining their
effectiveness. The institutions that were established
to exercise responsibilities of the State under the
Constitution are a cornerstone for safeguarding the
rule of law, sovereignty, territorial integrity and
constitutional order in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Efforts
to undermine them would have an adverse impact on
the long-term stability of the State.

We condemn statements by senior officials of
Republika Srpska denying the genocide committed
in Srebrenica in 1995, which has been confirmed
by the rulings of the International Court of Justice,
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and other courts. Such statements will do
serious damage to the reconciliation process inside
Bosnia and Herzegovina and regionally. In that regard,
we welcome the courageous and historical statement of
Serbian president Tomislav Nikolie in which he offered
an apology for the genocide committed in Srebrenica.

It is vitally important for all parties to recognize
the international and legal frameworks for the division
of power in the country. Pakistan supports all efforts
to ensure a safe and secure environment in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We urge the leadership of the country to
resolve their differences through dialogue. The Office
of the High Representative should continue to play its
role in that regard. We wish him success.

