Mr. Richardson (United States of America): The
United States was pleased last June when the Government
of Tajikistan and the United Tajik Opposition (UTO) signed
the Agreement to end their conflict, demobilize and share
power while preparing for elections. We are growing
concerned, however, that the peace process has lost its
momentum. On the one hand, we see cooperation between
the parties in the Commission on National Reconciliation,
members of the UTO employed in responsible positions in
the Government and a significant number of UTO soldiers
registered and quartered in assembly areas. On the other
hand, we are seeing Tajikistan go through round after round
of violence and disruption. On this basis, we find it
difficult to see the completion of even the first phase of
the peace process.

The United States voted today in favour of extending
the mandate of the United Nations Mission of Observers
in Tajikistan (UNMOT), as a sign of continued faith in
the peace process. We believe that people of good will
are working to see it through to a successful conclusion.
We must make it clear, however, that our willingness to
support a broken process is not infinite. We and the
international community want to give the parties the time
they need to establish an enduring peace, but the parties
must recognize that they alone hold the responsibility for
moving the process forward. It is clearly within the
capacity of both to comply with their obligations under
the peace accords. The Government committed itself to
sharing power in the interim period until elections, and it
must do so. The Government must implement its
obligation to appoint members of the United Tajik
Opposition (UTO) to 30 per cent of Government
positions. The Government must also act rapidly to
implement the provisions of the amnesty law. These
actions must be undertaken without being conditioned on
actions by the United Tajik Opposition.

For their part, the UTO leaders committed
themselves to demobilizing and disarming their forces.
Nonetheless, in the past few months we have witnessed
several instances of renewed combat that began when
UTO forces attacked Government positions. Regardless of
their disagreement with Government activities, UTO
commanders cannot resort to violence in response. The
UTO leaders must take responsibility for the actions of all
UTO field commanders and order them to abide by the
military protocol, including assembling, registering and
disarming. If necessary, the UTO leaders should work
with the Government to subdue and disarm insubordinate
commanders. The peace process cannot survive outbreaks
of violence such as those that we saw in March and
April.

The parties agreed to a timetable in their peace
process that, while ambitious, is still achievable. They
must expeditiously implement the first phase of the
military protocol. With the experience they already have
in quartering and registering UTO units, they should be
able to move quickly towards that goal. They should also
be thinking ahead about how to move on towards
legalizing political parties and preparing for elections.

 

In the meantime, the parties have a responsibility for
ensuring the security of UNMOT, foreign diplomatic
missions and international personnel. They should cooperate
in this effort, specifically in making the joint protection unit
into a showcase of national cooperation.

As a sign of the interest of the United States in the
success of Tajikistan's peace process, we have pledged
significant quantities of assistance, and we have abided by
our pledges. We call on all Member States to step forward
with donations to guarantee the process and relieve the
continuing humanitarian crisis and the threat from
landmines.

We congratulate the personnel of UNMOT for the
excellent work they have done in seeing the country
through the recent crises. We add to that a note of special
thanks to the Secretary-General's Special Representative,
Gerd Merrem, for the years he devoted to bringing peace
to Tajikistan and for his success in bringing the parties
together to sign the peace accord. We wish him well in
retirement, and we call upon the Secretary-General to
secure the advances made by Mr. Merrem by appointing
a replacement as quickly as possible.

