Mr. Fulci (Italy): To begin, allow me to subscribe
fully to the statement the Permanent Representative of
Spain, Ambassador Yafiez-Barnuevo, will shortly make on
behalf of the European Union.
It is with particular satisfaction that Italy co-sponsored
and voted in favour of today's resolution on Bosnia and
Herzegovina - a resolution indeed of historic importance,
since it creates a new scenario for the implementation of
the Peace Agreement signed yesterday at the Paris
Conference.

In the first place, the resolution authorizes the
establishment of a multinational force - IFOR - to
implement the Agreement. Italy will participate in this
Force with a contingent of 2,300 men in the theatre, with
naval forces that will continue to operate in the Adriatic

 

Sea, and air force and naval personnel at 20 air bases and
nine ports directly and constantly supporting the new
Bosnian operation. This makes for a total of 11,000 men.
Our troops will be deployed alongside those of other
countries in the framework of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) - that same NATO that without
firing a single shot prevented a third world war from
happening in the second half of this century. NATO will
assume a central responsibility in this new operation,
which is also open to the contributions of the Russian
Federation and other countries not members of the
Alliance, which we warmly welcome.

We are convinced that the presence of a force of
60,000 men in Bosnia will have a decisive impact on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement, acting as an
effective deterrent to any and all attempts to destabilize
the situation. In this way, the Force will also help
facilitate the peace process.

In the second place, paragraph 26 of the resolution
endorses the establishment of a High Representative and
the appointment of Mr. Carl Bildt to this post. The High
Representative will be a central figure in the civilian
component of the operation, in view of the guidance and
coordination functions assigned to him by the Dayton
Agreement. The civilian activities sector is one in which
the United Nations will maintain a key position, thanks
largely to the leadership role granted to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in the area of the return of refugees and
displaced persons, and to other significant responsibilities
in the humanitarian field, which are entrusted to a United
Nations Coordinator, as announced in a recent report by
the Secretary-General.

With regard to these competences, the establishment
of a United Nations police force - which we hope can
be decided on as soon as possible - will be crucial in
stabilizing the situation and safeguarding human rights.
The withdrawal of the forces behind the Zones of
Separation established by the Peace Agreement must not
cause a new exodus of the civilian population, or new
instances of "ethnic cleansing". The presence of
International Police Task Force monitors can play a
fundamental role in protecting the local population against
this threat.

Today's resolution also emphasizes the need to
safeguard human rights, which the Bosnian parties
pledged to respect according to the highest international
standards. There cannot be peace in Bosnia and

 

Herzegovina without a full restoration of human rights,
which have been repeatedly and tragically violated in the
last few years.

Reconstruction and development are another priority
for the consolidation of peace and for the future of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. These are areas in which the European
Union is called on to play a guiding role, and in which
Italy is ready to make a generous and qualified
contribution. The meeting on development, organized in
Rome last October, demonstrates our commitment to this
key aspect of the peace process.

Today's resolution also establishes the modalities for
the expiration of the mandate of the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR). UNPROFOR has played
an essential role in recent years, often with inadequate
means. International public opinion has not always given it
proper recognition. We have heard uncharitable and often
unjust criticisms. For my part, I wish to pay tribute to the
thousands of people who performed their duties in
extremely difficult conditions, particularly the many
members of UNPROFOR who lost their lives or who
suffered serious injuries - beginning with the brave French
soldiers who paid the highest price of all. The prospects for
peace that seem to be unfolding these days are also the
legacy of their dedication and the sacrifice of their lives.

Today's resolution continues a process that has
recently gone through important stages: the initialling of the
Dayton Peace Agreement; the London Conference, which
created a new institutional framework for the
implementation of the Agreement, with a Peace
Implementation Council and its Steering Board; the Paris
Peace Conference, where the Agreement was signed
yesterday, and where progress was made towards the
mutual recognition of the successor States of the former
Yugoslavia. In the View of Italy, such recognition remains
a basic feature of a comprehensive political solution to the
conflicts in the former Yugoslavia.
Other important appointments await us in the future:
the meeting of aid donors in Brussels, scheduled for 20 to
21 December; the meeting in Bonn, for the opening of
negotiations on regional stabilization and on the reduction
of weapons; the first meeting of the Peace Implementation
Council, which Italy will host next June. The last of these
will be an important occasion for a first verification of the
progress in implementation of the peace plan and of the
prospects for reconstruction.

 

This process will in all likelihood be long, difficult
and complex. It will not be easy to heal the wounds of
four years of fighting or to forget the untold misery, the
devastating violence and the long suffering of war. But
the process has begun, and today's resolution constitutes
one of its essential moments. We are convinced that it
will ultimately lead to the normalization of life in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and to the peaceful coexistence of
communities that have lived side by side in the same
territory for centuries. Having exacerbated their
differences, they have now come to the time to rediscover
and appreciate the far greater importance of what they
have in common, of what must unite them.

For Italy, Bosnia is a neighbour and a friend, whose
tragedy has deeply moved our public opinion. It is a
country that can rise again - that will rise again -
forget the past and move towards a better future. This is
the message that the Italian delegation would like to
convey to the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, through
their representative at the United Nations, Ambassador
Ivan Misic'.

