Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan voted in favour
of resolution 1548 (2004), which authorizes an
extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) for six
months. However, we supported the resolution with
serious reservations.

This resolution was supposed to be a proposal for
a technical extension of UNFICYP for a short period of
time that would enable the Secretary-General and the
Security Council to undertake a review of its mandate,
force size and concept of operations in the light of the
new circumstances. That is natural following the recent
rejection of the Secretary-General's compromise plan
for a comprehensive Cyprus settlement and bearing in
mind the positions of the concerned parties. Thus, in
our view, UNFICYP's mandate should have been
extended for only three months to enable that review to
take place, rather than for the six months endorsed in
the resolution.

Moreover, the inclusion of operative paragraph 3
in the resolution changed it from a procedural to a
substantive proposition. The reference in this
paragraph could have been balanced by inclusion of
language that was suggested by another delegation in
our informal consultations. The resolution also should
have incorporated a reference to the report of the
Secretary-General on his good-offices mission, which
was introduced by his Special Adviser, Mr. Alvaro de
Soto, on 8 June.

In April this year, after decades of hostility on the
island, the referendums on the Secretary-General's plan
for the reunification of Cyprus offered the hope for a
permanent settlement of the Cyprus problem.
Unfortunately, the plan was rejected by the Greek
Cypriot side, while it was accepted by the Turkish
Cypriot side.

The Secretary-General considers it a historic
opportunity that has been missed. That view is Widely
shared by the international community. The Secretary-
General believes that the rejection of his plan is a
major setback which will cast a dark shadow of
uncertainty over the implementation of a number of
issues so dear to the hearts of so many Cypriots,
including the question of the reunification of the
island.

In paragraph 83 of the report on his good-offices
mission, the Secretary-General states:

"Benefits for the Greek Cypriots, which have
been sought for decades - including the
reunification of Cyprus, the return of a large
swathe of territory, the return of most displaced
persons to their homes the withdrawal of all
troops not permitted by international treaties
have been forgone. The result is the maintenance
of the status quo - a status quo deemed
unacceptable by the Security Council."

In paragraph 93 of the report, the Secretary-
General said:
"I would hope they [the members of the Council]
can give a strong lead to all States to cooperate
both bilaterally and in international bodies to
eliminate unnecessary restrictions and barriers
that have the effect of isolating the Turkish
Cypriots and impeding their development,
deeming such a move as consistent with Security
Council resolutions 541 (1983) and 550 (l984)."

The Security Council will, we hope, soon endorse
this recommendation of the Secretary-General and urge
actions by the international community to take concrete
steps to end the economic isolation of the Turkish
Cypriot community, which has been penalized for so
many years and is now unable to enjoy the benefits of
European Union membership accorded to their Greek
Cypriot compatriots.

In the circumstances, and pending the Council's
decision on the Secretary-General's good-offices
report, the Security Council should have taken a
position that was more even-handed in the resolution
we adopted today. A provision to welcome the
Secretary-General's good-offices report would have
been one way to indicate such even-handedness.
Unfortunately, even this suggestion was not
accommodated in the text.

We can only hope that the resolution we have just
adopted will not prove to be counterproductive and that
it will not generate a further sense of injustice among
the Turkish Cypriot community. The Security Council
should act to strengthen the hand of the Secretary-
General in any future move to implement his plan and
help to bring us closer to the resolution of the Cyprus
issue on the basis of a bicommunal, bizonal federation
reflecting the wishes and interests of both the Greek
and the Turkish Cypriot communities.
