Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
listened attentively to the briefings delivered by the
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Miroslav Jenea, and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Filippo Grandi, and
noted their positive assessment of the progress achieved
in Rakhine state and the efforts made by Myanmar and
Bangladesh. Those undertakings should be sufficiently
affirmed. China is a friendly neighbour of Myanmar
and Bangladesh. We attach great importance to the
situation in Rakhine state and have provided emergency
humanitarian relief for the displaced persons. At the
same time, we have actively worked with both parties
to push for dialogue and consultations with a view to
finding a solution.

Since last November, the Foreign Minister of China,
Mr. Wang Yi, visited Bangladesh and Myanmar and
proposed a three-phase approach for the solution of the
Rakhine state issue. It has been unanimously endorsed
by Myanmar and Bangladesh. It pleases us to see that
some of the approaches are being implemented. The
goal of the first phase, which is to cease hostilities on
the ground and restore stability and order, has basically
been achieved. The goal of the second phase is to seek
viable measures to find a solution to the problem through
communication and consultations by both parties and is
also being pushed forward. The third phase is to adopt
measures to resolve the root causes of poverty through
development. I am confident that this goal can soon be
achieved through the efforts of Myanmar to alleviate
poverty in Rakhine state, along with the vigorous
support of the international community.

The problem in Myanmar's Rakhine state has a
complex historical, ethnic and religious background. It
cannot be solved overnight. At present, the situation on
the ground has been visibly eased. Humanitarian relief
operations have been actively carried out. Myanmar
and Bangladesh have maintained dialogue and
consultations, held joint working group meetings on
repatriation and worked with United Nations agencies.

The Rakhine Advisory Commission visited
Myanmar recently and affirmed Myanmar's efforts to
implement recommendations contained in its report.
Recently, Myanmar invited foreign missions and media
to Myanmar to visit the affected areas in Rakhine state.
China appreciates Myanmar and Bangladesh for those
efforts. China has noted that the process ofrepatriation of
the displaced by Myanmar and Bangladesh has recently
been delayed. We hope that the international community
can objectively observe the difficulties and challenges
encountered by the Governments of Myanmar and
Bangladesh, remain patient and provide support and
assistance. We also hope it will encourage both parties,
Myanmar and Bangladesh, to appropriately solve the
problems that emerged in the process of implementing
their agreement through dialogue and consultations so
as to repatriate the displaced at an early date.

The Security Council adopted a presidential
statement in November 2017 (S/PRST/2017/22) on
Rakhine state.

At the moment, the situation in Rakhine state is
generally stable. China has consistently maintained that
the appropriate way to resolve the issue of Rakhine state
is through bilateral efforts by Myanmar and Bangladesh.
Only when they reach a settlement that is acceptable to
the countries concerned will the agreement be capable
of being implemented and sustained and of obtaining
the understanding and support of every sector in those
countries. China hopes that Myanmar and Bangladesh
will continue to take appropriate steps and that the
Security Council and the international community will
play a constructive role in the process.

Lastly, I would like to reaffirm my willingness to
work with all the parties to actively advance efforts
aimed at helping to restore order and achieve stability
and sustained development in Rakhine state.

