The President: I will now make a statement in
my national capacity.

I would like to join my colleagues in
congratulating Foreign Minister Bakoyannis for her
very valuable briefing to the Council this morning. We
admire her tireless efforts as Chairperson in leading the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) to ensure security not only in Europe but in
the broader Eurasian region. Japan highly appreciates
the Greek chairmanship this year and welcomes the
recent agreement to extend the mandate of the OSCE
Mission to Georgia, one of the high priorities of the
OSCE's agenda.

Peace and security are indivisible geographically.

We need global solutions to global issues. Regional

organizations such as the OSCE can make great

contributions to the global work undertaken by the
United Nations.

Japan, as a partner country of the OSCE, shares
fundamental values of peace and stability, sustainable
development and human rights and has been actively
participating in a wide range of OSCE activities for
many years. We have exchanged knowledge and
experience with the OSCE by sending experts and
officials to field operations, participating in election
monitoring missions and providing financial support
for seminars and other activities. Through that long-
term cooperation with the OSCE, Japan finds it
beneficial to tackle together a wide range of global
problems with member countries of the OSCE.

First, Japan has actively collaborated in assisting
the democratization process through OSCE election
monitoring missions. We sent a significant number of
monitors, and made financial contributions to election
support in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Albania and
Kosovo. Last year, we took part in OSCE election
monitoring missions in Armenia, Georgia and Belarus.

Secondly, Afghanistan is one of the areas to
which both Japan and OSCE attach great importance.
Japan intends to contribute to the OSCE Afghan border
security reinforcement project. Japan will extend the
utmost support to stabilization and reconstruction,
especially as the presidential election is scheduled for
this year, which is an important milestone in the State-
building of the country.

Thirdly, Japan believes that OSCE's
comprehensive, cross-dimensional and integrated
approach to security could be effectively addressed by
promoting the concept of human security. Japan and
OSCE have closely cooperated on issues of human
security in the areas of refugee assistance, internally
displaced persons, ethnic reconciliation, human
trafficking and environmental degradation through
various activities, including workshops and conferences.

We are convinced that the human security
approach will provide a strong focus on the activities
of OSCE. As stated in the concept paper proposed by
the Greek chairmanship, it will create a model case of
symmetry, synergy and strategy. We believe that the
Greek chairmanship, having organized an international
conference on human security and climate change last
year, will continue to promote such an approach.

In conclusion, in June this year it was Japan's
turn to host the annual OSCE-Asian Partners
Conference in Tokyo. We would like to share our views
and experience, together with our fellow Asian partners
of OSCE - the Republic of Korea, Thailand,
Afghanistan and Mongolia - in order to deepen
cooperation with OSCE. I should like to reaffirm
Japan's close collaboration with OSCE.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The representative of France has asked for the
floor to make a further statement.

