The Secretary-General: I thank the Russian
Federation presidency for convening this debate at a
crucial juncture for the people of the Middle East and
North Africa.

The region faces profound divisions, troubling
currents and a tragic shredding of its diverse religious,
ethnic and cultural fabric. Decades-old conflicts,
together with new ones, as well as deep-rooted social
grievances, a shrinking of democratic space and the
emergence of terrorism and new forms of violent
extremism are undermining peace, sustainable
development and human rights. The territorial integrity
of countries like Syria, Yemen and Libya is under
threat. Millions of people have been forcibly displaced
from their homes. The impacts of this instability have
spread to neighbours and beyond.

In addressing these challenges, we would all do
well to recall the series of Arab Human Development
Reports issued by the United Nations Development
Programme, starting in 2002. Those studies identified
significant deficits in education, basic freedoms and
empowerment, especially among the region's women
and young people. Among the findings of the first
report, in 2002, was:

"Political participation in Arab countries
remains weak, as manifested in the lack of genuine
representative democracy and restrictions on
liberties. At the same time, people's aspirations
for more freedom and greater participation in
decision-making have grown, fueled by rising
incomes, education, and information flows.
The mismatch between aspirations and their
fulfilment has in some cases led to alienation
and its offspring - apathy and discontent.
Remedying this state of affairs must be a priority
for national leaderships."

Many such shortfalls continue to bedevil societies
across the region. Let us also recognize that many
of today's problems are being compounded by the
legacy of the past, including the colonial era and the
consequences of the First World War, notably the
dissolution of the Ottoman Empire. The well-known
peace to end all peace did, unfortunately, achieve
that aim.

It was in this broad context that the Arab Spring
reverberated widely as a call for inclusion, opportunity
and the opening of political space. Here, I would like
to pay tribute to the people of Tunisia, where the call
began. They have achieved considerable progress
in consolidating their young democracy, including
through a new constitution and a peaceful transition
of power.

But the Tunisia promise did not materialize
everywhere in the region. Today, in a region once home
to one of history's greatest flowerings of culture and
coexistence, we see many fault lines at work, old and new,
crossing each other and generating enormous volatility.
These include the Israeli-Palestinian wound, resurgent
Cold War-like rivalries, the Sunni-Shia divide, ethnic
schisms and other political confrontations. Economic
and social opportunities are also clearly insufficient.
As such difficulties rise, trust in institutions declines.
Societies fracture along ethnic or religious lines, which
are being manipulated for political advantage. At times,
foreign interference has exacerbated this disunity, with
destabilizing effects. And the risk of further downward
spirals is sky high.

Our most pressing peace and security challenges
in the Middle East are a clear reflection of the
rifts, pressures, neglect and long-term trends that
have brought us to today's crossroads. The Israeli-
Palestinian conflict remains central to the Middle
Eastern quagmire. Achieving a comprehensive, just
and lasting two-State solution that allows Palestinians
and Israelis to live side-by-side in peace, within secure
and recognized borders, is essential to security and
stability in the entire region. The recent tensions and
violence in Gaza are a reminder of the fragility of the
present situation.

International support is critical to creating an
environment conducive to launching meaningful direct
negotiations between the two parties. I remain deeply
committed to supporting efforts towards this end. Later
today, I will preside over a pledging conference to
address severe funding gaps facing the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East.

In Syria, civilians have borne a litany of atrocities
for more than seven years of conflict: sieges, starvation,
indiscriminate attacks, the use of chemical weapons,
exile and forced displacement, sexual violence, torture,
detention and enforced disappearances. Syria has also

become a battleground for proxy wars among regional
and international actors. Violence is entrenched amid a
fractured political landscape and a multiplicity of armed
groups. In the absence of trusted State institutions,
many Syrians have fallen back on religious and tribal
identities. I continue to call on the parties to the
conflict to engage meaningfully with my Special Envoy
for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, in the United Nations-
facilitated political process in Geneva. I urge progress
in the establishment of the constitutional committee.

Resolution 2254 (2015) remains the only
internationally agreed avenue for a credible and
sustainable end to the conflict. More than ever, our
aim is to see a united and democratic Syria, to avoid
irreparable sectarianism, to ensure full respect for
Syria's sovereignty and territorial integrity, and
to enable the Syrian people to freely decide on the
country's future.

Yemen is suffering a prolonged and devastating
conflict with clear regional dimensions. My Special
Envoy for Yemen, Martin Griffiths, has been actively
engaged in order to avoid an escalation that could have
dramatic humanitarian consequences. One week ago,
he presented to the Council elements of a negotiation
framework that he has been discussing with various
interlocutors inside Yemen and in the region. Our hope
is that this framework would allow for a resumption
of badly needed political negotiations to put an end to
the conflict.

In Gaza, Syria and Yemen, the international
community must remain mobilized in order to ensure
a strong humanitarian response to millions of people
in dire need.

In Libya, the United Nations is committed to
supporting national armed conflicttors to find a peaceful
resolution to the crisis. The national conference process,
organized as part of the United Nations Action Plan, is
delivering a clear message that Libyans are longing for
an end to the conflict and an end to the transition period.
All stakeholders must continue lending their support
to my Special Representative Ghassan Salame' as he
leads the political process. Political success in Libya
will also hopefully allow the country to play its role in
addressing the dramatic plight of migrants and refugees
who have been suffering so much in attempting to cross
the Mediterranean.

In the past few years, we have witnessed numerous
examples of Iraq's resilience, including overcoming
the risk of fragmentation and achieving victory over
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Iraq's
endurance as a stable federal State is a testament
to the enormous sacrifices of Iraqi people from all
communities. I strongly hope that the Iraqi institutions
will be able to ensure an adequate conclusion of the
electoral process in a way that fully respects the will of
the Iraqi people. In this context, the reconstruction of
areas destroyed in the retaking of territory from ISIL is
a priority, as is the safe, dignified and voluntary return
of Iraq's displaced people to their homes, including
those from religious minorities. It is also important to
complement such efforts by ensuring that those who
committed atrocity crimes are held accountable for their
actions, in accordance with international standards.

Let us remember that what look like religious
conflicts are normally the product of political or
geostrategic manipulation, or proxies for other
antagonisms. There are endless examples of different
religious groups living together peacefully for
centuries, despite their differences. Today's artificial
divides therefore can and must be overcome, based on
respect for the independence and territorial integrity of
the countries concerned.

In this context, it is important to value the experience
of respect for diversity that Lebanon today represents.
In Lebanon, parliamentary elections - the first since
2009 - were held peacefully in May, underscoring the
country's democratic tradition. We look forward to the
formation of the new Government to further strengthen
State institutions, promote structural reforms and
implement the dissociation policy. Heightened regional
tensions could threaten Lebanon's stability, including
at the Blue Line. Steadfast international efforts remain
critical in supporting Lebanon in consolidating State
authority, safeguarding the country from regional
tensions and hosting refugees until durable solutions
are found, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

I remain particularly concerned at the risks of
destabilization around the Gulf. That is why I have
always supported the efforts of the Kuwaiti mediation
to overcome divisions among Arab States in the area.
On the other hand, it is important to preserve the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, which should remain a
valuable element of peace and security, independent of
the wider discussion about the role of Iran in the region.
During the Cold War, ideological rivals still found
ways to talk and cooperate despite their deep divides,
for example through the Helsinki process. I do not see
why the countries of the region cannot find a similar
platform to come together, drawing experience from
one another and enhancing opportunities for possible
political, environmental, socioeconomic or security
forms of cooperation.

Regional and subregional organizations also have
a key role to play in supporting preventive diplomacy,
mediation and confidence-building. The region needs
to ensure the integrity of the State, its governance
systems and the equal application of the rule of law
protecting all individuals. Majorities should not feel
the existential threat of fragmentation, and minorities
should not feel the threat of oppression and exile. And
everyone, everywhere, should enjoy the right to live in
dignity, freedom and peace. I call on the members ofthe
Security Council to reach the much-needed consensus
and to act with one strong voice.

