Ms. Gaudey (Ethiopia): Allow me to start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate on peacebuilding in Africa in connection
with the agenda item "Peacebuilding and sustainable
peace". For obvious reasons, this agenda item is
critical to the African continent. Our region is one of
the most conflict-affected continents in the world and
a place where the United Nations deploys the highest
percentage of its peacekeepers. Over 70 per cent of the
Security Council's agenda items concern Africa and
all the countries on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission are African.
My special thanks goes to Her Excellency
Ms. Amina Mohammed and His Excellency Mr. Smail
Chergui for taking part in this important meeting and
for the briefings that they presented so eloquently. My
delegation fully endorses those statements. Let me also
join others in thanking the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing.

It is safe to say that the 2015 review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture, which led to the
adoption on 27 April of the identical General Assembly
resolution 70/262 and Security Council resolution
2282 (2016) on the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, was a significant achievement. The next
big challenge is going to be sustaining and further
expanding that political momentum and implementing
the review's key recommendations, especially those
parts that pertain to Africa.

The primary step for translating the words of the
resolutions into action involves strong partnerships
and coordination. In order to sustain peace in Africa,
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) should build
stronger links with the African Union and the
subregional organizations and enable them to exercise
their comparative advantages and play complementary
roles in a coherent manner. In that regard, the United
Nations has to devise its peacebuilding strategies in
a manner that supports and complements Africa's
own peacebuilding efforts such as the Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development Framework and the
African Solidarity Initiative. The African Union and
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture have
much to learn and benefit from each other's approaches
and experience, and from seeking greater synergy,
cooperation and complementarity. At this juncture, we
would like to add our support for the proposal made by
Mr. Chergui for the Peacebuilding Commission and the
African Union Commission to develop a 10-year joint
strategy to enhance the peace dividends in Africa.

Secondly, the mindset that equates peacebuilding
with a mere post-conflict process has to change for
good. Sustaining peace requires the determination to
address the root causes of conflicts. It is critical that
we adopt comprehensive and integrated approaches that
tackle the challenges of peace, security, human rights,
good governance and development in a holistic manner.
The United Nations engagement with the continent
should be more strategic and focus on activities that
are essential for sustainable development and poverty
eradication. We need to strengthen the links between
United Nations peacebuilding efforts, the African
Union's Agenda 2063, and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), as they provide blueprints for addressing root
causes and drivers of violent conflict.

Whatever we profess will achieve no significant
result unless we are ready to implement what we say
and address the obstacles facing efforts to ensure
predictable and sustained funding for peacebuilding
activities. Peacebuilding efforts in Africa have
been significantly hindered by the ad hoc nature of
financing, which is often directed towards emergency
responses. Therefore, addressing the unpredictability
and inadequacy of peacebuilding funds and resources
is the main task, and our concerted efforts are required
to prevent the outbreak, escalation and recurrence of
conflict in Africa.

In that regard, we look forward to the Secretary-
General's report to the General Assembly at its next
session on options to increase, restructure and better
prioritize funding allocated to peacebuilding activities,
including through assessed contributions. We also must
look into other means of funding, including through
cooperation with multilateral financial institutions,
such as the World Bank and the African Development
Bank, engagement with the private sector, and
maximizing effective domestic resource mobilization
capacity.

Let me conclude by urging Member States to
sustain and increase the political momentum gained and
to make every effort to ensure lasting peace in Africa.
Strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union is vital in that regard.
Let us, therefore, strategize our peacebuilding efforts
in Africa alongside the Post-Conflict Reconstruction
and Development Framework; the African Solidarity
Initiative; African Union's goal of Silencing the Guns
initiative for a conflict-free Africa by 2020; the African
Peace and Security Architecture 2016-2020 Roadmap;
the African Union's Agenda 2063; and the 2030
Sustainable Development Goals.

