Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the United Nations Conference on
International Organization in San Francisco, where the
Charter of the United Nations was drafted, and whose
seventy-fifth anniversary we will mark next year, one
of the key areas of disagreement was the question of
the scope of the use of the right of veto and whether
it should be conditional or unconditional. At the time,
the Soviet Union was in favour of an unconditional
veto applicable to all issues discussed by the Security
Council, including proposals for issues to be discussed.
At the time, the delegations of the United States, the
United Kingdom, France and other countries objected to
the Soviet Union's approach. Their argument ultimately
prevailed, and today in the Security Council when a
country objects to a proposed subject for discussion,
the permanent members do not exercise the veto but
vote on it as a procedural issue. At the time of the San
Francisco Conference, those delegations' reason for
their position was that the unconditional use of the right
to veto would be a violation of freedom of speech. Today
we were surprised to see the French delegation take the
position of the Soviet Union during the drafting of the
Charter in San Francisco by casting doubt on the briefer
whom we invited to brief us on the situation in Syria.

Since Council members have persistently asked us
about the state of affairs on the ground, we have tried
to enable them to hear about it first-hand. Through
all the years of this conflict, no one has done more to
normalize the situation on the ground in Syria than the
Russian Reconciliation Centre. I would like to draw your
attention, Mr. President, to the fact that our delegation
has never questioned any of the briefers proposed by

the delegations that have expressed doubts today, but
if that is the game they want to play, we are prepared
to go with it in future. Nonetheless, I still suggest that
delegations listen to our representative, because he can
shed light on many questions that are of interest to them
as well.

