Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this meeting and
the valuable information provided by Assistant
Secretary-General Rosemary Di Carlo. We also
thank Ambassadors Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve, as
Facilitator of the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), and Olof Skoog, representing the European
Union, for their briefings.

In line with its foreign policy objectives regarding
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
Peru attaches high priority to compliance with
resolution 2231 (2015), whereby the Council endorsed
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). We
believe that that instrument, and the follow-up and
monitoring regime it provides for, reflect the values of
multilateralism and diplomacy in peacefully resolving
acute international disputes or situations of high
tension. The JCPOA should therefore be preserved.
We are following the implementation of the plan with
particular attention, both in the Security Council and
in the Board of Governors of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). With regard to the latter, we
take note of the comprehensive report submitted by its
Director General.

Peru, like other Members of the United Nations,
regrets the withdrawal of the United States from the
plan, the reimposition of national sanctions and the
application of various actions that hinder the capacity of
the parties to implement it in its entirety. We also deplore
the measures that Iran has taken in response since the
middle of this year, aimed at reducing its commitments
under the JCPOA. We urge the Iranian authorities
to reverse these measures, to exercise restraint and
moderation, and to prioritize diplomatic channels.

To this end, we must stress the crucial supporting
role that IAEA plays in the implementation of the plan.
We particularly highlight its rigorous and impartial
work, and the value of its comprehensive reports on
its verification and monitoring activities in Iran. We
also consider it vital that the Council remain united
in its responsibility to ensure the full validity and
implementation of the JCPOA and resolution 2231
(2015), so as to preserve the non-proliferation regime
and maintain international peace and security.

Finally, given the delicate situation in the
Persian Gulf, we join calls on the leaders of the
main stakeholders involved to show concrete signs
of moderation, commitment to peace and respect for
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.

