For weeks the Security Council has struggled to come to terms with the efforts of two of its members to end cross-border humanitarian aid to the Syrian people. Good faith negotiations were met with intransigence and contempt, and draft resolutions repeatedly faced inexplicable veto. But today the Council showed that resolve and unity is a powerful combination. Today the Security Council worked on behalf of the very people the Charter of the United Nations set out to protect. The United States thanks co-penholders Belgium and Germany for their responsible stewardship of this negotiation and once again thanks all of Council members who stood up for what was right. Today we saved lives. Let us not be mistaken: resolution 2533 (2020) is not what the United States and a majority of the Council fought for over the course of the past six weeks - or, indeed, for the past six months. This resolution is also not what the United Nations, Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and dozens of non-governmental organizations operating in Syria have repeatedly urged the Council to do. But the United States and the majority of the Council remained determined through nine rounds of voting this week to ensure that United Nations aid convoys, filled with food, vaccines and other humanitarian items, will continue to cross into Syria from Turkey for another year. We have given reassurance and hope to millions of Syrian civilians who have relied on the United Nations aid mechanism since cross- border operations started in 2014. To be clear, today's outcome leaves us sickened and outraged at the loss of the Bab Al-Salam and Al-Yarubiyah border crossings. Behind those locked gates are millions of women, children and men who believed that the world had heard their pleas. Their health and welfare are now at great risk. Yet there is no question that the Council's authorization of cross-border humanitarian access through Bab Al-Hawa for 12 months is a victory in the light of the Russian Federation and the People's Republic of China's willingness to use their veto to compel a dramatic reduction in humanitarian assistance. This solemn victory must not end our struggle to address the mounting human needs in Syria - that fight is far from over. We fully recognize that the Al-Assad regime has not yet demonstrated that it is ready to end the war against the Syrian people. Until the Al-Assad regime and its backers take the necessary and irreversible steps to implement the political solution necessary to end this conflict, as outlined in resolution 2254 (2015), the United States and our allies will stand with the Syrian people to ensure that the humanitarian aid they deserve reaches everyone in need. We will never back down, we will always have hope for their future and we will continue to stand with them.
