Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me first to express our sincere thanks to President
Michelle Bachelet Jeria of Chile for presiding over
today's Security Council meeting. We also express
appreciation for the initiative to hold this important
meeting on inclusive development for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Without any
doubt, a close correlation exists between the pillars
of development and of peace and security. So long as
conflicts continue to pose major obstacles and there is
no genuine, comprehensive development, it will be very
difficult to maintain peace and security in States and
communities.

I also note that today's discussion takes on added
value given that it is happening concurrently with
other important events. First, there is the launching
of the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture and the assessment of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions by the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations, both of
which are among the most important tools of the United
Nations in maintaining peace and security, including in
countries emerging from conflict and in preventing the
recurrence of violence.

This year will also witness the convening of
three important intergovernmental negotiations,
the third International Conference on Financing for
Development, to be held in July, the intergovernmental
negotiations on the post-2015 development agenda, the
first meeting of which was held today, and, finally, the
twenty-first session of the Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, which will address agreement on an
international decision by December. Those three events
form the framework of international cooperation in the
coming 15 years; they will build on prior achievements,
including the Millennium Development Goals, and
adopt a totally new agenda on sustainable development.

The high cost of conflict - including material
and resource losses and losses of human life, waves
of refugees and displaced persons and the generation
of heinous humanitarian situations - must prompt us
to adopt a new form of preventive diplomacy aimed at
addressing the root causes of conflict and preventing
its emergence in the first place. Such efforts must be
based on prevention. The most important pillars in that
regard are promoting inclusive development on behalf
of all of society, fostering the principles of democracy
and the rule of law and eliminating poverty and
marginalization, which are also among the root causes
of many conflicts. Allow me to address some points in
that context.

First, in accordance with international instruments,
as well as Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2171 (2014), States have the primary
responsibility for preventing conflicts and protecting
civilians. Egypt therefore underscores the need to
respect national priorities as identified by national
authorities and according to considerations of national
sovereignty, with the participation of political parties
and civilian society in drafting national strategies aimed
at achieving comprehensive development and building
peace, in order to guarantee national ownership of the
strategies in a manner conducive to ensuring social
stability and peace.

Secondly, peace and sustainable development
cannot be achieved without the participation of
all sectors of society, particularly women and
youth, not only in maintaining peace but also in
institution-building, political transformation processes
and the implementation of development strategies.
In that context, I would emphasize the importance of
progress in the implementation of Security Council
resolutions, particularly resolution 1325 (2000).

Thirdly, the discussion on building inclusive
societies would not be complete without discussing
issues pertaining to immigrants, in particular youth,
and the need for programmes and strategies to assist
them in areas including providing education, work and
training, so as to ensure their full integration within
the social, cultural and economic fabric. That would
enable them not only to positively contribute to the
development of society, but also in becoming channels
for communicating with their societies of origin.

F ourthly, inclusive and comprehensive development
is not only necessary in achieving stability and
preventing the recurrence of violence, but it is also
important in addressing cross-boundary security
threats, which are considered to be among the major
challenges to international peace and security. In that
regard, I would like to point out the fact that poverty,
marginalization and a lack of education and work
opportunities, particularly among youth, as well as
ongoing foreign occupation, widespread racism and
the activities of organized crime figures, are among
the major elements contributing to an environment
conducive to extremism and terrorism, from which the
world has been suffering, as recently witnessed.

Finally, we cannot fully consider the idea
of development without addressing the broader
framework, both regionally and internationally. It is
therefore important to support regional cooperation and
development initiatives, including the New Partnership
for Africa's Development, which serves as a continental
work programme to promote good governance,
eliminate poverty and achieve development in Africa.
That programme is African-owned and aligned with
strategies designed in Africa.

We must establish the foundation for a new and
more just world economic order, as well as reform
the governance structures of the system to allow
developing countries to draft economic policies. That
must lead to achieving higher growth rates, increasing
productivity, using modern technology and creating
a balance between the use of natural resources and
the requirements of sustainable development while
preserving the environment. Those are all issues
that must be discussed while drafting the post-2015
development agenda.

The close correlation between the three pillars
of the United Nations system - peace and security,
development and human rights - cannot be ignored.
Given that each has its own specificities, they must be
addressed individually. Furthermore, it is important
to avoid burdening the Security Council with tasks
lying outside its mandate according to the Charter of
the United Nations. We would not like to end up with
a Council that interferes with or affects the rules or
mandates of other bodies. We hope that the Council's
initiative will not serve as a precedent leading to the
weakening of other international organizations.

