Mr. Koncke (Uruguay): My delegation would like to
congratulate the New Zealand delegation and especially
His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs for
the remarkable work done in the month of July while
serving as President of the Security Council. We would
like to highlight the firm commitment demonstrated by
you, Mr. President, and by your country to the values
and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. We would also like to commend the opportune
choices made in regard to the small island developing
States (SIDS) as well as other challenges undertaken
that we will all remember.

(spoke in Spanish)

At the outset, I would again like to commend you
for convening this open debate on such an important
topic as that of the peace and security challenges facing
small island developing States (SIDS). I also wish to
thank the Secretary-General, the Prime Minister of
Samoa, the Prime Minister of Jamaica and the Minister
of Finance of the Seychelles for their briefings.

At the United Nations Conference on Environment
and Development, held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992,
the international community recognized the unique
vulnerabilities of SIDS in terms of their small size,
limited resources, geographic dispersion, isolation
from markets and dependence on international trade,
among many other factors. Those vulnerabilities pose
significant challenges not only for the sustainable
development of SIDS but also because they often
threaten the very existence of those countries through
the impact of climate change.
My country had the honour of participating in the
Third International Conference on SIDS, held in Samoa
in September 2014, where the issue of sustainable
development was discussed at length. As stated in the
concept note prepared for this open debate (S/2015/543, annex), the Conference Outcome document also
reaffirmed the importance of the issue of peace and
security for SIDS.

Today, with complex challenges like the current
ones, no clear boundaries exist between the agendas
of health, human rights, environmental protection,
economic development and maintaining international
peace and security. Issues such as piracy, the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, including illegal
fishing and drug trafficking, and other activities of
global organized crime, pose serious threats to the
peace and security of SIDS. Others take advantage of
their inherent vulnerabilities, with potential dangerous
effects on international peace and security, which
is why the Council has included this topic of grave
concern on its agenda.

The increasing impact of climate change and
natural disasters on small island developing States and
on the efforts of those countries to achieve sustainable
development is an undeniable reality. Given that reality,
it is essential that the entire international community
intensify its efforts and recognize the responsibilities
incumbent upon it in every forum, particularly within
the principal bodies of the United Nations, such as the
Council.

Our region, Latin America and the Caribbean,
has been actively involved in seeking a solution to the
problem, not only because it directly affects countries
in the region, that is the Caribbean States, which are
SIDS and advocate on the issue, but also through the
calling we have in the region for peace and solidarity.
We have seen how one small island developing State in
the region faces multiple challenges. I am referring to
the case of Haiti, where the international community
and the region in particular have made enormous
efforts towards its stabilization. Those efforts continue,
although we have not yet achieved the desired result,
but we do see progress.

That is why we believe that the special needs of
SIDS must be borne in mind in all forums and attended
to in some specific ones, and that substantive solutions
to the structural problems that are the causes of the
problem must be found.

Finally, my delegation would like to highlight
the contribution of the SIDS to the international
community's efforts to maintain international peace
and security, particularly in conflict mediation, and
their contribution to peacekeeping operations with
nearly 700 Blue Helmets. Uruguay, as a country that
is also truly committed to the peacekeeping system,
salutes the efforts and commitment to peace that those
countries have demonstrated.

Similarly, Uruguay, as a candidate to the Security
Council for the 2016-2017 biennium, feels a profound
commitment to the SIDS. In that sense, if elected,
Uruguay is committed to providing the necessary
support to those issues that require the complete
involvement of the international community. In that
regard, we hope to help.

