Mr. Gone (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Iwould
like to congratulate the Uruguayan presidency of the
Security Council on organizing this high-level public
debate on the issue of the protection of civilians and
medical care in conflict. I also congratulate Secretary-
General Mr. Antonio Guterres, the Vice-President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Deputy Executive Director of Human Rights Watch for
their briefings. Their various reports, which are very
exhaustive and based on observations from the field,
shed light for us without reservation and challenge our
collective conscience on the need to join our efforts to
strengthen the protection of vulnerable people and of
those who are entitled to special protection.

My delegation would also like to take the
opportunity that today's debate affords to pay tribute
to the commitment of humanitarian actors, especially
those who have paid with their lives in performing
their duties.

In spite of the fact that international humanitarian
law obliges us to distinguish between civilians and
combatants and to respect and protect medical and
humanitarian personnel and their equipment and
facilities, it is clear that, far from diminishing, efforts
to hinder humanitarian action, attack medical personnel
physically and destroy hospitals are still continuing
and are often accompanied by unspeakable atrocities.
As many speakers before me have pointed out, these
represent serious violations of humanitarian law that
remind us that it is more urgent than ever to mobilize
the international community and to act, including
through coercion.

With its adoption a year ago of resolution 2286
(2016), the Security Council marked an important
stage in the readiness of the United Nations and the
international community to meet the challenge of
protecting medical personnel and infrastructure in
areas affected by conflict. My delegation welcomes that
progress and has also noted with interest the Secretary-
General's recommendations for measures that should
be taken in that regard. From now on, the Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols, resolutions
1894 (2009) and 2286 (2016), along with previous
resolutions and the many multilateral instruments that
have been adopted to date, will provide us with solid
benchmarks for effectively preventing and ending any
violations of humanitarian, human rights or refugee law.

In my delegation's view, the major challenge
continues to be ensuring that States take on board and
implement these various documents effectively. In
that context, my delegation would like to make some
recommendations. The first is that we should strengthen
the promotion of international humanitarian law. More
often than not, many of the violations committed in
conflict situations occur out of the total ignorance of
the parties involved of their obligations. We believe
that strengthening the promotion of humanitarian law
could considerably reduce the frequency and extent
of such violations. That involves training defence and
security forces in the basic principles of international
humanitarian law, with particular emphasis on
protecting civilians and medical personnel in conflict-
affected areas. That has been a goal of the security-
sector reform that Cote d'Ivoire has been conducting
since the end of the 2011 post-election crisis, with the
valuable support of the United Nations system and
bilateral partners. The challenge has been to transform
the army into a body imbued with the basic principles of
humanitarian law and focused on serving development
and the protection of civilians. The same objective
guides the Ivorian authorities in training contingents
for United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Our second challenge is aligning national legislation
with international legal norms related to preventing and
ending violations of humanitarian law. It is impossible
to effectively protect civilians and medical personnel
and infrastructure without aligning national legislation
with international norms. States must therefore acquire
the necessary capacity to enable them to deal with all
cases of violations of international humanitarian law
in accordance with internationally recognized and
accepted legal standards.

Recognizing the major instruments governing the
area, de facto and de jure, continues to be one of the
basic steps in achieving that. To that end, my country,
which considers international law extremely important,
is party to the principal international instruments in
the areas of international humanitarian law and human
rights, including the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War and its
Additional Protocols I and II, the Convention Relating
to the Status ofRefugees, the African Union Convention
for the Protection and Assistance ofInternally Displaced
Persons in Africa, and the Rome Statute.

The third and last challenge is combating impunity.
Many speakers in today's debate have emphasized that
the abuses and crimes committed against humanitarian
workers have for the most part gone unpunished. That
makes it all the more crucial to ensure that all States, and
conflicting parties in particular, fulfil their obligations
under international humanitarian law, especially where
bringing the perpetrators of such unacceptable crimes
before the competent jurisdiction is concerned.

