Mr. Heusgen (Germany): There is not very much I can add to what my American colleague just said and what was said by the two briefers at the very beginning of today's meeting - this is a nightmare we are confronting. Let me add a couple of quotations to those already cited. In his statement of 17 February, Mark Lowcock himself said that if things continue as they do we are faced with the biggest humanitarian horror story of the twenty-first century. Looking at the pattern on the ground where it appears that the Syrian regime supported by Russia and other allies are primarily targeting areas where a high number of displaced persons have sought shelter, to quote Michelle Bachelet, it is cruel beyond belief that civilians living in freezing conditions are being bombed. With the situation is as bad as it is, all we can do is support the Secretary-General of the United Nations, who has called for an immediate ceasefire. I would also echo actually what the representative of the United States has just said: basically, the Astana formula does not work anymore, and the United Nations has to step in. There is no recourse but to support what Geir Pedersen has said and what he is doing, but I also think that it is now time for the Secretary-General also to step up to the plate. It is an immense responsibility that we face here as the United Nations and as the Security Council, namely, to stop what is what is happening. We must spare no effort. We are also concerned about the escalation around the Turkish observation force, and we demand that the Syrian regime stop its attacks against Turkish forces. We call for an immediate return to de-escalation. We always say that, when it comes to problems, there is no military solution to a problem if sustainable stability is to be achieved. I think we are confronted in this regard with a situation where Syria, Russia and their allies are trying to prove the opposite, that there is a military solution and that control of the territory of one's country can be recovered by driving out a million people from the area. Overall, there are probably 3 million people in the area, and the attacks are continuing. This has to be stopped if we do not want to end up with the biggest humanitarian horror story of the twenty-first century. There may be a situation if this continues that we will soon have more Syrians living outside of the country than inside of it, and those who remain are left in a country that is totally destroyed morally and physically. For a peaceful Syria, there is therefore no alternative but to go to a political process, to have the Constitutional Committee work, to have reconciliation in the country, to have, also, accountability for the crimes that have been committed. By the way, in this afternoon's Arria formula meeting, we will hear from the Commission of Inquiry, which will focus on violations of children's rights during the Syrian conflict and offer recommendations to all parties to the conflict on the way forward. This is the way we forward. Let us go back to where all of this started. It was first and foremost the Syrian regime's policy of brutal violence, repression and prosecution that caused this conflict and is still keeping Syrian internally displaced persons and refugees from returning home. We all know about the arbitrary arrests, torture, sexual violence and forced disappearance, extradition, killings of detaineesand other grave human rights violations, which are at the origins of this conflict. I would therefore conclude with a plea to our Russian colleague to stop the support of Syria. If he tells the Syrians that there is no longer military support for the Syrian regime, it will have to stop the onslaught against its own population.
