Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): 1, too, would like to
thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing this morning. It
is also a pleasure to see you, Mr. President, presiding
over this meeting.

A lot has been said here today. A lot has been
expressed in terms of a lot of hope and in terms of
what the future holds. I believe that peace is slowly
becoming a word in the world lexicon of diplomacy
that actually means "do nothing", and that is a very sad
comment on where mankind is headed.
I know for a fact that the Jewish community
faced a horrible diaspora. I read about it in history. As
a historian, the way they were dispersed was abhorrent
to me. As a person who read about the Warsaw ghettos,
who read The Diary of Anne Frank and who enjoyed
the great music that they created internationally and the
very strong traditions of culture that they brought to
the Abrahamic religions and communities as their
forerunners, I know that they were in many ways a
model of fortitude. Those who had faced an
Armageddon surely would know better than to create
one.

I read in the press recently the statements of
young, idealistic soldiers of the Israeli army and saw
how they spoke about how a fervour of religious war
was encouraged in them to make them go out and face
the Gaza Strip and what was happening there. It is a
sad day when we play these games that create divisions
in the world.

I know for a fact that Muslims have a long and
old tradition. At one stage, after the very horrible
persecution of the community, when registers were
drawn up in Spain, the Muslim caliphs who at that time
ruled Jerusalem invited the first return of the diaspora
back to Jerusalem. It was the Ottoman caliphs who
reinducted, at a later stage, a member of the
community into the Jerusalem council. This is history. I
believe that to give this a tinge of a holy war, as I read
in the papers today, is a sad, sad statement.

It is an even sadder statement because, in many
ways, as I have said earlier, some of the very strong
leads for civilization come from the Jewish community.
Its travails are a part of history. Who has not read Leon
Uris? Have we not all sympathized with what
happened? Then, if you have faced all this, how can
you inflict such things on others? The one thing that
the various books and various prophecies have
revealed is the enormous fortitude, enormous patience
and enormous caring for the people of God. Are we all
not the children of God? We are.

Therefore, I feel that this is the time to make the
statement that one would expect better. The world
looks upon Israel as a role model in the West. How
many children do we know in homes across America
and Europe who play with little toys that can
sometimes cause immense damage? How many do we
know about who have actually, through an incendiary
device, accidentally killed thousands of people, even in
the city of New York? Yesterday they had a day of
remembrance for many people who died due to a fire.
To retaliate, then, with the might of an empire, with
thousands killed in a reprisal, this is regrettable.

It is more regrettable because it comes from a
people who should be known in history for their
resilience, their fortitude and their courage. Those
beliefs do not make you weak, they make you strong.
But strength does not come through dominating others.
That is why a little, defiant David shot the sling that
killed Goliath. The issue was, however, that he
remained a personable person and remembered that his
strength was not to be used to inflict harm on the
innocent. That is a lesson we should take from history.

The unresolved Arab-Israeli conflict remains a
severe thorn in the side of the United Nations and the
world community. There is a lack of any tangible
process. We hear of the peace process, we hear of road
maps. It is amazing. I never fully understood the words
"one step forward and two steps back" until this
particular part of the world proved to me that this is
something to be believed. We have seen hopes
repeatedly dashed and international incidents created
out of relatively small events. We have seen the stark
violation of international law and United Nations
resolutions. We have seen draconian policies and
practices. We have seen the fragmentation and the
absolute fracture of Palestinian society. We have seen
walls built.

Amazingly, the greatest wall in the world, the
Great Wall of China, could not keep the marauders out
for too long, but certainly kept a lot of people in who
could not escape the vicious practices of many
empires. Does this create hope? Does this create a
better system? Does this create something that the
world can be proud of? I think the right to personal
movement and unabated settlement activity are
creating new aspects on the ground. The continuing
inhumane and unlawful siege of the Gaza Strip has
transformed it virtually into an open prison, where
hundreds of thousands are living lives of abject misery,
so near to the Mediterranean and the civilized world of
the Greeks, where it all starts from, yet bombed into
the Dark Ages. The world at large has witnessed much
cruelty, and more cruelty, as a mere spectator: the
haunting memories of the devastation inflicted on the
innocent population of Gaza, the killing of five sisters
through a shot in the window for no apparent reason.
I do not know how anyone is going to justify any
of that. But where is the moral outrage that translates
itself into something tangible - a meaningful change
in the lives of the Palestinians? While Israel deserves
criticism, no less responsible is the international

community, which is complicit in its inaction. The
proverbial water off a duck's back rings true here. The
attacks on the United Nations buildings and personnel
itself showed complete disrespect. It was not the
physical damage caused alone, but the icon that
tumbled and crumbled with a lot of innocence inside.
The Secretary-General's initiative for a Board of
Inquiry is welcomed by us.

But we must not lose sight of the larger picture.
The general sense of pessimism around the peace
process does not augur well. The international
community needs to refocus its attention and to
synergize its energies and its efforts to reinvigorate the
peace process of negotiation and to address all core
issues for a comprehensive and just settlement and for
the durable solution for which the parameters already
exist, namely, the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and of the General Assembly, the principle of
land for peace, the Madrid Peace Conference terms of
reference, the road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and
the principles set out at the Annapolis Conference.
There must also be parallel progress on the Israel-Syria
and Israel-Lebanon tracks for a comprehensive peace
in the region.

In conclusion, an early comprehensive settlement
of the Arab-Israeli conflict, including the core issue of
Palestine, should be our collective strategic objective.
All Member States must throw their full moral,
diplomatic, political and economic support behind its
early realization. Indeed, that would have a positive
impact on regional and international peace and security
and help stabilize other simmering situations across the
region. While remaining fully committed to the just
cause of the Palestinian people, Pakistan will continue
to play its rightful role in the collective endeavour to
establish lasting, just and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East.

