Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We welcome the report
of the Secretary-General and the briefing by
Mr. Holmes, the humanitarian coordinator.

We would like to thank you for organizing this
debate, Mr. President. This report of the Secretary-
General comes on the tenth anniversary of the first
consideration by the Security Council of the protection
of civilians in a thematic debate on this issue. It is
deplorable that civilians still account for the vast
majority of casualties and continue to be targeted and
subjected to indiscriminate attacks and other
violations. However, civilians continue to be victims of
targeted attacks, forced displacement, sexual violence,
forced conscription, indiscriminate killings, mutilations,
hunger, disease and loss oflivelihood.

Over the past 10 years, the Security Council has
received several reports and adopted several presidential
statements and resolutions with specific attention given
to the protection of civilians. While such developments
are commendable, they are of limited value if they do
not translate into concrete improvements in the
protection of civilians on the ground. We need to
commit ourselves to practical action and a clear path
from policy statements to actual implementation on the
ground. We need to move to forward and develop a
more systematic approach to protecting civilians and
ensuring that there is sustainable support for civilians
even after the conflict has ended.

The inclusion of protection activities in the
mandates of peacekeeping missions, such as the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), was a significant
action by the Security Council. Furthermore, over the
years, the Security Council has taken important steps to
improve protection for specific groups, such as women
and children. The Security Council has also endeavoured
to enhance protection for refugees and internally
displaced persons by mandating peacekeeping missions
to protect camps and other sites from armed attacks
and to maintain their civilian and humanitarian
character by supporting the disarmament and separation
of combatants.

However, there is need for a common
understanding among United Nations Member States
about what peacekeeping missions should be mandated
to do and what they should not do. Questions - such
as the degree of robustness of modern United Nations
peacekeeping, how protection-of-civilian mandates can
best be implemented or what other peacebuilding tasks
should be undertaken by United Nations peacekeepers
and for how long - need to be answered. These
peacekeeping activities require a strong consensus
among contributors of troops, police and other
personnel as to what extent the personnel who are
required through a mandate should be guided.

The proliferation and fragmentation of non-State
armed groups has contributed to the increasingly
asymmetric nature of conflicts. We have seen this in a
number of trouble spots, such as Somalia. This has a
profoundly negative impact on civilians, as armed
groups have sought to overcome their military inferiority
by using strategies that flagrantly violate international
law, including attacks against civilians and the use of
civilians to shield military objectives. Although these
armed groups are bound by international humanitarian
law and must refrain from committing acts that would
impair the enjoyment of human rights, we know that
for some groups, such as the Lord's Resistance Army,
attacks and the commission of other violations against
civilians are deliberate strategies intended to maximize
casualties, intimidate the population and destabilize
communities. All of that must stop.

As partners, it is critical that Member States
support or at least not impede efforts by other parties,
such as religious groups, traditional leaders and civil
society organizations, to engage armed groups in order
to seek improved protection of civilians. However, the
reality is that many times this engagement proves
futile. When such efforts fail, alternatives must be
considered which should not be restricted to systematic
condemnation of violations committed by armed
groups and demands to comply, together with the
application of targeted measures.

While the Security Council has indicated its
intention to ensure that mandates include clear
guidelines as to what missions can and should do to
protect civilians, this clear direction from the Council
should be informed by a realistic assessment of what is
on the ground following consultations with the
Secretariat, troop and police contributors, other
stakeholders, regional organizations and, more
especially, countries that are affected in the regions
where there may be conflict. Currently, there is a
disconnect between mandates, intentions, expectations,
interpretations and real implementation capacity because
of some of these omissions. However, this assessment
should take place within a broader policy framework
that includes clear direction as to possible courses of
action, including in situations where the armed forces
of the host State are themselves perpetrating violations
against civilians, as well as regarding the tasks and
capabilities needed for implementation. The question
of States and State troops violating civilian rights is a
common feature, as demonstrated in the recent field
visit by the Security Council mission.

The report provides pertinent recommendations
premised on the overriding need to enhance compliance
and accountability in conflict, that is, compliance by
all parties to conflict with the applicable law with the
and demands and decisions of the Security Council.
For our part, we want to underscore two of them which
we consider critical in the protection of civilians and
for achieving sustainable peace.

First, renewal of peacekeeping mandates should
ensure that relevant protection concerns and possible
responses are incorporated in the Council's actions.
Secondly, the timely deployment in relevant situations
of peacekeeping missions with robust protection
mandates to ensure the protection of civilians on the
ground should occur in collaboration with other key
players, such as countries in the region and countries
affected by the conflicts.

Finally, the protection of civilians does not stop
with the end of hostilities. Ensuring that civilians
receive needed humanitarian assistance, rehabilitation
and reconstruction is key for sustainable peace,
sustainable security and sustainable development.

