Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the sisterly State
of Kuwait on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council this month and to thank it for its
efforts. I also thank the Republic of Kazakhstan for its
efforts during its presidency last month. In addition, I
highly appreciate the efforts deployed by the outgoing
countries Ukraine, Japan, Italy, Egypt, Uruguay and
Senegal. I also wish every success to The State of
Kuwait, the Netherlands, Poland, Peru, Equatorial
Guinea and C6te d'Ivoire. We hope to cooperate with
these countries during their term in the Council to
achieve the common interests of all States Members of
the United Nations.

I wish also to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), Mr. Jan Kubis,
for his briefing and for the efforts he has undertaken
together with his team.

The security forces of all categories were able to
establish their full dominance on the international Iraqi-
Syrian border, from the Al-Walid border crossing to the
Rabia border crossing, and managed to liberate Mosul
and Ramadi islands and establish full control over all
areas along the border with Syria. The whole of Iraqi
territory has thus been freed from the grip of Da'esh
terrorist factions. Iraq is now at the threshold of a new
phase that will involve implementing comprehensive
Government reforms on the political, economic and
social fronts.

The Government and people pf Iraq would like
to thank all the States that have participated in the
international coalition, particularly the United States
and the European Union countries, as well as all the
friendly countries that were not part of the coalition but
have combated terrorism, supplied Iraq's security forces
with military and logistical support and worked in
coordination with them while respecting our country's
sovereignty and territorial integrity. These national and
international efforts have achieved historic victory over
those criminal factions.

One of the priorities of the Government of Iraq is
building a lasting peace, which is a challenge that is as
significant as that of guaranteeing our citizens a decent
living. Iraq belongs to the Iraqi people, regardless of
their affiliation or views. The Government has adopted
a national strategy for an interfaith dialogue that is
founded on the principles of civil harmony and fostering
unity among Iraqis which have helped us to achieve a
historic victory against Da'esh terrorist factions.

In order to respond to the Iraqi people's desire to
succeed in the international campaign to bring Da'esh
to justice for the crimes it has committed in Iraq, in
particular genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity, Iraq, through negotiations with the United
Nations Secretariat and with the help of friendly states,
has been able to put together an acceptable mandate that
ensures full respect for its sovereignty and jurisdiction
in the task of collecting criminal evidence for crimes
committed by Da'esh. We hope to see a head appointed
for this team, in accordance with the mandate, and we
call on Member States to provide it with short- and
long-term financial and logistical support.

With the aim of rebuilding our liberated cities
and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals by
2030, which will enable us to significantly improve
our citizens' daily lives and tackle our development
challenges, the relevant Iraqi authorities, together with
our partners from the international organizations, have
formulated many plans and strategies we need to make
progress in the post-Da'esh phase in Iraq, most important
of which is the national development and poverty
reduction plans 2018-2022, a strategy for eradicating
slums in Iraq, a plan for a social development fund and
a strategy for developing the private sector 2015-2030.

We are also putting together a national framework
document for the reconstruction of liberated cities
2018-2027. Our National Development Plan 2018-
2022 is characterized by including new concepts such
as promoting administrative decentralization; the
revitalization of the private sector; focus on human
capital; economic recovery; investment in the education
and health sectors and the provision of basic services;
the empowerment of women and young people and
of vulnerable groups and their involvement in the
country's economic life; and job creation for the very
poor and support for small and medium enterprises.

The Iraqi Government expects the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to play a vital
role in establishing mechanisms that will coordinate
the efforts of all United Nations agencies operating in
Iraq, especially in the areas of assistance, the sharing of
expertise and social and economic capacity-building,
which directly affect our citizens' daily lives. The
Mission's work during post-Da'esh phase must respond
to the challenges, circumstances and needs of the Iraqi
people. My Government believes that the Mission can
play a coordinating role focusing on the following
pressing issues: first, promoting good governance,
strengthening administrative institutions, fighting
corruption and improving the country's economic
growth and diversification; secondly, tackling
environmental issues, addressing sandstorms in Iraq
and providing high-quality essential services; thirdly,
investment in human capital and reducing youth
unemployment; fourthly, delivering humanitarian
assistance to internally displaced persons and enabling
them to return to their liberated cities; and fifthly,
rebuilding cities liberated from Da'esh, assisting the
victims of terrorism and combating violent extremism.

With regard to the report of the independent review,
after studying the summary submitted by the United
Nations pertaining to the team's recommendations for
the Mission's new mandate, the Government of Iraq
believes that those recommendations do not distinguish
between the Mission's political mandate, which permits
it to respond to Iraq's general needs, and internal
issues that are governed by the provisions of the Iraqi
Constitution and our established laws. For that reason,
Iraq does not support the recommendations related
to the mandate, specifically conflict prevention, the
empowerment of women and minorities, and relations
between the central Government and the Kurdistan
Government. Those recommendations come under the
purview of the Iraqi Government, its constitutional
authorities and its internal affairs.

Iraq was not in a state of conflict. It was a war
that Iraq waged against an international terrorist
organization whose members come from 120 different
States Members of the United Nations, some of which
have helped to finance them. We believe that national
reconciliation should be comprehensive and not limited
to a particular ethnic or religious sector to the detriment
of another. Rather, it should encompass every sector of
society while respecting the Constitution, legal and
judicial system and Iraqi unity.

With regard to the empowerment of women,
the Iraqi Constitution accords women all rights and
ensures their representation in Parliament, where they
hold 25 per cent of seats. In accordance with resolution
1325 (2000), our Council of Ministers has created an ad
hoc department for the empowerment of Iraqi women.
We have also established a high commission to promote
Iraqi women's status that is the national entity involved
in international Iraqi commitments to issues concerning
the empowerment of women, and in follow up with
the relevant national parties. The official authorities
work with international organizations, such as the
International Committee of the Red Cross and others,
to establish small enterprises for women and boost their
participation in economic and political life. They issue
recommendations to improve the legal and economic
status of women in Iraq and to provide assistance to
Iraqi women through the social care system which is
financed from the general budget.

Iraq does not support any UNAMI mandate related
to what the report calls "minorities". Our Constitution
identifies such groups as integral components because
we are racially and religiously a diversified country. All
of our constitutionally recognized components make
up the distinct Iraqi identity. The groups of the Iraqi
components - including Christians, Yazidis, Shabaks,
Sabaean, Feylis, Sunnis and Shiites of Arab, Kurdish
or Turkmen origin - are indigenous peoples that
have built the Iraqi civilization. They are represented
in the general elected Government, which consists of
all components and cares for all specificities. This
Government, since its establishment and under the
aegis of Prime Minister Haider Al Abadi, has sought to
unite the Iraqi people and to ensure their safety and a
decent life on the basis of the rule of law.

Our Government also aspires to rebuild all of our
country's cities so as to enable its components to live in
harmony together after being liberated from terrorism.
In this regard, Iraq appreciates the role of the United
Nations agencies working in Iraq, especially the United
Nations Development Programme, which, alongside
the relevant Iraqi ministries and authorities, delivers
effective assistance to all liberated areas, thereby
enabling an equal delivery of assistance so as to avoid
discrimination. That also helps to foster hope for the
residents of the liberated areas, all of whom suffered
from the crimes committed by Da'esh.

The Iraqi Government, with the assistance of
partners and international organizations, has managed
to implement programmes for the return of refugees
expelled by Da'esh terrorist factions. They are now
able to return to the liberated cities. The Government
has established an integrated programme to achieve
stability, deliver necessary services and preserve
religious and ethnic diversity in those cities, while
securing the State's exclusive right to possess weapons.
We call on the international community to contribute
to rebuilding the cities that have been destroyed. We
commend the continued commitment of the European
Union to assisting Iraq in the short and long terms by
adopting a special strategy to meet Iraq's current needs.

The delegation of my country appreciates the
efforts of the Secretariat to honour the requests of the
Independent High Electoral Commission in Iraq and
deliver assistance to strengthen our national capacity.
The Iraqi Council of Representatives has set forth a
timetable for elections to be held on 12 May, seeking
to ensure that it will be a historic day for a modern
Iraq in which Iraqi people participate in the legislative
election process.

In order to build on the democratic political process,
the Iraqi Government intends to ensure the participation
of internally displaced persons in the upcoming
parliamentary elections by securing protection for all
voters and guaranteeing the transparent outcome of the
elections so that they will be deemed successful and
contribute to entrenching democracy and the peaceful
exchange of power.

My delegation thanks the State of sisterly Kuwait
for the efforts it has undertaken with the World Bank
and the European Union, as well as the United Nations
in Iraq, in preparation to host the Conference for the
Reconstruction of Iraq, which was held in Kuwait
from 12 to 14 February. Iraq places great hope on the
outcome of that Conference and its implementation
mechanisms. We are grateful to all States that attended.
The goals of the Conference pertained to investments
and development, based on studies that assess the
damage wrought in Iraq with respect to infrastructure
and the delivery of basic services.

The Government of Iraq reaffirms its commitment
to undertaking greater efforts in order to make progress
on the matters of the disappeared Kuwaiti citizens and
Kuwaiti archives. Our national and joint commissions
are sparing no effort to determine the fate of the
disappeared Kuwaiti persons and others. The Ministry
of Defence, in conjunction with the International
Committee of the Red Cross in Baghdad, has been
conducting field investigations in Shakhat and 'Ayn
Tamr in Karbala, Salman Pak in Baghdad, Khamisiyah
in Dhi Qar, Salman Road in Al-Muthanna, Al-Razi
Street in Diali and other places. It holds regular meetings
on a quarterly basis with the participation of UNAMI to
inform all stakeholders about recent developments. The
Ministries of Foreign Affairs and of Defence are also
stepping up efforts and are engaged in media campaigns
and field visits to find new witnesses and collect new
information to achieve tangible results and identify the
whereabouts of Kuwaiti detained and missing persons,
including Kuwaiti materials and records to be returned
to Kuwait.

To conclude, we thank Mr. Jan Kubis, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and his team
for advising the Iraqi Government and conducting the
activities of the Mission with a view to achieving a
united and stable Iraq, free from terrorism. I also thank
the Deputy Special Representative ofUNAMI, Ms. Lise
Grande, and we wish her every success.

