The President (spoke in French): I wish to draw
the attention of the members to document S/20l4/872,
which contains a letter dated 5 December 2014 from
the representatives of Australia, Chile, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea,
Rwanda, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

In view of the request that the matter be included
in the provisional agenda and in view of the comments
made by the representatives of China and Australia,
I propose to put the provisional agenda to the vote.
Accordingly, I shall put it to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chile, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Republic of Korea,
Rwanda, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America

Against:
China, Russian Federation

Abstention:
Chad, Nigeria

The President (spoke in French): The provisional
agenda has been adopted.

The situation in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea

Letter dated 5 December 2014 from the
representatives of Australia, Chile, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Republic
of Korea, Rwanda, the United Kingdom

of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

and the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2014/872)


The President (spoke in French): Pursuant to
the request of the representatives of Australia, Chile,
France, Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Republic
of Korea, Rwanda, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America
contained in document S/2014/872, that a meeting of
the Council on the agenda item "The situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea" be convened,
I shall suspend this meeting and we shall resume, after
a brief recess, to continue consideration of the agenda
item.

The meeting was suspended at 3.15 pm. and
resumed a13.20p.m.


The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and Mr. Ivan
Simonovie, Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights.

I now give the floor to Mr. Zerihoun.


