Mrs. Pi (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Uruguay welcomes this open debate on
children in armed conflict and welcomes all the efforts

of the international community in this regard. My
delegation particularly appreciates the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children in Armed Conflict, a mandate that Uruguay
fully supports.

We take this opportunity again to thank
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy for her work and her
commitment to broad-based and effective protection of
children in a situation of particular vulnerability. Her
substantive reports, undertaken in the context of broad
consultation, not only allow us to appreciate the
achievements, but also clearly show how much work
remains to be done.

The figures cited in recent reports on the impact
of armed conflict are particularly worrisome, and no
region in the world is immune. We are stunned by the
number of children killed in war zones; injured or
suffer permanently disabling injuries; recruited as
soldiers, in blatant violation of international human
rights instruments and humanitarian law; and the
thousands of children, girls in particular, who are
subject to sexual exploitation. We are concerned by the
ongoing illegal recruitment of children in conflict
zones, many of whom are kidnapped from refugee
camps; by the various forms of sexual violence
suffered by children, with devastating and permanent
repercussions for the victims; by the cases of children
who are detained in contravention of international
norms; by systematic and deliberate attacks on
educational institutions; and by the impunity still
enjoyed by the perpetrators of crimes against children.

Uruguay welcomes the fact that the issue of
children affected by armed conflict is receiving
increasing attention on the international agenda, as
reflected in the many international instruments to
which my country is a party. Much remains to be done,
however. The subject is on the General Assembly's
agenda, and every year my country plays a very active
role in that regard with a view to strengthening and
increasing the involvement and responsibility of a body
of universal composition in a subject that falls within
its purview and is of concern to us all.

Uruguay nonetheless recognizes the role that has
been played by the Security Council, where progress
has moved from talk to implementation through the
adoption of numerous resolutions, the most recent of
which created the monitoring and reporting mechanism
with a view to ensuring that sound information is
available and concrete action taken to end the illegal
recruitment and exploitation of children in conflict
zones.

Some two years after the adoption of resolution
1612 (2005), establishing the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, it is now time to assess not only its
implementation, but also its format. We are thus
concerned that, despite the reports received identifying
six types of serious violations against children, the
mechanism is applicable only to the recruitment and
illegal use of child soldiers. We feel that that approach
should be broadened, since no violation is more serious
than another and all should be considered on an equal
footing.

We appreciate the inclusive and broad-based
nature of the mechanism, which works with the
involvement of all parties to a conflict -
Governments, non-governmental armed forces, the
United Nations system and civil society, including non-
governmental organizations. We believe that only
through joint and coordinated endeavours, the
strengthening of the rules of international law and the
utilization of available judicial mechanisms - the
International Criminal Court in particular - will it be
possible to develop and implement plans of action
allowing us to put an end to the serious violations that
children continue to endure in armed conflict.

We welcome the joint work done by civil society
with the United Nations system as a whole, including
the peacekeeping missions, in building lasting child
protection mechanisms. We believe that the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict in peacekeeping
missions, as well as the inclusion by UNICEF of child
protection advisers in such missions - in which
Uruguay has been deeply involved - should be
stepped up and receive sufficient human, financial and
technical support.

My delegation feels that greater attention should
be paid to the rehabilitation of children linked to armed
groups or that have been the victims of other serious
violations of their rights, particularly in cases of sexual
abuse or exploitation. We agree with the Special
Representative that the efforts made in the initial
planning and implementation of peacekeeping
operations should take into account the need to protect
and rehabilitate children, and that such action should
12
be community-based so as to facilitate the sustainable
and successful reintegration of children.

Child protection is a commitment on the part of
us all. We hope in that regard that all States, together
with the United Nations system and organized civil
society, including children themselves, can undertake
joint action that will allow us to achieve a world of
peace for all in which we can truly protect the rights
and well-being of children.

