Mr. Dos Santos (Mozambique): Allow me to start
by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the particularly
important month of December. My delegation remains
ready to collaborate with you as you discharge your noble
duties.

I wish to commend His Excellency Ambassador
Wisnumurti of Indonesia for his outstanding performance
last month.

The Secretary-General deserves our appreciation for
his continued commitment to maintaining international
peace and security. His reports on developments in
Angola bear testimony to this fact.

Two months ago, a team of Foreign Ministers from
southern Africa came to this body, mandated by the heads
of State of the region to voice their concern over the slow
progress in the peace process in Angola. They urged the
Council to take appropriate action in order to encourage
a speedy implementation of the "Acordos de Paz".

After clearly identifying the major obstacles and
their source, the Council, in its wisdom, adopted
resolution 1075 (1996) of 11 October, in which it
expressed deep disappointment with UNITA for delaying
the full implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. The
Council called upon UNITA immediately to fulfil 12
tasks. Among these tasks was the issuance of a formal,
written declaration indicating that all its soldiers had been
quartered and that it had no more weapons and military
equipment, thus removing any obstacles to the extension
of State administration throughout Angola. The Council
considered then the possibility of imposing measures

 

against UNITA if it did not comply by 20 November 1996.

Where do we stand today? Are we witnessing serious
signs of commitment on the part of UNITA to comply with
the Council's decisions? The Secretary-General's report
indicates some positive developments. However, those are
far from what we expected and we remain deeply
concerned over the slow pace of events.

My delegation believes that UNITA's full compliance
with the tasks enumerated in the aforementioned resolution
would allow the process to move into the next stage.

We welcome the latest news of substantive progress.
The people of Angola deserve better than what they are
being offered now. They need assurances that they can go
back to their areas of origin and rebuild their villages and
communities without fear of another outbreak of war.
Southern Africa wants an Angola in peace, a strong partner
in the region's quest for integration and development.

Mozambique shall continue to lend its solidarity and
support, working in concert with the other countries of the
region and the international community until peace becomes
an irreversible reality in Angola.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to reiterate its
appreciation to all members of the Security Council for
their continued interest and active role in the peace process
in Angola. We therefore welcome the resolution just
adopted extending the mandate of the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) until 28
February 1997.

