Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
want to begin, Mr. President, by thanking you and your
delegation for having included this briefing on the
programme of work for this month. We want to express
special gratitude to the Government of Norway for its
high standing in addressing the subject of protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

We would also like to express our thanks to
Mr. Kenzo Oshima, the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his briefing. We appreciate the work
that he and his Secretariat team are doing to respond to
the requests of the Security Council in connection with
the subject before us today.

Today, a valuable tool is being given to us in the
form of an aide-memoire which will guide the Security
Council's considerations on humanitarian issues related
to peacekeeping mandates. We believe that through this
procedure the Council is becoming more aware of the
toll that armed conflict takes on the lives of civilians.
We are also reminded that we must work even harder to
prevent and resolve conflicts. That is the best way of
avoiding the hardship and suffering that we are
witnessing in many parts of the world today.

We feel that it should be underscored that this
aide-memoire has been prepared in close consultation
with the Security Council and that we all recognize the
need to apply it on a case-by-case basis, taking into
account the specific needs of every conflict situation
and of every peacekeeping mission in the field.
Practice will show us the way forward.

We would like to highlight three aspects of
Mr. Oshima's briefing, with a view to asking him a few
questions on those points.

First, I believe that we all are deeply concerned at
the abuses under investigation which were committed
in refugee and displaced-person camps in West Africa.
In addition to the degrading nature of this behaviour,
light has been shed on the complex relationship
between the ideals of humanitarian service, the quality
of that service in some areas and the management of
funds received from the public for this work.

I should like to ask Mr. Oshima if he could
elaborate, along the lines of what was mentioned by
Ambassador Greenstock, on codes of conduct for
international workers, who sometimes do not feel
themselves to be accountable to society.

In asking this question, I should like to highlight
two aspects. First, it is our hope that this problem will
not be dealt with as something focusing only on West
Africa, but, rather, that we will focus on the fact that
this is a problem that can arise wherever there exists a
humanitarian crisis. Secondly, the problem involves not
only humanitarian workers; questions have also been
raised regarding the personnel of peacekeeping
operations.

Secondly, I should like to comment on the
facilities for access by humanitarian organizations to
those persons that are most vulnerable in situations of
conflict. We are seeing today many situations in which
access is difficult - in Afghanistan, Angola, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in other areas.
Do we have more or less precise figures regarding this
disturbing reality? What are the general views of the
international community on this situation? And how it
can be corrected, on the basis of the norms of
international law and in particular of General Assembly
resolution 46/182 on the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance?
I should like to make one last point regarding the
future work of the Secretariat. We want to underscore
the valuable contribution to an understanding of
humanitarian issues that is being made by the round
tables organized by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, with a View to preparing a road
map on the practical implementation of, and the
institutional responsibilities related to, the 54
recommendations on the protection of civilians that
were made by the Secretary-General.

We would be interested in hearing some thoughts
about the interaction of humanitarian organizations
with non-State actors in armed conflicts. We are all
aware of the many abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law committed on a daily
basis by these groups, and the fact that the international
community has a very minimal capacity to react to
them.

It is our understanding that in Geneva the Inter-
Agency Standing Committee has been examining this
question, with a view to preparing some directives for
United Nations workers. Perhaps Mr. Oshima could tell
us something about this.

