Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): As recent examples in
Kosovo and East Timor have shown, the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is extremely
important, not only for humanitarian reasons per se, but
also because it has a major bearing on how to reach
conflict resolution and how to realize sustainable peace and
reconciliation.

First of all, Japan would like to join others in urging
that all harm to civilians in armed conflict should stop now.
In this connection, Japan joins others in commending the
present and former Presidents of this Council for taking
the initiative in putting this subject on the agenda this
year. We also appreciate the report that the Secretary-
General submitted in response to the Council's request for
specific recommendations on measures it should take to
legally and physically protect civilians in armed conflict.

Let me remind the Council that Japan has actively
participated in a number of international initiatives for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and is determined
to continue playing its part in the endeavours of the
international community to meet this challenge. For
example, Japan is a party to all of the six major human
rights instruments and strongly adheres to the underlying
spirit of those instruments. We have been playing an
active part in collaborative efforts to restrict the use of
small arms and to establish the International Criminal
Court.

As for the protection of humanitarian personnel,
Japan was the second party to ratify the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel
which came into force in January of this year, and has
extended funding to the trust fund for security training,
which supports security and stress-management training
for field security officers. In this connection, I am happy
to note that the first training project funded by Japan, a
workshop in Nairobi, will take place in November.

At the same time, ways should be explored to
further strengthen the protection of those who take part in
humanitarian activities, with due consideration to the
specific situation of the conflict.

The report of the Secretary-General contains several
concrete recommendations as to how the United Nations
and this Council might be more effective in protecting
civilians in armed conflict, and it deserves due attention.
My remarks today are of a preliminary nature, owing to
the need for more time to study the recommendations in
depth.

First, the recommendation to facilitate the rapid
deployment of a greater number of civilian police,
administration experts and humanitarian personnel is
worth further study in enhancing United Nations presence
in protecting civilians in a conflict situation.

Secondly, as regards sanctions, Japan strongly
believes that innocent civilians should not be punished.
Rather, sanctions should be imposed in such a manner
that they will attain their specific objectives as effectively

 

as possible. Although careful consideration should be
required before establishing any permanent review
mechanism, the development of standards and rules for
minimizing any detrimental humanitarian impact should be
explored.

Thirdly, Japan fully supports the recommendation that
arms embargoes should be imposed in situations where
civilians are targeted by parties to the conflict, and I should
like to take this opportunity to echo that message to arms-
exporting States.
Fourthly, the notion of preventive peacekeeping
operations offers wide-ranging possibilities. Throughout the
previous decades, we, Member countries, have assembled
our wisdom to foster and evolve peacekeeping operations
by applying the spirit of the United Nations Charter in such
a way as to cope with reality. As circumstances in the
region and the nature of the conflict itself vary, the
modality and timing of deploying an international presence
of a preventive nature should be flexible. In this connection,
I draw attention to a comment made by Mr. Olara Otunnu
at a previous meeting of the Council. He said that
violations of humanitarian norms can be discouraged by
making them known to the rest of the world; in this vein,
a preventive monitoring presence, when feasible, would be
desirable.

Fifthly, it is important to disarm armed elements in
refugee and internally displaced person camps. However, it
is not easy to accurately assess the degree of armed
elements in these camps, or to judge whether a host
Government has the ability to fulfil the responsibility of
disarming them. The recommendation to deploy
international military observers to monitor the situation in
these camps warrants consultation with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), as suggested in the report.

Needless to say, a major difficulty in putting into
practice most of the above recommendations seems to lie
in the fact that non-State belligerent actors tend neither to
be in a position to obey international law nor to be
susceptible to international pressure. This is an aspect that
imposes a major constraint upon this whole issue of
protecting civilians in armed conflict, and it deserves our
full attention.

Today's agenda item is relevant to all stages of a
conflict. Japan firmly believes that durable peace can and
must be attained, however difficult the task. As we have
seen in cases such as Bosnia, an international presence can
gradually move peace forward from a fragile to a more
stable level. Let me cite two recent examples of Japan's
involvement in the cause of peace. The first is the pledge
of $220 million for humanitarian and reconstruction
assistance for Kosovo and neighbouring countries; and the
second is a pledge announced yesterday in Tokyo for a
preliminary $2 million to meet immediate humanitarian
needs for East Timor, to be followed by further assistance
in response to any future appeal, as well as substantial
financial contributions to the United Nations trust fund to
support the multinational force established by the Security
Council resolution.
We are of the View that in the follow-up process of
this report by the Secretary-General, non-members of the
Council should also be involved, given the scope and
depth of the issue. We are willing to play a constructive
part in any follow-up that may take place to cope with
this important issue.

