Mr. Briz Gutierrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate and for having distributed the informative
concept paper contained in S/2008/528, with which we
agree on several issues.

My delegation fully associates itself with the
statement made by the Cuban delegation on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement, and we would like to take
this opportunity to add - or reiterate - a few
comments that we consider important.
At the outset, we would like to acknowledge that,
even before the publication of the note by the President of
the Council (S/2006/507), which was mainly a
compilation of measures that were already in practice, the
work of the Council has progressively benefited from
greater transparency, effectiveness and interaction.
Nonetheless, we must remember that those improvements
have been made in an ad hoc manner and are not binding.
Each of those improvements responded mainly to the
ability and the will of each presidency to maintain contact
with delegations that are not members of the Council and,
more importantly, to listen to and take into account their
suggestions, observations and concerns.

That is why we agree with other delegations on
the importance of discussing and formalizing the rules
of procedure in order to have the necessary certainty
and predictability to be able to tackle energetically and
flexibly the various questions, whether recurring or
emergency matters, that come before the Council.

It is also important for us to recognize the
increasingly widespread perception that the members
of the Council, in particular the elected members, serve
to represent the membership of the Organization in its
entirety. In our particular case, we would like to thank
the delegations of Costa Rica, Panama and Peru for
keeping the Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States abreast of the activities of the Council over the
past two years.

We take this opportunity to draw your attention to
the pending task of improving the interaction between
United Nations organs, in particular between the
Council and the General Assembly, which leaves much
to desired. Several initiatives taken in recent years that
seem to have been dropped could be taken up once
again. In that regard, we recall the note in document
S/2002/ 199 concerning the content and adoption of the
annual report of the Council to the General Assembly.
We believe that it would be useful once again to have a
report that meets the analytical needs of the rest of the
membership. Not only should it be adopted in a public
meeting, but a public debate on its content should be
permitted. We highly appreciate the efforts of the
delegation of Viet Nam to address this shortcoming by
organizing an informal meeting this year.

At the same time, however, we cannot overlook
the need for consideration of the relationship between
the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council. Strengthening that relationship is another
major challenge on our agenda. We reaffirm our
conviction that there can and must be a closer
relationship between the two organs; in our View, the
Peacebuilding Commission provides an invaluable
opportunity to deepen and strengthen that relationship.

Those are some of the points we wished to bring
to the attention of the Security Council.

