The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Jamaica.

Today the Security Council is taking a careful
look at ways in which conflicts might better be averted
through creative initiatives by the Council and relevant
actors in the international community. As President of
the Security Council this month, Jamaica called for
discussion on this issue by the Council out of a deep
conviction that, unless strong emphasis is placed on
conflict prevention, this new century could well
become more deadly than the last, with the United
Nations and other international bodies caught in an
endless struggle to restore peace among warring
groups.

My delegation wishes to recognize the valuable
work done on this subject during the presidency of
Slovenia in November 1999.

The outbreak of new conflicts and the renewal of
old hostilities in many parts of the globe has restored a
sense of urgency to the debate on conflict prevention
that has occupied the attention of the United Nations
and other governmental and non-governmental
organizations concerned with issues of peace and
security. Secretary-General Kofi Annan correctly stated
in his 1999 report on the work of the Organization that
the United Nations in the twenty-first century must
become increasingly a focus of preventive action.

As many nations grow weary of the burdens of
peacemaking and peacekeeping, the challenge to find
new paths and stability through the avoidance of war
has become more critical. The tragedies witnessed in
Rwanda and the Balkans have stirred a global
community stung by the horrors of these wars to say
"never again". However, the means by which this
sentiment may be translated into reality are not
altogether clear. The seeds of conflict cannot be wished
away by a mere consciousness of the horrors of war.
Indeed, parties are not easily deterred from an agenda
of war and destruction, even in the face of tremendous
human and material costs. The simple fact is that the
prevention of conflict is infinitely better than heroic
measures to secure victory or restore peace.

The international community must work to find
means of defusing the all-too-prevalent circumstances
of ethnic hatred, bigotry, religious intolerance and
misplaced nationalistic tendencies that so often spiral
out of control and lead to violent conflict. It must also
pay special attention to the often-overlooked economic
underpinnings of such conflict. Poverty, inequality and
underdevelopment provide fertile ground for the
emergence of tension and deadly conflict among and
within communities that can least afford the
consequences of hostilities. It is a sad irony that many
societies faced with unresolved tensions of one sort or
another are often confronted with severe economic
hardships. These tensions often define the parties in a
struggle for scarce resources and increase the potential
for armed conflict.

The international community must convert the
fruits of the dialogue on conflict prevention into a road
map for peace. Already radical initiatives such as the
move by the Security Council to boldly challenge the
sinister relationship between diamond trading and
bloody conflict in Sierra Leone, Angola and elsewhere
in Africa point to a new day in the international
community's pursuit of peace. If the political will is
summoned to deny the ability of warring factions to
sustain their illicit trade in natural resources, a Vital
lifeline that supports and sustains armed conflict will
be degraded, if not destroyed.

Special efforts to deny to similar groups the fruits
of trafficking in illicit drugs must also be encouraged.
An all-out effort must be made to stem the illicit
trafficking of small arms. These weapons are the
insidious tools of trade that precipitate and sustain
armed conflicts and fuel increasing levels of violent
crime, which undermine the fabric of societies and
threaten the stability of many small States.

Our focus on prevention of armed conflicts must
be founded on practical considerations that can be
popularly understood and accepted. The economic
costs of conflicts provide a sobering picture at a time
when resources for development and poverty
eradication are hard to come by and are insufficient to
meet the demands of the global community. The
Carnegie Commission on Preventing Deadly Conflict
estimated that the cost to the international community
of the seven major wars in the 1990s - not including
Kosovo - was $199 billion. The World Bank in that
period disbursed some $191 billion. Without taking
into account the incalculable effect of the squandering
and sacrificing of the lives of young men and
women- our most precious resources - in these
deadly conflicts, it is clear from a purely economic
standpoint that this cycle of self-destruction which
threatens so many societies must be averted if
humankind is to truly make progress in the twenty-first
century.

The international community should not adopt a
scale of priorities that gives greater importance to some
regions over others. It must base its decisions on the
objective merits of each situation - especially the
severity of the conflict and the capacity for death and
destruction that each brings. As the figures that I cited
earlier demonstrate, the cost of war vastly outstrips the
resources required for maintaining institutions that
promote conflict prevention and resolution. We must
commit to providing the United Nations, and to
regional bodies concerned with conflict prevention and
resolution, the resources necessary to enable timely and
effective action to avert or quickly resolve conflicts.
Starving these entities of scarce resources is a recipe
for continued disaster. At the same time, there must be
a renewed commitment to providing the means for
empowering societies economically, and to undoing the
circumstances of inequity and deprivation that threaten
the stability of many of them. A proper mix of
economic support, and the fostering of the principles of
fairness, justice and good governance in the policies of
key institutions, can only assist in the effort to reduce
the tensions that often lead to deadly conflict.

A careful examination of the root causes of armed
conflict suggests that the answers will not be easy to
come by. The hostilities that haunt us are driven by
powerful forces that are deeply entrenched. The
challenge for the Council is to look beyond the
enormity of the challenge, find solutions and chart a
course of action for the twenty-first century.

I shall now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
