Ms. Power (United States of America): I want to
thank Minister Ndiaye and Senegal for highlighting
the risks posed by extremists and militia to civilians
and to peacekeepers. I think one can tell by the packed
Chamber that this conversation is overdue, and we
really thank him for leading and putting the issue on
the map. Although the Council today will not hear the
voices ofpeacekeepers and civilians who are vulnerable
to asymmetric threats, surely, if they were here, they
would thank him as well.

I would also like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson, Secretary-General Jean of the International
Organization of la Francophonie, Under-Secretary-
General Fedotov, Assistant Secretary-General Laborde
and Mr. Boutellis for their very informative briefings.
This is not an academic debate. Just yesterday,
as others have noted, a mine reportedly killed a
Togolese peacekeeper in and two civilians in Mali.
The United States condemns that attack and we
extend our deepest condolences to the victims and
to the Governments of Mali and Togo. Right now,
peacekeepers in places like Mali, the Central African
Republic, South Sudan and the Golan operate under
the daily threat of asymmetric warfare. The United
States recognizes those peacekeepers for deploying to
some of the world's least secure States. Their service
is Vital to international peace and security, and when
the goals of their missions - supporting political
processes, strengthening State institutions, protecting
civilians - run counter to the goals of non-State armed
groups, peacekeeping operations are vulnerable.

I want to make the case today that peacekeeping
missions must be better prepared to operate where
groups target civilians and peacekeepers. That means
being prepared to use robust force to carry out their
mandates, which includes protecting civilians when
authorized by the Security Council to do so. That requires
not just better equipment and training for peacekeepers
but more systemic reform in how we on the Council and
the United Nations manage peacekeeping operations.

First of all, I would like to comment on the role
of peacekeepers themselves. Some Member States
today will say that United Nations peacekeepers simply
should not be asked to protect civilians from terrorists
or militia. They argue that regional organizations or
other coalitions should shoulder that responsibility. I
want to say that those who make that argument have
a point. Far too often, United Nations peacekeeping
operations do not have the equipment, the training,
the logistics, the intelligence or the leadership needed
to protect themselves, never mind civilians, against
groups prepared to bomb and kill civilians as part of
their fight. But the solution cannot be only to tell the
United Nations to hunker down and wait for someone
else to take care of the problem, because the fact is that
United Nations peacekeepers are sometimes the only
forces present to help civilians in need.

The Security Council deployed peacekeeping
missions with mandates to protect civilians in places
like Mali and the Central African Republican because
countless people needed urgent help, notwithstanding
the important initiative that regional forces had shown
in both of those countries, which themselves took on
great risks and faced very difficult circumstances
operating under various flags.
The Counciljudged that the United Nations was best
placed to organize and deploy a sustained multinational
force with enough capabilities to make a difference.
For now, the reality is that the Council will continue
to deploy United Nations peacekeeping missions to
fragile and insecure environments to protect civilians.
And, as extremist groups increasingly take advantage
of these weak States to find safe havens, peacekeepers
will need to be ready to respond, or their attackers
will feel a growing sense of impunity. To clarify, we,
the United States, do not believe that United Nations
peacekeepers can or should become offensive counter-
terrorism forces. We know that that is unrealistic. But
the United Nations cannot walk away because there is
a terrorist threat where peacekeepers are deployed. As
an international community, we do not have that option.

United Nations peacekeeping missions should
be fully prepared to protect civilians when terrorists
arrive in a town and start shooting civilians. They
should be prepared to protect themselves when the
United Nations knows that terrorists are preparing to
launch attacks against its own personnel. This is not a
radical idea. The United Nations own guidance already
explicitly provides for it. We in the Council annually
renew mandates for forces that we know are present
where terrorists are present.

The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) shows how
peacekeeping missions have to adapt. When it was
authorized and deployed, in 2013, MINUSMA was
intended to stabilize the peace in Mali after extremist
groups had seized approximately half of the country's
territory. Yet the peace process has faltered. There
has not been full implementation, and terrorist groups
like Ansar Dine have continued to act as spoilers and
attack civilians and United Nations troops. In many
parts of Mali, the country's people are now looking to
MINUSMA to protect them rather than Government
forces. MINUSMA'S troop-contributing countries are
taking enormous risks to support the vital Mission
and they have our eternal gratitude. Mali is the
deadliest peacekeeping operation in the world, with
65 peacekeepers killed by hostile action just since
1 January and 139 peacekeepers killed since 2013.

MINUSMA shows the way in which we are
all falling short in meeting the complex challenge.
The Mission has dire gaps in its capabilities, which
undermine its ability to respond to terrorist attacks.
Many contingents do not bring suitably armoured
vehicles to protect against improvised explosive
devices (IEDs) and conduct mobile patrols. We Member
States must urgently and durably address the pending
shortage of helicopters, which could mean significant
delays in medical and casualty evacuations. Outmoded
logistics mean that the Mission struggles to deliver
food, water and ammunition across long supply lines to
remote bases. While we greatly appreciate that troop-
contributors have improved MINUSMA's intelligence
capabilities, troops at many of the force's bases still
do not have the equipment to know which groups are
preparing to attack the Mission, or from where. I know
that the Council members who visited Mali heard this
first-hand from the forces.

This brings me to my second point. The
Secretariat, troop- and police contributing countries
and Governments like mine that train and equip
peacekeepers need to work together to prepare missions
to repel attacks on the United Nations and civilians.
Addressing such gaps starts with deploying troops
that are better equipped and trained to operate in
unstable environments in the first place. That is why
the United States Government is providing counter-
IED training, contributing logistics capabilities, like
airlift to peace operations, and partnering with the
United Nations to provide better technology for troops
to communicate and use geographical data to improve
decision-making. In that regard, new technologies can
be helpful. For example, unmanned aerial systems
could allow peacekeepers to detect threats earlier and
monitor critical supply lines while keeping troops out
of the firing line. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has used such unmanned systems to help the
Government track armed groups and plan operations
that help protect civilians from imminent attack.

We know that, here at the United Nations, some
continue to be sceptical and worry that this technology
will be too intrusive. Peacekeeping missions, however,
share the information that they gather with host
countries - it is important to stress. We also must
note that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
is addressing concerns about the storage and security
of the information collected, which has also generated
concern. Even as we address these concerns together
through more consultation and transparency, we cannot
lose sight of the fact that the benefits of unmanned
aerial systems are lifesaving for both civilians and
peacekeepers. We as members of the Council should
encourage the United Nations, troop-contributing
countries and host Governments to deploy these
systems. Our peacekeepers, we know, are often in
impossibly difficult circumstances. The least that we
can do here back in New York is reduce their sense
of blindness. Over the past 15 months, starting with
the first-ever leaders' summit on United Nations
peacekeeping, Member States have also pledged more
than 55,000 new troops and police officers, including
new medical, aviation and engineering capabilities.
These collective efforts to improve peacekeeping have
generated a new reserve on which the United Nations can
draw to replace units unprepared to execute mandated
tasks. Accordingly, when the United Nations observes
a pattern of underperformance or an egregious failure
to act by peacekeepers, the Secretary-General should
repatriate and replace the contingent.

Looking beyond equipment and training,
the proliferation of asymmetric threats against
peacekeeping operations will also require an evolution
in peacekeeping leadership. In the field, Force
Commanders should be able to expect that every
contingent in a mission will be ready and willing to
respond when a terrorist unexpectedly strikes or
when the opportunity to head off an imminent attack
presents itself. Instead of relying on military responses
to asymmetric threats, missions should, as others have
noted, consider expanding their relationships with local
populations. For example, peacekeeping missions could
broaden outreach to faith leaders, local officials and
other members of civil society, while helping address
suspicions about the United Nations role and giving
peacekeepers better insight into threats on the ground.
Peacekeeping missions should of course be able to draw
upon the counter-terrorism resources within the United
Nations system. We appreciate that Assistant Secretary-
General Laborde of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED) could join us here. We hope that
CTED can work with other United Nations agencies to
deploy experts in preventing violent extremisms and
assist Force Commanders and Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General.

In conclusion, on 12 October, militias from the
Seleka coalition reportedly attacked civilians near the
town of Kaga-Bandoro in the Central African Republic.
One witness, a 40-year-old woman named Marcelline,
recalled,

"[w]e were in the house when suddenly the Seleka
arrived and set it on fire. They killed my uncle and
stabbed my brother to death".

Another 48-year-old-resident, named Yongon,
told a journalist that he ran past a body with its head
cut off, as he searched for cover. Looking to escape
the violence, people like Marcelline and Yongon fled
towards the safest place that they could find, a base
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
In that case the peacekeepers responded, firing on the
Seleka until the United Nations had repelled the militia.
This is of course just one case. In far too many others,
United Nations troops did not answer similar calls for
help.

The incident in Kaga-Bandoro shows that
when violence comes, people still desperately look
desperately to the United Nations to help keep them
safe. More important, it shows that when peacekeepers
act, they save lives. We must not let asymmetrical
threats keep peacekeepers from taking such action to
protect the vulnerable.

