Mr. Cardi (Italy): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this very timely and opportune briefing.
I also want to thank Mr. Chergui, Mr. Kaberuka and
Chef de Cabinet, Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, for
their briefings.

The joint United Nations-African Union framework
signed on 19 April, the report of the Secretary-General
on the joint United Nations-African Union review of
mechanisms to finance and support African Union
peace operations authorized by the Council (see S/2016/809) and the report of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission on the same theme should
mark the beginning of a new strengthened partnership
between the two organizations. Italy fully supports the
mechanism described in the report of the Secretary-
General for a joint planning and mandating of African
Union (AU) peace operations, which preserves the
prerogatives of the Security Council but at the same
time provides for African ownership and paves the way
for African solutions to African problems.

With regard to financing, the different options
to provide financial support envisaged in the report
(S/2017/454) of the Secretary-General can be chosen
on a case by case basis. Already in 2008, the report
(see S/2008/20l3) prepared by the panel of experts
chaired by former Prime Minister Romano Prodi called
for predictable and sustainable financial support to
United Nations-approved African Union peacekeeping
missions. We are thereofre fully in favour of exploring
the use of assessed contributions, provided, of course,
that the appropriate set of requirements in terms of troop
quality, training, equipment and high accountability
standards are met.

In that respect, we welcome the commitment
taken by the African Union Heads of State and
Government, at the Kigali Summit in July 2016, to
contribute 25 per cent of the costs of African Union
peace support operations, as reaffirmed in the report
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission.
It is a commitment that will increase significantly the
contribution of African States to peace operations.
Enhanced strategic cooperation with the African Union
is therefore one of the ways leading to smart and cost-
effective peace operations and a fundamental element,
in our view, of the reform of the peace and security
architecture envisaged by Secretary-General Guterres.

As others have said, African Union peace operations
have comparative advantages in terms of flexibility,
rapid deployment in challenging environments and
the capacity to perform robust mandate tasks, such as
peace enforcement and counter-terrorism, that United
Nations peacekeeping operations cannot perform. We
already have some examples of fields of action where
African Union-United Nations cooperation has been
positively tested, such as in Somalia with the African
Union Military Observer Mission in Somalia and in
Darfur with the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur.
I would like also to recall the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, whose revitalization
we deem essential as a preventive tool for the entire
region, and the recent creation of the Group of Five for
the Sahel force, a mission that can have a crucial impact
on security in the region in cooperation with the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali and with the European Union missions
active in the area - the European Union Training
Mission in Mali, the European Union Capacity Building
Mission (EUCAP) Sahel Mali, EUCAP Sahel Niger. I
would also like to recall the strong European support
for this force.

Concerning adherence to United Nations rules
and standards, we agree that it is paramount to
secure high standards of accountability and conduct
and discipline for the United Nations-mandated
peace operations undertaken by African Union. We
welcome the engagement stated in the AU Commission
Chairperson's report to strengthen African Union
human rights due diligence capabilities, including
preventing and combating sexual exploitation and abuse
in African Union-led peace operations. In that respect,
we think training is key, in particular predeployment
and mandate-oriented training. Allow me to recall that
Italy has a strong record in the training of national,
military and police personnel for peace operations.
Respect for human rights, the protection of civilians
and a gender perspective are embedded in our national
military training curriculums.

We stand ready to strengthen our engagement in
the capacity-building of the police and military units
of Member States willing to contribute to African
Union missions and to help the United Nations devise
new training instruments and capacities in support of
specific African needs.

