The President (spoke in Arabic): Under rule 37 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

(spoke in English)

"The Security Council deplores in the strongest
terms the recent events in the cities of Ramadi and
Fallujah in Anbar province in Iraq. The Security
Council condemns the attacks that are being
perpetrated by Al-Qaida affiliate, the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), against the people of
Iraq in an attempt to destabilize the country and
region. The Security Council recognizes that Iraqi
security forces, local police and tribes in Anbar
province are showing great courage as they fight to
defeat ISIL in their cities.

"The Security Council urges the people of
Iraq, including Iraqi tribes, local leaders and Iraqi
security forces in Anbar province, to continue,
expand and strengthen their cooperation against
violence and terror, and it stresses the critical
importance of continued national dialogue and
unity. The Security Council welcomes comments
from Grand Ayatollah al-Sistani welcoming
internally displaced residents of Anbar to Najaf and
Karbala, as well as the commitment of a number of
communities - Sunni, Shia and Kurd - to meet
the needs of the displaced.

"The Security Council expresses its strong
support for the continued efforts of the Iraqi
Government to help meet the security needs of
the entire population of Iraq. In this regard, the
Security Council acknowledges the efforts of the
Iraqi security forces and Iraqi local police, whose
members are also being targeted and killed in
ongoing attacks by terrorists. The Security Council
welcomes the commitment of the Government of

Iraq in the protection of the civilian population
in Fallujah and elsewhere and to the provision
of humanitarian relief, and encourages the
Government of Iraq to continue working with
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) and humanitarian agencies to ensure
the delivery of humanitarian relief. The Security
Council expresses concern about the impact of
the violence on civilians and encourages the safe
passage of civilians trapped in conflict areas,
as well as the safe return of internally displaced
persons as conditions allow.

"The Security Council stresses the critical
importance of continued national dialogue and
unity, an inclusive political process, the holding of
free and fair elections in April 2014, and the right
to peaceful protest as guaranteed under the Iraqi
Constitution. The Security Council believes that
this is vital to underpin a unified national stance
against terrorism and to ensure Iraq's long-term
security.

"The Security Council reaffirms the need
to bring perpetrators, organizers, financiers and
sponsors of these reprehensible acts of terrorism to
justice and urges all States, in accordance with their
obligations under international law and relevant
Security Council resolutions, to cooperate actively
with Iraqi authorities in this regard.

"The Security Council reaffirms that ISIL
is subject to the arms embargo and assets freeze
imposed by Security Council resolutions 1267
(1999) and 2083 (2012) and underlines the
importance of prompt and effective implementation
of these measures.

"The Security Council reaffirms the need to
combat by all means, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, threats to international
peace and security caused by terrorist acts and that
any acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation, wherever, whenever
and by whomsoever committed. The Security
Council reminds States that they must ensure that
measures taken to combat terrorism comply with
all their obligations under international law, in
particular international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support for

the independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of Iraq. The Security Council reiterates
that no terrorist act can reverse the path towards
peace, democracy and reconstruction in Iraq, which
is supported by the people and the Government of
Iraq and the international community."

(spoke in Arabic)

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2014/l.

I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.

