Mr. Forero (Colombia) (interpretation from Spanish): I wish to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month.

Let me join other delegations in thanking the
Secretary-General for submitting his report on the causes
of conflict in Africa, a most important contribution to the
quest for an explanation of the violence and instability
which have been experienced by the African continent
throughout its entire recent history and which have
perceptibly increased in recent years.
I must note at the outset that, as a developing
country, we are linked by powerful ties of solidarity and

 

kinship to that continent, all of whose countries are
members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. We
therefore welcome the fact that, even though it has been
late in coming - all too late if we consider the millions of
lives lost while the international community stood by
indifferent - there is now an investigation into the
underlying causes of this great suffering and desolation,
something which the Non-Aligned Movement has urged for
many years now.

The report of the Secretary-General is first and
foremost a document whose scope demands careful study
by the General Assembly. In view of the importance of this
matter, all Members of the United Nations, and especially
African countries, must contribute their views. This will
give us additional perspectives on the report, which will
make possible a discussion aimed at defining a common
United Nations position on this matter. This examination
must not become just another endless debate; what is
needed is conclusions that will enable us to adopt specific,
urgent measures. But this will be impossible, and its
implementation will be ineffective, without consensus
among the international community, and especially among
the African countries.

The report's analysis and recommendations do not
themselves constitute a definitive navigational chart for the
international community, for African States or for
developing countries in general. The report is a serious and
intelligent effort by a son of Africa with great experience
in United Nations peace efforts in that continent. But the
unfair fate of Africa, resulting from prejudice and from
prescriptions imposed by an international community that
has repeatedly failed to understand the complex realities of
Africa, is lesson enough that this time we must act
cautiously and, most important, respectfully when
considering the action that should follow general agreement
on the international system's policies towards Africa.

As the Secretary-General notes in his report,
development is a human right - my delegation would say
a fundamental human right - and is the long-term goal of
all the nations of Africa. Unfortunately, the seriousness of
Africa's problems, on so many fronts, means that the need
for greatly accelerated economic development will not
allow development to be relegated to a less important
position vis-a-vis other equally pressing factors in the
sphere of peace.

Developing countries hold the View that, when it is a
matter of achieving development, political efforts should
not have priority over economic efforts. We are therefore
concerned that some might see the opposite position in
this report or detect a focus that promotes the idea that
the fulfilment of certain political or institutional standards
is a sine qua non if Africa is to rid itself of
underdevelopment. We believe that we must make an
effort to avoid dogmatic stances that would favour one
position and reject another when considering whether
solutions should first tackle the problems of peace or the
problems of development.

We want to stress the report's view that African
countries should understand that the ability to achieve
peace lies first and foremost in their own hands, and that
the effectiveness of international support hinges on the
cooperation and political will of the recipient State. We
agree that any analysis of Africa must be based on
something other than the image of a dependent continent
anchored in the traumas of its colonial post, and that the
ability of Africans to determine their own future must be
recognized.

But we must take care not to assign to African
countries a responsibility beyond their capacities, thus
absolving the international community of nearly all its
responsibilities while leaving it with the power to monitor
compliance with a whole set of political, social and
institutional obligations and requirements. In our View, the
notion of Africa's principal responsibility with respect to
its own problems implies that both the cooperation and
the explicit consent of the State in question are essential
for the success of international efforts to promote peace,
and are moreover a basic principle of international law.

My delegation will now speak briefly about several
specific elements of the report. We fully agree with the
Secretary-General's initiative by which the Security
Council would urgently take up the question of publicly
identifying international arms traffickers and their
activities. There may be no more harmful international
influence on Africa and on developing countries in
general than the illegal introduction of weapons to their
territories. Hence, the international community's neglect
of this issue has unacceptable moral implications. The
response of the Security Council must be commensurate
with the scope of the problem; it should set up a
multilateral machinery that would begin by compiling and
publishing information on those who engage in the illegal
traffic in arms.

We View as interesting the Secretary-General's
analysis of humanitarian issues. His statement that human
security is the cardinal mission of the United Nations is

 
the most original utterance on this subject. But this is a
poorly defined concept that is not set out in the Charter,
and it must be discussed very carefully, as must the
concepts that derive from it, such as the use of force by the
Security Council to defend members of a peacekeeping
operation, humanitarian workers in a hostile environment,
or refugees or displaced persons subjected to massive
violence. Perhaps the initial answer to questions to which
these matters give rise can be found in the Secretary-
General's reference to the fact that the operations in Bosnia
and in Somalia illustrate the magnitude of the challenges
and dangers posed for peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers operating in a hostile environment without the
consent or support of all of the parties.

In the opinion of my delegation, United Nations
efforts to find an effective machinery to defend the
recipients of humanitarian assistance, as well as those who
distribute it, must be reconciled with the need to respect the
intergovernmental nature of the Organization and therefore
the sovereignty of Member States. The most notable aspect
of the report is its attempt to understand the new realities
that define the causes of recent conflicts in the light of
lessons learned over recent years. But, just as the failure in
Somalia should not discourage the international community
about its ability to take action for peace in Africa, that and
other exceptional cases should not be used as models for
building a theory that would disregard the sovereignty and
have no faith in the intentions and the legitimacy of African
States.

Another noteworthy aspect of the report is its search
for approaches ensuring that the efforts of the international
community do not end with the signing of peace accords,
but that they seek to foster development and stability from
all possible angles. This necessarily implies the
establishment of boundaries between efforts for the
maintenance of international peace and security, which are
mainly within the competence of the Security Council, and
activities for the reconstruction and strengthening of
institutions, which by their very nature fall under the
purview of the General Assembly. It is not a good idea to
erase the dividing line between responsibilities carried out
by force and those designed to assist the social and
institutional efforts of States, which must be transparent and
consensual.

The report of the Secretary-General offers the
international community a framework and instruments that
constitute a challenge as well as an opportunity to try to
recuperate from all the years of oblivion and discrimination
to which the African continent has been subjected. It is
clear that respect and cooperation are the only way.
