I would like to thank you, Madam President, for organizing this meeting, and High Representative Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing. The eighty-fifth report (see S/2020/1056, annex) of the Director General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) underlines once again the need for further work to eradicate the danger of the use of weapons of mass destruction in Syria. The Syrian regime continues to flout its obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention, thus undermining the international community's efforts to bring the regime to account for its well-documented crimes against humanity. The identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies in the regime's fraudulent declaration remain unresolved, in contravention of its obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention and resolution 2118 (2013). The outstanding issues related to the initial declaration of the Syrian regime must be resolved in full cooperation with the Declaration Assessment Team. The regime must declare the full extent of its chemical weapons programme to the OPCW without further delay. The 9 July decision of the OPCW Executive Council was acrucial step forward in addressing the possession and use of chemical weapons by the Syrian regime. We express our grave concern over the non-implementation of this decision by the Al-Assad regime within 90 days, as set out in that decision and as also indicated by the report of the OPCW Director General of 14 October 2020. Turkey looks forward to further measures, particularly during the next session of the Conference of States Parties, to address the failure of the Syrian regime to declare and destroy all of its chemical weapons and production facilities in a fully verifiable manner. The Security Council must act urgently and in unity on this crucial issue. That would be the only guarantee to prevent the future use of chemical weapons by the regime against its own people. The Fact-Finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic (FFM) is working on the remaining investigations as they relate to chemical weapons use in Syria. We look forward to seeing the results of those investigations. We note the reports of the FFM on the Saraqib and Aleppo incidents, released on 1 October 2020. The FFM report on the allegations of a chemical weapons attack in Aleppo in November 2018 proves the unfounded nature of the regime's allegations. These unsubstantiated claims are aimed at nothing but diverting attention from Syria's well-established culpability in a number of chemical weapons attacks. Turkey reiterates its full support for the Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) and looks forward to the publication of its next report. We once again underline our confidence in the integrity and impartiality of the OPCW Technical Secretariat, the DAT, the IIT and the FFM. Their invaluable efforts need to be supported, instead of being hindered or discredited. We would like to reiterate our call for accountability in Syria. The reports of the United Nations-OPCW Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) and the FFM, and most recently the IIT report on Ltamenah, provide sufficient basis on which we can act to end impunity. The IIT is working meticulously to identify the perpetrators of chemical weapons attacks in Syria and we commend its efforts. We also fully support the cooperation between the OPCW secretariat and the International, International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 (IIIM). The efforts of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic are also invaluable and contribute to the investigation of chemical weapons use in Syria. We should not allow attempts that jeopardize the norm against the use of weapons of mass destruction. As part of our collective duty, we must all urge the Syrian regime to cooperate with the OPCW. The Al-Assad regime has resorted to conventional weapons and chemical weapons alike during a decade-long war against its own citizens. We appeal to the Security Council to act in unity and enforce the implementation of its resolution 2118 (2013). Finally, I would also like to recall the special responsibility of those who have influence on the Syrian regime in this regard. History will judge us not only by what we have done, but also by what we have not done. We need to act decisively in order to ensure accountability in Syria. This is our historic responsibility to the victims of those chemical attacks.
