Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
As this is the first time that I am attending a formal
meeting of the Security Council since I assumed my
role as the Permanent Representative of China five
days ago, please allow me to take this opportunity to
extend my cordial greetings to you, Mr. President, and
the colleagues present. I look forward to working with
you, Sir, and every colleague in close communication,
coordination and cooperation.

China thanks Peru for its productive work as
President of the Council for the month of July and
congratulates Poland on its assumption of the Council
presidency for the month of August. We welcome
Mr. Czaputowicz, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Poland, who is presiding over this
meeting. We give special thanks to Ms. Gamba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict; Ms. Fore, Executive Director of
the United Nations Children's Fund; and the two other
briefers for their statements, which were very moving.

Children are the hope of every country. Caring for
children is protecting our future. In recent years the
international community has made tremendous efforts
to protect children affected by conflicts and achieved
positive progress, but armed conflicts, far from being
eliminated, have intensified. As was pointed out by
Ms. Gamba in her statement, 12,000 children died or
were maimed in 2018, setting a new record high. That
record high serves as a sad reminder that we have a heavy
and arduous responsibility to protect children from the
scourge of war so that they can grow up in safety and
security. China opposes and condemns violations of
children's rights and interests in armed conflicts and
supports the efforts of the United Nations and the
Security Council to protect children in armed conflicts.
I would like to emphasize the following points.

First, achieving peace provides the best protection
for children. As children bear the brunt of war and
conflicts, preventing, resolving and diffusing conflicts
is a top priority. That is the fundamental way out. Being
the primary organ for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Security Council should
fulfil its duties by using all political means, such as
mediation, good offices, dialogue and negotiation,
as is stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations,
promote cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations and support and urge parties to a conflict
to resolve disputes by peaceful means so as to create a
safe environment for children to grow up.

Secondly, we should support the countries concerned
as they take up their primary responsibilities. The key to
implementing resolution 1882 (2009), on the protection
of children affected by armed conflict, lies in the
efforts and cooperation of the Governments concerned.
The international community should fully respect the
leadership ofthe countries concerned, enhance dialogue
and communication and provide effective support and
assistance in addressing difficulties, including financial
and technical assistance. In the long run, sustainable
development is the foundation underpinning lasting
peace. The international community should respect
and guarantee the rights of the countries concerned and
their status as developing countries.

Thirdly, we should forge synergy in international
efforts to tackle both the symptoms and the root
causes of problems. In the collective endeavour of
the international community to resolve conflicts, the
protection of children should be treated as an integral
part and given full attention in political negotiations
and peace agreements. In advancing the post-conflict
reconstruction and peacebuilding strategy, we should
give priority to children's return to school and
reintegration in society and enhancing child-protection
mechanisms. Adequate financial resources should be
provided and development assistance scaled up. The
countries concerned should be actively supported in
their efforts to eradicate poverty, promote education and
protect children's rights. China is ready to work with all
parties in that respect so that children in conflict areas
can bid farewell to weapons, stay away from war, lead
a happy life, with dignity, and create a bright future for
themselves, their countries and the world, at large.

