Mr. Christopher (United States of America): I
congratulate you, Madam President, and Italy on assuming
the presidency in this very commemorative and important
year. It is an honour for me to represent the United States
at this kind of important session.

When the Security Council first met on a January
morning in 1946, the nations of the world were recovering
from war and they were deeply conscious of their past
failures to preserve peace. My predecessor Edward
Stettinius, who represented the United States at that first
meeting, called the United Nations "not a fulfilment, but a
beginning" (S/PV.], p. 7). It turned out to be a very
challenging beginning because as soon as the pleasantries
had been exchanged on that January morning the Council
found itself divided over issues like Iran, Greece, and
Indonesia.

At critical moments in the years that followed, the
United Nations, and the Security Council in particular, have
overcome divisions, to help us build a more peaceful and
more secure world. For example, the United Nations
Security Council's stand against Iraqi aggression in the
Persian Gulf gave new life to the founding purpose of the
Charter. From Cambodia to El Salvador to Mozambique,
United Nations forces have helped the survivors of some of
this century's greatest calamities to build new lives in
larger freedom. Dedicated United Nations personnel have
brought food to the hungry in some of the most forgotten
corners of the world. They have eradicated infectious
diseases and reduced infant mortality around the world. We
know and recognize that the United Nations has
succeeded in these tasks by combining the strength of
individual States while representing the will of the world
as a whole.

But the United Nations has evolved and grown in
ways that its founders simply could not have foreseen. Its
structure and its finances have not kept pace with these
rapid changes, and both our structure and our finances are
now under immense strain.

The United States has a very important stake and
role in a successful United Nations. We recognize that
American participation, leadership and support are
essential if the United Nations is to be effective. I want
to assure you that President Clinton is committed to our
meeting our obligations to this Organization, the
commitments we made under the Charter.

To sustain support for the United Nations, we must
reshape the Organization as if we were creating it anew
today. Of course, the United Nations must continue to
meet the challenges for which it was created. But as we
approach the twenty-first century, the United Nations
must also confront the new security challenges of our
time: fighting proliferation, fighting terrorism, fighting
crime, fighting narcotics, and seeking to arrest the damage
to our environment. These threats have taken on new
scope in our more interdependent world. They are threats
that can be dealt with only on a multilateral basis and,
hence, the Security Council has a special responsibility to
meet them.

To meet these challenges, the United Nations must
become more focused, more efficient and more
accountable. It must direct its limited resources to the
world's most pressing problems. Every nation, large and
small, has an obligation to ensure that the United Nations
sets disciplined and clear priorities, so that our activities
in the United Nations will meet our expectations and earn
our support. The primary purpose of the United Nations
is to save and to lift lives. Certainly with that kind of
noble purpose, it cannot afford to waste time or money in
that effort.

We must also resolve to maintain and improve the
effectiveness of the Security Council. Germany and Japan
should become permanent members. Each region should
be fairly represented, without, at the same time, making
the Council too large and too unwieldy to be effective.

 

It will take time, of course, to make the United
Nations as effective as it must be to meet both the old and
the new goals we have set. But that is all the more reason
to get started now and to redouble our efforts. Unlike our
predecessors on that January morning in 1946, happily we
are not fundamentally divided. We also have a half century
of experience behind us, and, I believe, a clear sense of
what must be done. We can and should expect this year to
end with a concrete blueprint for change and a
determination to turn our plans into action.

