Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): Let me begin by
congratulating the Netherlands on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council, and by thanking
you, Madam President, for convening today's debate
on Afghanistan, which coincides with International
Women's Day. We pay tribute today to the important
contributions of women in promoting stable and
prosperous societies. It is an occasion to focus on what
more needs to be done to empower women against the
many challenges they face, particularly in conflict and
post-conflict societies.

I am pleased that Her Excellency Ms. Julie Bishop,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Australia, will be
joining us later on, and my dear colleague, Ms. Habiba
Sarabi, Deputy Chairperson of Afghanistan's High
Peace Council, and Ms. Mariam Safi are among us
here today. I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary- General, Ambassador Tadamichi Yamamoto,
for his briefing.
Today's meeting provides another occasion to
assess the overall situation in Afghanistan. 1 am pleased
to report that, in the course of the past three months,
the imperatives of Afghanistan's security, stability and
development received added international attention,
with particular focus on addressing the root causes
of the conflict and strengthening our defensive and
security capabilities, in parallel with efforts to devise a
more practical peace plan.

Our security forces, with better support from
international partners, have increased pressure on
terrorist groups across the country. Nevertheless,
regional sponsors of terrorism, having faced
international pressure and setbacks in the countryside,
remain belligerent, as reflected by their efforts to
engineer violent attacks in urban centres with high
numbers of civilian casualties. Despite that, governance
reform and economic development have continued
unabated. A national dialogue among various political
forces has been under way on issues that are crucial
to our unity and political stability, the success of our
peace efforts and preparations for holding timely and
transparent parliamentary elections this year.

Afghanistan has always emphasized that our
partnership with the international community has been
a strategic asset for advancing shared goals of defeating
terrorism and achieving stability. In that light, the
Council's visit to Kabul from 13 to 15 January and its
high-level meeting on 19 January on the security and
development of Afghanistan and Central Asia (see S/PV.8162) were clear signs of international support
at the highest level. We are grateful to all members
of the Council for their collective commitment and
improved consensus on a more focused engagement on
key issues related to Afghanistan's security, stability
and development. We wish to offer a special debt of
gratitude to my friend and colleague Ambassador
Kairat Umarov for his personal efforts in that regard as
President of the Council during the month of January.

During the Kabul visit, the Council discussed
a range of security, political, economic and social
issues with Afghanistan's leadership in Government,
the Parliament, the judiciary, the High Peace Council,
political parties and civil society. One common request
pertained to effective Council action to address the
sponsorship of terrorist outfits and the problem of
their regional safe havens as priority needs for security
and stability in Afghanistan. That was highlighted by
Ms. Safi here today. It is also reflected in the recent
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan (S/2018/165).
Of late, we have seen new measures at the
international level to change the calculus and promote
genuine and productive counter-terrorism cooperation.
In that regard, recent decisions, including the reduction
of financial aid to the State concerned and its inclusion
in the watch list of the Financial Action Task Force
represent a renewed attempt to encourage genuine
action on the crucially important goal of defeating
terrorism effectively. We hope that the trend continues
and that the response to those measures is positive, in
the interest of peace and security in Afghanistan and
the region.

Days after the Council's visit and almost
immediately after the 19 January high-level meeting
of the Council, regional sponsors of terrorism, through
their trained violent proxies, unleashed a new wave
of terrorist attacks. The sheer level of savagery in
those despicable and heinous attacks was startling.
Armed gunmen from the Taliban's Haqqani Network
attacked the Intercontinental Hotel in Kabul, killing
18, including 14 foreign nationals, and wounding
many more. The subsequent week witnessed two more
barbaric attacks - one in the Jalalabad compound of
the international non-governmental organization Save
the Children, where 27 people died, and the other was
an explosives-laden ambulance detonated next to a
major civilian hospital in the heart of Kabul. The blast
destroyed vehicles, shops and buildings nearby, killing
at least 105 civilians and injuring 235. The use of an
ambulance for such a ghastly attack is a war crime under
international law, including international humanitarian
law. The Council condemned the attacks and cited the
need to hold the perpetrators, organizers and financiers
ofthe attacks to account. Yet, despite all ofthe evidence
linking those attacks to regional sponsors, the question
once again is, When will that happen?

Last week, Afghanistan convened the second
conference of the Kabul Process for peace and security.
That marked a major development in the context
of peace efforts aimed at ending the conflict and
achieving a credible and just peace that conforms to
the aspirations of all Afghans. In recognition of our
people's demand for ending violence, President Ghani
reached out to the Taliban in an unprecedented manner,
calling for direct talks without preconditions. Should
his call receive a positive response, the Taliban will
be granted the chance to become normal citizens, to
compete peacefully in politics through democratic
procedures, to be relieved of Security Council sanctions
measures and to enjoy the benefits of other positive
measures. In turn, they will have to give up their
long-standing path of violence. Moreover, our peace
process aims to protect and expand, not diminish, the
rights of our people, especially women. The time is
now for the Taliban to respond affirmatively and seize
the historic opportunity before them. We are inspired
by the international community's level of support for
our new peace plan. The conference renewed the call
for tangible measures for combating terrorism, in
accordance with obligations stipulated in the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and various
Security Council counter-terrorism resolutions. We
hope that States that have failed in that endeavour will
adopt a new approach based on express commitments
for the benefit of regional security.

For too long, the debate on State-sponsored
terrorism has been kept away from international
forums, including the United Nations. Beyond the
intelligence networks, the rest of the world knows
little about the behaviour of that aspect of terrorism
at national, regional and international levels. The
regional State sponsors of terror outfits exported to our
country have recently pursued new methods of denial
and belligerence by using reverse psychology and
attempting to distort narratives. Irrefutable evidence
of complicity in facilitating safe havens and logistical
support to terrorists has been responded to by failed
methods of counter-narratives, accusing Afghanistan
of "providing safe havens to terrorists". Exploiting the
democratic political dynamics of Afghanistan, they
attempt to sow discord among our people, victimize
our refugees by unfairly linking them to terrorism and
portray their orchestrated terror attacks as civil war.

Meanwhile, according to the latest United Nations
report, we have suffered more than 10,000 civilian
casualties yearly over the past four years, mainly due
to terrorist attacks plotted beyond our frontiers. In
their desperation, they do not even hold back from such
heavily risk-prone attempts as to abuse and manipulate
ironclad and all-weather friendships in international
relations, in favour of concealing the evidence of
their sponsorship of terrorism, obfuscating facts and
distorting narratives at regional and global forums.

In the light of increased terrorist activities around
the world, the time has come to openly debate the
regional State sponsorship of terror outfits exported
to our country and let the world know more about its
behaviour. The Kabul Process is notjust about outreach
to the Taliban; it is about ending the conflict, achieving
peace and preserving the democratic order, for which
numerous Afghans and allies have sacrificed their
lives. Moreover, the Taliban should not be permitted
to misuse the opportunity they have been presented, as
they have done in the past.

As we grapple with security challenges, we are
working to achieve the important objectives stipulated
in the agreement that founded the National Unity
Government of Afghanistan, witnessed and welcomed
by the international community. That is essential for
our national unity and political stability, as it is for the
success of our new peace plan. The effort is carried out
within the parameters of a broad-based dialogue with a
view to advancing the national interests of Afghanistan,
in conformity with the spirit of our Constitution. Our
overall objective is to advance national unity and
strengthen social cohesion and inclusivity to achieve
a just and peaceful society, fully grounded in the
rule of law, where our youth can fulfil their national
aspirations. We are confident that our efforts will soon
yield positive outcomes.

On today's special occasion, I reaffirm the National
Unity Government's commitment to empowering the
role of women in all facets of our society and politics.
Ms. Sarabi's briefing offered a clear perspective on
progress made in terms of the benchmarks of our national
strategy, resolution 1325 (2000) and the challenges ahead
ofus. We now have female ministers, deputy ministers,
members of Parliament, peacemakers, civil society
activists and ambassadors serving as proactive agents
for the development of Afghanistan. Two weeks ago,
at a historic event, Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah
represented Afghanistan at the inaugural session of the
Human Rights Council in Geneva. That symbolized
Afghanistan's overall commitment to the principles
of universal human rights. Despite progress, we know
that our achievements in the area of the promotion and
protection of human rights need to be consolidated as
indicated in the report of the Secretary-General with
regard to civilian casualties documented by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
which I mentioned earlier.

Against all odds, Afghanistan has progressed
steadily on the path of economic cooperation, increased
regional connectivity and shared prosperity. We have
expanded multidimensional relations with our Central
Asian neighbours, thereby resulting in numerous
agreements in the areas of trade, connectivity
and economic cooperation. The inauguration
of Afghanistan's segment of the Turkmenistan-
Afghanistan-Pakistan-India Pipeline in Herat by
President Ghani and leaders and senior officials of
Pakistan, Turkmenistan and India, following more
than a decade of preparatory work, has generated
new incentives for cooperation and opportunities for
fostering mutual trust and confidence. Additionally,
other regional projects aim to boost productivity
and economic cooperation for common gains. We
are looking forward to the forthcoming ministerial
conference on Afghanistan to be held in Tashkent.

We wish to expand relations with all partners,
including the United Nations. We are grateful for
the crucial assistance role of UNAMA, which has
been a catalyst for bringing change to the lives of
our people. We welcome the renewal of UNAMA's
mandate through the adoption of resolution 2405
(2018) and underscore once again the imperative of
implementing the one United Nations approach for
achieving optimum efficiency and coherence. Let me
reconvey our appreciation for the dedicated efforts and
leadership of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Yamamoto - a dear friend.

Combating the illicit network of narcotics, money-
laundering, and terrorism finance remains a key
priority for us. Based on our national drug action plan,
we have continued eradication operations, and opiate
seizures have reached their highest levels since 2012.
We will continue to increase cooperation with our allies
to strengthen the relevant law enforcement agencies,
foster greater intelligence-sharing and set up effective
mechanisms to curtail drug trafficking.

Additionally, refugee repatriation from
neighbouring countries remains operational. We are
working in close collaboration with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
provide assistance and much needed services to that
vulnerable group. We call for continued international
support for the joint humanitarian response plan for the
period from 2018 to 2021, which requires $437 million
for 2018 to assist 2.8 million people in need. However,
security and durable peace are fundamental solutions
to addressing that humanitarian challenge, and
require comprehensive national, regional, and global
commitment and action.

Lastly, in two weeks's time, 21 March will mark
the beginning of Nowruz - the Afghan New Year.
We are beginning this new spring season with hope,
determination and confidence. As international pressure
to address the root causes of violence in our country
intensifies, our defence and security forces stand as
capable as ever to protect and defend Afghanistan
against international terrorism. Given that, we have
taken a historic step towards the restoration of durable
peace in our country. In that light, we look to our
international partners, including the Council, to remain
at our side in that endeavour.

