Mr. Taha (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, and the
Council for having invited me to attend this important
meeting on the Sudan. I would also like to thank the
Council for the interest that it has shown in the
question of peace in the Sudan, which prompted the
Council to hold a historic meeting in Nairobi last year
to encourage the Government of the Sudan and the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM/A) to put
the final touches to the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement and to complete the negotiations by the end
of last year.

In that meeting in Nairobi, declared the
Government's determination to complete the
negotiations and to arrive at a comprehensive peace
agreement by the end of the year. So did my brother,
Mr. John Garang, the Chairman of the SPLM/A. Earlier
this year, we actually celebrated the signing of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, which was endorsed
by the legislative institutions. Actual implementation
of the Agreement began in accordance with the agreed
timetable for the initial stage, thus opening a new
chapter of the Sudan's history.

In this context, I would like to inform the Council
that we have officially deposited the Agreement
document with the Security Council. Also, I would like
to welcome the report of the Secretary-General, which
is the subject of this meeting. With regard to the
upcoming peace support mission, the report is
professional and objective. We would like to assure the
Council of our continued cooperation with the
Organization and of our readiness to discuss the details
of the mission, in accordance with the provisions of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

In its historic meetings on 18 and 19 November
2004, the Security Council called on the international
community to provide assistance for the
implementation of the Agreement soon after its
signature and entry into force. In the same meetings,
the Council declared its commitment to provide
assistance to the people of the Sudan as soon as the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement is signed, to help
with the efforts aimed at building a unified and
peaceful nation living in prosperity, it being understood
that both parties would have to honour their agreed
commitments in full. This Council also urged the joint
assessment mission to speedily complete its work,
including determining the assistance needed for
reconstruction and economic development, writing off
debts and pursuing trade activities soon after the
signature and entry into force of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement.

The Agreement has been signed, and its
implementation is currently under way. So are the
efforts to assess the needs of the Sudan. The
Government of Norway, to whom we owe our thanks,
called for the convening of a donors conference for
reconstruction and economic development in the
Sudan. Here in the Council, I would like to call on the
international community to support efforts aimed at
reconstruction and development so that the people of
the Sudan will enjoy the peace dividend and reap the
benefits accrued therefrom, which will make peace
both sustainable and permanent.

I appeal to the Security Council to call on all
countries to undertake the following measures. First,
lift any economic and trade restrictions or sanctions
that obstruct reconstruction, development and
investment efforts, and initiate an active partnership
with the Sudan. Secondly, completely write off foreign
debt owed by the Government of the Sudan to
international institutions and States, so that we in the
Sudan can channel our resources into providing social
services to our citizens, build our infrastructure,
improve the capabilities of our citizens and
institutions, fight poverty and increase our growth
levels in accordance with the Millennium Development
Goals. Thirdly, donate generously at the upcoming
donors conference to get the economic development
process and the desired comprehensive growth under
way.

My country has suffered from the scourge of war
for so long, and we are determined, through the
Government of National Unity, to bring about a real
change on the ground so as to realize our
reconstruction goals, development and unity. A
prosperous Sudan, at peace with itself and its
neighbours, is good for the region, for the continent
and for the world at large. I am confident that this
Council and the international community will spare no
effort to assist the people of the Sudan in the
realization of this noble objective.

The Agreement that was signed on 9 January
2005 in Nairobi is comprehensive. While addressing
the root causes of the protracted conflict between
northern and southern Sudan, the Agreement does not
ignore issues that are germane to the cause of the
country as a whole - namely, the fact that the Sudan is
a large, multi-ethnic, multireligious and multicultural
country - or weaken its infrastructure, which has
suffered imbalances in its development and services
because of the conditions of war and embargo.

The Agreement addresses these aspects for the
whole of the Sudan in that it, first of all, lays the
ground for a political system that considers citizenship
the basis for rights and duties, commits to international
human rights instruments, and recognizes diversity and
deems it a source of strength and a basis for unity.
Secondly, the Agreement establishes a democratic rule,
dedicated to justice, the rule of law and good
governance, in which the Sudan will be governed on a
decentralized basis, with power-sharing arrangements
between the centre, the State and local government, in
accordance with a constitutional regime defining and
regulating these powers. Thirdly, the financial
resources of the country are fairly divided in a manner
that took into account the differences in the level of
development, services and imbalances resulting from
the war among the different states.

The Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the
just and fair provisions included therein for power-
sharing and wealth-sharing has laid the necessary
foundation for a political and developmental solution
to the war in Darfur and for a comprehensive peace to
prevail throughout the Sudan - in the eastern and
middle parts, in the north and in all of its constituent
parts.

I have just returned from Darfur, where I had the
chance to witness firsthand the situation, which I
discussed with the citizens and the officials in the
different states of Darfur. My visit has convinced me
even more of the need to arrive at a political solution
that will end the war and alleviate the suffering of our
people there. His Excellency the President of the
Republic recently entrusted me with the Darfur file. I
would like to assure the Security Council that the
Government is determined to pursue the course of
settlement and that our resolve, patience, perseverance
and seriousness that led us to arrive at the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement in Naivasha+ will
remain with us until we end the hostilities in Darfur
and declare the year 2005 a year for peace for the
Sudan - a comprehensive peace, God willing.

On the basis of the mission personally entrusted
to me by the President of the Republic and of the
Government's commitment to finding a political and
sustainable solution to the problem, I should like to
submit to the Council our vision for speedy
negotiations to swiftly put an end to the suffering of
the people of Darfur.

I shall begin with the humanitarian sector.
Through it words and its actions, the Government has
demonstrated its readiness to devote full attention to
that sector. The Government made great strides in
concluding agreements with the United Nations and
with armed groups in Darfur aimed at facilitating
urgent relief measures for those adversely affected by
the unfortunate events that have taken place in past
months. The Government has made serious efforts to
remove all obstacles facing humanitarian work,
whether undertaken by United Nations agencies or by
non-governmental organizations. Those efforts have
sometimes been strained by a lack of adequate
international financing for relief efforts, at other times
by adverse weather or Darfur's weak infrastructure,
and often by security failures resulting from armed
groups' lack of commitment to the ceasefire. However,
regardless of the reasons why humanitarian relief
efforts have sometimes been obstructed, I should like
to assure the Council and the rest of the international
community of our strict commitment to our pledge in
this regard and our consistent readiness to discuss,
negotiate and enact any new measures that should be
undertaken to overcome the obstacles we face.

I turn next to the security sector. Despite the
improvement in that sector in comparison with the
period during which the situation drastically
deteriorated, the Government believes that the security
situation could see further improvement should the
following conditions materialize.

First, the authority, capacities and forces of the
African Union should be enhanced - financially and
operationally - so that it can complete its deployment
and undertake the tasks of monitoring the ceasefire and
putting an end to the security incursions that have cast
a long shadow over humanitarian efforts and efforts to
achieve a peaceful political settlement.

Secondly, disarmament programmes should be
undertaken immediately, since they are a primary
factor in the re-establishment of peace and security in
Darfur. That can take place as soon as the ceasefire is
respected. The Government, for its part, will undertake
specific projects in that regard, benefiting from the
experiences of other countries, such as promoting
development in exchange for weapons. However, an
effective disarmament process will require financial
and technical support from the international
community and a higher degree of commitment than
that currently displayed by the armed groups in Darfur.

Thirdly, we must fully open the way for relief
efforts and facilitate the movement of citizens inside
Darfur so as to help promote normal social and
economic activity, which in turn will have positive
effects on the normalization of life and advance the
cause of peace.

Fourthly, human rights violations and other
crimes in Darfur must be investigated and the
perpetrators must be punished so that peace can prevail
and a peace settlement can be achieved. The
Government has in fact begun to implement the
recommendations of the Independent Investigation
Committee established by presidential decree in May
2004 to investigate the events and human rights
violations in Darfur, on which the Council has already
been briefed. Emphasizing the seriousness with which
it regards the Committee's recommendations, the
Government has established a Judicial Inquiry
Committee, chaired by a justice of the supreme court,
at the end of January to investigate those crimes and
violations and punish the perpetrators. In that regard,
we have read the recent report of the International
Commission of Inquiry and have already distributed to
delegations our comments concerning some of the
aspects of the report and its recommendations. We
hope that members will consider our comments
objectively. We are fully confident that the
recommendations of the report of the national
Committee will achieve precisely the results called for
in the report of the International Commission. The
Government established the Independent Committee as
a reflection of the national will: we attach importance
to the principles of accountability, the administration of
justice and an end to impunity.

Fifthly, the repercussions of general human rights
violations and of other abuses not attributed to
individuals named in the report must be addressed.

Sixthly, detainees in Darfur who were not
indicted or proved guilty of crimes specified under the
law must be released. That is a measure that has
already been undertaken by the Government.

Realizing the principle of accountability and
bringing to justice those accused of committing crimes
should not divert our attention from the need to achieve
peace first by putting an end to all hostilities,
guaranteeing full commitment to the ceasefire and
reaching the peaceful settlement that we seek. Here, we
are committed to moving the Abuja negotiations
forward as soon as possible. We are also fully
committed to finding a just political settlement.

I turn next to the economic and social sector. A
total solution to the problems in Darfur cannot be
achieved without enhancing the basis for peaceful
coexistence among members of the population. Better
still, we should move from peaceful coexistence to
interdependence and cooperation among various
groups. Historically, these have been a hallmark of
Darfur and a guaranteed formula for constructive
coexistence within society. The Government's plan to
restore that stability is based on the following steps.

First, relations among the population must be
reorganized on the basis of measures and agreements
linked to Darfur's heritage and guided by the
requirements of modern development within the
structures of the State and society. Such measures and
agreements include organizing land ownership and
employing modern civil concepts and mechanisms to
enhance understanding and settle local disputes.

Secondly, emigrants and refugees must be
repatriated and returned to their villages and the social
and economic infrastructure must be rehabilitated in
order to ensure that they remain in their home regions.

Thirdly, grievances must be addressed, damages
assessed and steps taken to address those damages. In
that regard, the Government has already established a
new commission, headed by a Supreme Court justice,
to determine the losses and evaluate the required
reparations.

Fourthly, short- and medium-term rehabilitation
and development projects must be prepared and
implemented, in agreement with the donors and the
international community. We referred to that need at
the Security Council meeting held in Nairobi in
November in the context of the joint assessment
mission, which will submit the Sudan document to the
donors conference in Oslo in April. I should like today
to reiterate my call on the countries of the world to
support those efforts at the donors conference.

Fifthly, with respect to the political sector, the
Government of the Sudan believes that none of the
aforementioned measures and steps can succeed
without a radical political settlement. The Government,
in negotiating with the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement (SPLM), has already demonstrated its
unprecedented determination, in the context of the
history of the crisis in our country, constructively and
creatively to address the issue of the political
settlement.

In that respect, I should like to stress that the
basic principles endorsed by the Government and in the
1998 Constitution and the Peace Agreement signed
with the SPLM. on 9 January represent the
Government's firm belief in and commitment to
applying them to all States of the Sudan, be they in the
South, the North, the East, the West or the centre. The
Government is prepared to undertake the final
settlement on the basis of those principles once the
details and mechanisms have been agreed through
negotiations with the armed groups in Darfur. I should
now like briefly to summarize those principles.

First, a formula for an advanced federal system of
Government, the most appropriate kind for the
Sudanese States, should be adopted. For the
Government, that would entail the adoption of a
constitution for each State, to be superceded only by
the national constitution endorsed in the Nairobi Peace
Agreement. In the context of the relationship between
the State and national constitutions, the States shall
enjoy the following authorities. First, they shall receive
expanded political and economic powers, the details of
which shall be agreed upon at a later date. The Peace
Agreement with the South highlights and defines those
powers. States are to enjoy the freedom of political and
economic decision-making in the context of
decentralized rule. Secondly, the executive and
legislative organs of each State shall be chosen on the
basis of free and general elections and of open
competition among political actors. Thirdly, the States
shall enjoy equitable participation in the legislative and
political structures of the central authority. Fourthly, an
independent judiciary shall be established. Fifthly, an
independent and active civil service shall be created.

Secondly, the cultural and social plurality of the
Sudan is a positive asset that, with the restoration of
political and social stability, could be used to achieve a
unique unity based on pluralism.

Thirdly, we must find an equitable formula for
sharing wealth in a way that will allow each and every
State to receive its fair share. We can arrive at that
formula through the Agreement on Wealth Sharing
signed in Naivasha with the SPLM.

Fourthly, a commission for development and
reconstruction must be established to address
immediate and long-term development needs and to
allocate a budget from the central revenues of the State
and the contributions of donors.

The perpetuation of the status quo in Darfur - be
it through prevarication in the negotiations, the delayed
achievement of a settlement or a loss of focus on the
need to find a genuine solution - will exacerbate the
problem. My message to the Security Council and to
the international community is based on our sincere
and honest desire to outline the parameters of a real
settlement of the crisis and our commitment to
defining, negotiating and achieving a political solution.

The vision that I have described is based on our
belief that the problem must be solved in the context of
affirming the principles of democracy, decentralization,
good governance and equal rights - principles that we
all share. In that context, we are aware of the great role
to be played by the international community, and
which it must play through the African Union, as
agreed. We welcome the efforts that have been made in
that regard, be they in the sponsorship, witnessing or
guaranteeing of agreements or in the follow-up to their
implementation. We also welcome and request all
financial and technical support for advancing our
efforts.

In conclusion, the Government of the Sudan
reiterates its thanks and appreciation to the Security
Council and the international community, as well as to
the specialized agencies of the United Nations, in
particular the United Nations Advance Mission in
Sudan headed by Mr. Jan Pronk, for their efforts to
define a working vision. The Mission will find us, as
always, ready to cooperate in the achievement of its
mandate. We look forward to the Council's
constructive support and understanding as the
Government strives to meet its commitments in full
and in a way that will contribute to establishing the
urgently-needed, comprehensive and permanent peace
throughout the Sudan - in the South, the North, the
West, Darfur, the East and the centre.

