Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like first
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting. We are grateful that the Secretary-General has
returned so that he can be with us this afternoon. This
is a unique opportunity for us to consider this matter
with the full participation of the key regional partners.
On behalf of Angola, I commend the Secretary-General
for the way in which he has seized this challenge and
has come to the Council so that we may jointly
consider this crisis, which is not only a Caribbean
crisis, but international: it is our crisis.

The current crisis in Haiti calls once again for the
Security Council and the rest of the international
community to take a stand by doing what is our
responsibility: to restore peace and the rule of law in
that crisis-ridden country. Our debate this afternoon in
itself attests to the resolve of the international
community and of the Council to act. The armed
insurgency, if allowed to proceed unchecked, would not
represent a dignified or effective alternative. The
outcome would be yet another outlaw regime, which
would open yet another chapter in the era of darkness
and obscurantism for the people of Haiti - an era that
has already lasted too long.

In my delegation's View, those are strong enough
reasons for the deep concerns expressed by the
international community with regard to events in Haiti
and for our willingness to act. We fully support the
initiative of CARICOM. and of the OAS, presented so
eloquently as a political solution to the crisis, and we
appeal to the opposition to reconsider its rejection of
the Plan that has been submitted. We believe the
democratic opposition should seize this opportunity as
a realistic way to advance its objectives for the
democratization of Haiti and for the attainment of its
political goals.

We would like to express our appreciation for the
responses made by the Governments of France, Canada
and the United States. I believe their continued
engagement will help the people of Haiti and the other
countries of the region to find appropriate solutions to
the crisis. My delegation is prepared to support the
actions of the Security Council aimed at an effective
engagement in Haiti, including that of an international
force to support a political settlement. My delegation
also fully supports the appointment by the Secretary-
General of a Special Adviser on Haiti, as the situation
is evolving in such a way that it warrants a more
effective United Nations presence.

The humanitarian crisis unfolding in Haiti is a
cause of great concern. We call on the parties to ensure
the protection of civilians, the safety of humanitarian
personnel and respect for human rights. In that
connection, we support the launching of the flash
appeal for humanitarian assistance to the people of
Haiti.

In conclusion, I support yesterday's response by
the President of the Security Council in the form of a
press statement (SC/8009). I hope that the Council will
issue a presidential statement this afternoon, which
should be clear and unambiguous in order to deal with
the situation, which is evolving in a very dangerous
way. The testimony presented this afternoon by the
countries of the region should be taken very seriously
as sound advice.

