Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Allow me, on behalf of
the Jamaican delegation, to thank the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, Mrs. Sadako Ogata,
for her very comprehensive briefing, in which she has
certainly given us food for thought.
We wish to take this opportunity to commend
Mrs. Ogata for her leadership of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and to recognize her unwavering
commitment and service to the international
community during a very complicated and often
difficult decade in which the global population of
concern to UNHCR has grown to some 22.3 million
persons.

We have observed the humanitarian crises and the
mass movements of populations in the former Yugoslav
republics, in Kosovo, in the Great Lakes region of
Africa, in West Africa, in the Horn of Africa, in East
Timor and in Afghanistan, to name but a few. It is a
tribute to Mrs. Ogata's leadership and part of her
legacy that in all these tumultuous times UNHCR was
there, faithfully executing its mandate in seeking to
provide international protection to refugees and other
persons of concern and in seeking permanent solutions
by assisting Governments to facilitate voluntary
repatriation and/or assimilation into new communities.
It is in this context that I wish to congratulate the
UNHCR in advance on its fiftieth anniversary.

My delegation recognizes that the task facing
UNHCR is a mammoth one. As Mrs. Ogata has said on
previous occasions, "Solutions to refugee problems
take time." At this time, my delegation wishes to
highlight a few areas to which the United Nations as a
whole, and the Security Council in particular, must
devote greater attention, with the ultimate aim of
enhancing the effectiveness of the United Nations
humanitarian activities.

First, we attach importance to the strengthening
of UNHCR's emergency preparedness and response
capability. As Mrs. Ogata has indicated, UNHCR is
now focusing on upgrading its capacity to address
refugee emergencies at short notice.

Secondly, we see the need for an intensification
of efforts to guarantee the safety of humanitarian and
associated personnel. Only recently we were saddened
at the murders of three UNHCR staff in West Timor
and another in Guinea. We maintain that if
humanitarian personnel are unable to discharge their
duties in an environment free from fear and
intimidation, then their efforts will come to nought.

Thirdly, the 1994 Convention on the Protection of
United Nations and Associated Personnel provides a
backdrop for humanitarian work. While States have the
primary responsibility to protect and provide for
civilians in their territory and to ensure the safe,
unimpeded access of humanitarian workers to civilians
in need, the Security Council has a role to play in
helping to create an environment for such assistance.
There must be collaboration on the ground between
peacekeepers and humanitarian agencies.

We recognize also, as Mrs. Ogata pointed out,
that security partnerships are important in order to
create a better security environment, and we agree that
this is an essential, if complex task. We will recall that
the Council recognized the critical importance of the
protection of humanitarian personnel during the
debates that we held in February and March. The
Council must now convert its words into action.

Fourthly, my delegation agrees, as Mrs. Ogata so
aptly stated to the Council in its debate in January, that

"humanitarian action alone will not be able to
solve any of the problems leading to forced
human displacement." (S/PV.4089, p. 6)

The Security Council therefore has a definitive
role in preventing, containing and resolving conflicts.
We agree that by taking firm positions and supporting
decisively, rapidly and substantively the follow-up to
peace agreements, and by promoting the mobilization
of resources for reconstruction and peace-building, the
Council will have made its contribution to averting and
stemming humanitarian crises. We must work towards
this goal or render ourselves incapable of discharging
the mandate for the maintenance of international peace
and security.

Fifthly, the United Nations system must work
towards devising mechanisms to effectively and
equitably address the protection of displaced
populations, whether displaced within their own
countries or as refugees. The international community
must find a way to better help those countries that open
their borders to vast numbers of refugees, often at
tremendous economic and social costs.

Mrs. Ogata gave us a vivid example of the
humanitarian situation in West Africa as a result of the
Sierra Leone crisis, as well as the resulting
humanitarian crisis. These have to be dealt with in a
regional context. This was, as Sir Jeremy Greenstock
pointed out, forcefully brought to the attention of the
recent Security Council mission to West Africa.

Sixthly, the continued implementation of a
targeted strategy for the advancement of refugee
women and the mainstreaming of a gender equity
perspective must remain a priority. We recognize the
work being done to incorporate this in several key
training packages and field guidelines. The priorities
aimed at mainstreaming children's issues into
UNHCR's overall protection and assistance activities,
as well as increased emphasis on an inter-agency
approach, require continued action within the context
of the Council's activities related to children and armed
conflict.

In addition, the formulated policy on older
refugees, which was endorsed in February of this year,
is particularly welcome, as is the project, Imagine
Coexistence, which seeks to promote coexistence in
divided communities. We have noted the pilot projects
destined for Bosnia and Rwanda.

The point made by Mrs. Ogata regarding
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration is an
important one, and we agree that these programmes
require effective action by the Council in collaboration
with the humanitarian agencies.

The debate this afternoon must serve as a solid
basis for the Security Council to intensify its
cooperation and collaboration with UNHCR. We are
faced with grim reminders as we witness humanitarian
catastrophes, burgeoning crises and staggering human
costs. Millions of people continue to be uprooted by
conflict and are exposed to extreme hardship, violence
and death. It is our collective responsibility to help
them. We know that solutions are difficult, but we must
be clear and decisive in our actions to help those
affected.

In conclusion, I wish again, on behalf of my
delegation, to thank Mrs. Ogata for her outstanding
contribution and for the inspiration she has provided.
We wish her every success in her future endeavours.

