Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): As
we meet today, we regret the Secretary-General's
decision to disband the fact-finding team on recent
events in Jenin, which the Council welcomed in
resolution 1405 (2002) after the vote of approval from
all our countries on 19 April.

The team created by the Secretary-General was a
high-level group composed of persons with impeccable
professional careers and unquestionable ethical
qualities. We applaud the desire of President Martti
Ahtisaari and his team to play a constructive and
definitive role in shedding light on the events in Jenin,
and we are grateful for their willingness and patience
during these days of uncertainty with regard to the
team's future.

We have witnessed some encouraging signs in the
midst of widespread tragedy and despair, thanks to the
intense diplomatic activity involving, among others,
the Governments of the United States and the United
Kingdom. The lifting of the siege on President Arafat's
headquarters, the resulting political strengthening of
the Palestinian leader and the proposal of the United
States to convene a conference on the Middle East,
announced following the meeting of the "quartet" in
Washington yesterday, all deserve our recognition.

The initiative of holding an international
conference deserves support. The bases for negotiation
are well known: resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973)
and the principle of land for peace. The proposal of the
Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, which was endorsed at
the recent Arab Summit and in resolution 1397 (2002),
recently adopted by the Security Council, was another
element that must serve as the basis for negotiations.
The diagnosis is clear. It is necessary to attend
simultaneously to the three fronts of security:
humanitarian care, economic recovery and the political
process. A partial solution involving only one of those
aspects without taking into consideration the others
cannot lead to a lasting solution.

The encouraging news, however, continues to be
troubled by the Israeli Government's notorious
objections to the Secretary-General's fact-finding team
for Jenin. My delegation deeply regrets Israel's refusal
to cooperate with this team in a timely fashion, and
therefore it regrets the fact that the Secretary-General
was forced to disband it. We offer our full support to
the Secretary-General, and we support the conclusions
he has offered in his letter to the President of the
Security Council.

Israel, the occupying Power, has lost the
opportunity to demonstrate with an independent
investigation that, as members of that Government
have argued time and again, its actions were "necessary
and proportionate". There was really nothing to fear.
Therefore, this decision surprises us.

The Security Council is missing an opportunity to
continue playing a constructive role in the Middle East
situation. In recent months this body has managed to
build an important consensus on the situation in the
Middle East, which has led to the adoption of
important resolutions. This consensus was not easy to
achieve, and my delegation worked actively to
contribute to it. In the current situation, in the light of
the inexplicable position of the Government of Israel,
the unfortunate decision of the Secretary-General to
disband the team and the inability of the Security
Council to react properly, this body missed the
opportunity to perhaps rescue its own political
relevance.

The numerous charges of violations against
international humanitarian law that have been made
concerning the situation in Jenin are very serious and
cannot remain without clarification, nor should they. At
the focus of today's discussion is the implementation
without delay and without conditions of Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 1402 (2002)
and 1405 (2002). Colombia does not accept or
conceive of the fact that there are arguments that can
justify the failure to comply with these resolutions.

Finally, I cannot conclude without making yet
another plea to respect the sacred nature of the Church
of the Nativity and to seek a peaceful solution to the
tense situation that prevails in Bethlehem.

