Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
the excellent work that you and your team have done in
conducting a comprehensive review on resolution 1540
(2004). I would also like to emphasize the opportunity
that the review has given Member States to be able
to voice their opinions and convey to the Council
their ideas regarding the process of the review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), in particular
through the open consultations organized in June.

Spain's initiative to create the Group of Friends
of resolution 1540 (2004) deserves special mention.
In addition to generating a valuable exchange among
its members, it has allowed us to follow the most
important aspects of the review process throughout
the year. We look forward to Spain's leadership in
continuing to drive the activities of the Group, of which
Argentina is a member and to which we hope to add
even more countries.

There are myriad painful cases in which
international terrorism has given ample evidence of its
capacity for destruction. The use of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors has stopped being an
abstract or theoretical problem in recent years and has
highlighted the need for Member States to redouble
their efforts to prevent terrorist groups from gaining
access to weapons of mass destruction, their related
materials and their means of delivery.

For Argentina, resolution 1540 (2004) represents,
in terms of its scope and legal nature, the most robust
response by the United Nations to the problems
posed by weapons of mass destruction and access
to them by non-State actors. Since its adoption 12
years ago, Argentina has addressed that resolution
by striving to preserve the balance between our
traditional commitment to non-proliferation and our
reaffirmation of the sovereign right to the peaceful use
and development of advanced technologies, including
nuclear, chemical, biological or pharmaceutical
technologies, or nanotechnology. Both of those
principles are enshrined in the text of resolution 1540
(2004) and have been reaffirmed in resolution 2325
(2016), which was adopted this morning by the Council
and which Argentina co-sponsored. In that respect, on
26 October 2004, with its first national report followed
by successive updates, the last ofwhich is in the process
of being drawn up, the Argentine Republic, as an active
member of the five non-proliferation regimes, as well as
the Proliferation Security Initiative, has demonstrated
its unwavering commitment to the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.

Member States must redouble their efforts to
strengthen and update their national export-control
systems, which we believe should be based on four
fundamental pillars. The first pillar is a transparent
and standardized national licensing system. The second
pillar is the effective compliance with current legislation
applicable to export control, including aspects of
brokering and transshipment. The third pillar is the
promotion of corporate awareness of the importance of
industrial development and the security of international
trade. The fourth pillar is close regional cooperation.

With regard to regional cooperation, I wish to
emphasize that Argentina is a provider of assistance
under the framework of resolution 1540 (2004)
and conducts capacity-building activities for the
identification of strategic goods at the subregional
and regional levels, as well as in the field of South-
South cooperation with African countries. Our
commitment to our region of Latin America and the
Caribbean is inescapable, and we will continue to
provide assistance to those countries that request it, in
accordance with paragraphs 19 and 20 of the resolution
that we just adopted. Moreover, Argentina welcomes
the new resolution's recognition of the positive role
played by civil society, including industry and the
academic world, as well as its recognition of the key
role that parliamentarians play. All of those groups
are fundamental in implementing the obligations that
emanate from resolution 1540 (2004).

We believe that it is vitally important to ensure that
dual-use chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
materials are properly protected, far from those actors
who would not hesitate to use them to terrorize and sow
panic and destruction. It is illusory to think that we live
in safety while such materials lack proper protection
and international regulations are not being applied at a
global level.

In order to achieve our objectives and face the
challenges imposed by the current international context,
it is essential to have appropriate institutional support.
In that regard, my country welcomes paragraph 9 of
the new resolution, which calls on the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to
analyse the effectiveness and efficiency with which it
fulfills the mandate of its special political mission with
a view to strengthening that mission and assuring that
it is fully ready to carry out its duties. We look forward
to the report on the results of that evaluation, which the
Committee will provide next year.

There are several challenges facing the future of
resolution 1540 (2004) and its implementation. First,
there is the challenge of addressing the global threat
posed by non-State actors, which is made particularly
complex by the associated proliferation risks.
Secondly, there is the challenge of ensuring the better
channeling of requests for assistance in order to enable
concrete and effective responses. Thirdly, in relation
to universalization, we believe that those States that,
for various reasons, have not yet submitted their first
national report, should be encouraged to do so, and that
they should assisted to do so, ifthey so request. Fourthly,
challenges regarding new technologies, particularly
in terms of legislation and export controls, must be
analyzed and incorporated into the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). Lastly, a major challenge will
be to develop and consolidate a network of contact
points at the regional and global levels.

Allow me to conclude by congratulating Spain on
the work that it has carried out over the past years in
its capacity as Chair of the 1540 Committee, as well
as by extending Argentina's determined contribution to
assisting the next Chair of the 1540 Committee.

