Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Sir, for having convened this
important meeting and, at the same time, I wish to say
how pleased my delegation is to have Judge Patrick
Robinson, President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) here with
us, and I congratulate him on his recent appointment
and the discharging of his functions.

We also welcome Judge Dennis Byron, President,
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
Mr. Serge Brammertz and Mr. Hassan B. Jallow, both
Prosecutors for the International Criminal Tribunals.

Costa Rica welcomes the very informative and
detailed content of the briefings on the present
situations of the trial activities and we recognize
efforts aimed at complying with an orderly completion
strategy in accordance with Security Council
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004).

However, we note that given elements beyond the
control of both Tribunals, it is possible that their trial
activities will not conclude in 2008 as planned and that
some trial-related activities may even continue through
2011 or 2012. Our delegation continues to believe it
important for both Tribunals to redouble their efforts so
that the extension of this time frame is as brief as
possible.

Obviously this appeal for them to redouble their
efforts cannot and must not be to the detriment of the
rights of the accused to receive fair trials with a
maximum of existing judicial safeguards in place,
based on the Tribunals' respective statutes.

Since the initial report on the completion strategy,
the members of the Council have appealed to the
international community to continue to cooperate with
the Tribunals and to facilitate compliance with their
respective mandates.

In this regard, we would like to recognize the
efforts of those individuals, institutions and sectors in

Serbia which made it possible for two fugitives of the
ICTY to be apprehended and handed over, including
Radovan Karadzic. The most cruel and inhumane
crimes such as genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity must not go unpunished. Costa Rica
urges the international community to provide all
information at their disposal in order to collect data
leading to the arrest of fugitives of both Tribunals and
to bring them to international justice as soon as
possible.

Similarly, we would underscore the importance of
activities aimed at bolstering the capacity of the
respective national justice systems in order to increase
the number of transfers to national jurisdictions and
that elements which, to date, have led the Tribunals to
reject those transfers, be set aside in the near future.
The purpose of this would be that, simultaneously, the
international community could find justice while
ensuring the most efficient trial process in these
national jurisdictions.

In referring to the legacy of both Tribunals and
their possible residual functions, we would like to
point out that our delegation believes that any
mechanism which is selected must be substantially
minimized and considerably less burdensome.
In any event, it is particularly important for my
delegation that the high-level individuals presumed
guilty, many of whom are still at large, be judged by
these international Tribunals and that the perpetration
of such atrocious crimes not go unpunished.

We recognize and we are grateful for the valuable
work done by the Belgium delegation and we recognize
their dedication, as Chair of the Security Council
Informal Working Group in 2008, to guiding the
numerous related negotiations to a safe harbour.

I should like also to refer briefly to the question
of the archives for both Tribunals. This is a very
important aspect of the future residual mechanisms.
These archives are not only important for the trials
which are under way in national jurisdictions, thanks to
the transfers made by the Tribunals, but they also
represent the most valuable legacy for the international
community in its efforts to combat impunity. This
demonstrates once again that only through justice can
we ensure lasting peace and that both elements are
mutually complementary and beneficial.

In conclusion, my delegation believes that this
Council must hear the opinions of countries of the
region prior to taking a final decision on the location of
the archives. It is essential that the ultimate solution
reconcile the interests of all interested parties in the
region, the international community in general, and
above all the victims and their survivors.

