Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation could not support
resolution 2414 (2018). The main problem was that the
process ofdrafting and agreeing the decision was neither
transparent nor consultative. We note, unfortunately, that
none of the principled and properly justified comments
that we repeatedly directed to the authors - including
those of a compromise nature - was taken into
account. A series of useful proposals put forward by
the other members of the Council were also met with
no response. As a result, the text remains unbalanced
and the entire situation strengthens our doubts about
the issue of informal country-specific penholderships
in the Security Council.

We decided not to block the resolution because we
accept the value of continuing the work undertaken
by the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara. However, had we voted in favour of
we would have abandoned our principled position in
support of the existing foundations of a settlement,
which, pursuant to the resolutions of the Security
Council, is based on the fundamental principle that
any model of settlement must be mutually acceptable.
Instead, the main emphasis of the resolution is
placed on such shaky and contradictory categories as
practicability and realism, which could open the way
for all kinds of equivocal interpretations.

We will remain an impartial and balanced player
that maintains contacts with all the regional parties
with which we maintain historical and friendly
relations. We must warn, however, that the document
that was adopted today, contrary to the expectations of
its sponsors, could end up having a negative effect on
the efforts of the new Personal Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Western Sahara, Mr. Horst Kohler, to revive
the political process. Attempts to accelerate the process
could lead to an outcome that is opposite to what is
sought. In that regard, we believe that a review of the
mandate ofthe United Nations Mission is unacceptable,
and we do not support efforts to mandate the Mission
with the authority to monitor the human rights situation.

In addition, we absolutely do not understand why
the resolution includes passages concerning generic
aspects of peacekeeping, despite the fact that that is the
prerogative of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations of the General Assembly. For example, the
work on establishing benchmarks for the effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations - which, incidentally,
should apply not only to the military and the police but
also to the civilian components of a mission, as well as
the units at Headquarters that oversee them - has not
been completed. Why are we trying to prejudge events?

With regard to the initiatives of the Secretary-
General to standardize the culture of performance,
neither we nor the troop-contributing countries fully
understand what that entails. What is it, and how can
we welcome it at this stage?

The text also contains a series of provisions that
undermine the impartial and balanced approach of the
Security Council to the issue of Western Sahara, which
we do not support. We are convinced that overcoming the
differences and achieving a just and lasting settlement
will be possible only by political means on the basis of
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. The
ultimate formula must be acceptable both to Morocco
and to the Polisario Front, and provide for the self-
determination of the people of Western Sahara in the
framework of procedures in line with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. That is
the key concept underpinning a settlement in Western
Sahara. It is unacceptable to try and replace it with
other formula.

In conclusion, I underscore that the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara plays an
exclusively stabilizing role in establishing conditions
on the ground conducive to the resumption of dialogue
between Morocco and the Polisario Front. We need
to encourage joint efforts to launch the negotiating
process. Let us not decide the outcome in place of
the parties. We are concerned about the vacuum in
the process, and the failure to settle the situation in
Western Sahara can be exploited by various extremist
forces, which would have a negative impact the military
and political situation in the entire region.

