Mr. Lisuchenko (Ukraine): In its right to reply, the
delegation of Ukraine would like to raise the following
points. We are deeply disappointed that, instead of
finally confessing to committing aggression against my
country, the Russian delegation has resorted to repeating
false insinuations that do not convince anybody. What
we have just witnessed is nothing but just another
Russian attempt to divert our attention from its efforts
to export terrorism to Ukraine. It represented a classic
smear scenario employed by experienced criminals to
shift blame and shield themselves from prosecution.

When we speak about the support that Russia is
providing to terrorist organizations, that involves not
only the financing of information campaigns aimed at
cultivating hatred, resentment and radicalism, but also
the fostering of terrorist propaganda in the occupied
territories of Ukraine, the Donbas and Crimea. It also
involves direct governance, military support and the
supervision of terrorist activities.

I wouldjust mention the situation in certain areas of
the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine, which the
pro-Russian propaganda refers to the so-called Donetsk
and Luhansk People's Republic as "new Russia".
In that respect, the 29 March issue of the reputable
German magazine Bild highlighted that the Russian
side had established an inter-ministerial commission
for humanitarian support of the affected areas in the
south-east areas of Donetsk and Luhansk. Through that
commission and its six working groups, the Russian
Government is steering all affairs of the mentioned
occupied areas. The said regions are being treated as
parts of Russian territory, and the Russian Federal
Security Service supervises each working group.

Despite statements issued by the Russian Federation
on the future integration of those regions with Ukraine,
the Russian side plans to secure the long-term existence
of those territorial organizations under full Russian
control. It also plans to create a puppet State whose
future will be decided exclusively in Moscow.

