Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by thanking Mr. Alan Doss for his
summary of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/728). I would also like to congratulate him, as
well as the entire personnel of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) on their commitment and the
decisive role they are playing in keeping the peace in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, despite
all the unfortunate obstacles. I would also like to
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium.
We appreciated his important statement on the topic
under consideration.

I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for his information on the situation; we look
forward also to hearing the statement of our colleague
from Rwanda.

The numerous atrocities in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have, we must
acknowledge and state, reached a climax. No human
conscience can tolerate this. The escalation of armed
violence since the resumption of hostilities last August
has led to a catastrophic humanitarian and security
situation, as we can see from the total destitution in
which displaced persons live, the indiscriminate attacks
against civilian populations, the sexual violence and
the ethnic-based massacre of civilians.

Clearly, the situation is fraught with danger; we
even have to fear carnage and a possible expansion of
the conflict to the rest of the subregion. In these
conditions, any initiative that could help to resolve the
crisis can only be beneficial.

We strongly support the political action
undertaken at the international and subregional levels
in order to reach such a settlement, and we note with
great interest the mediation undertaken by
Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, and Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, Special
Envoy of the Southern African Development
Community for the Great Lakes Region. Thanks to
their combined efforts, a ceasefire has now been
obtained. In order to progress further, they need the
firm support and full cooperation of the parties and of
the international community.

As we are convinced that only a political solution
can sustainably resolve the crisis, we believe it is also
crucial for States in the region, in particular the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda, to
intensify their efforts in order to give effect to the
commitments they have undertaken in the framework
of the Nairobi process. We urge all players to resolve
the substantive issues that separate them, in particular
the issue of the threat posed by national and foreign
armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

It is also essential to make it possible for the
recommendations which emerged from the bilateral,
regional and international initiatives undertaken in
early November to restore trust with a view to a
resumption of political dialogue. We cannot say this
often enough: the Nairobi and Goma processes offer a
credible basis for the restoration of peace in the region.

Despite its efforts to implement its mandate,
MONUC is almost powerless with respect to the
humanitarian tragedy on the ground. Given the collapse
and near disintegration of the Armed Forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the criticism
levelled against it, MONUC is the only bastion for the
population which is fleeing the violence.
08-62035

Because it understood the risk of the deterioration
of the situation, my delegation supported resolution
1843 (2008), which was intended to strengthen
MONUC's capacity to fulfil its mission of protecting
the civilian population. We recall that during past
consultations, the Secretariat assured Council members
that MONUC's mandate under Chapter VII of the
Charter was robust enough for it to carry out its
mission.

However, objective constraints, such as the
inaction of the Congolese armed forces, do not allow
MONUC to confront the illegal armed forces on its
own. As a result, and within the framework of the
renewal of this mandate, the question of reviewing
MONUC's mandate has to be considered carefully -
and, I would say, with a great deal of caution as well,
given the continued worsening of the security and
humanitarian situation in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Once again, the human tragedy being played out
on the ground calls out to the international community
to find, without delay, viable solutions that would take
into account the responsibility to protect civilian
populations as well as the duty to pursue and punish all
those responsible for atrocities committed in the
framework of this conflict. The Security Council must
continue to call upon all parties to respect international
humanitarian law and, naturally, to consider measures
against those who are responsible for serious human
rights violations and other atrocities, in particular, war
crimes, genocide and flagrant violations of
international humanitarian law.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
reiterate its resolute support for MONUC and hopes
that a strengthened Mission can face the many security
and humanitarian challenges in Eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We thus support the efforts
under way aimed at finding a final political settlement
to the crisis.

