Mr. Kpayedo (Togo) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting the
quarterly report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/254)
on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). I should also like to thank the
representatives of Serbia and Kosovo for their important
statements.

The agreement signed on 19 April between Kosovo
and Serbia constitutes a decisive historic step on the
path to the normalization of their relations. Fourteen
years after the end of the conflict and five years after
independence proclaimed by Kosovo, the parties, after
months of tough negotiations, have finally initialled
this agreement in order to put an end to the conflict in
Kosovo and open up new prospects for both States. The
agreement signed grants a large measure of autonomy
to the Serbian municipalities in North Kosovo and
gives the Kosovo Government powers over all its
territory, which constitutes a considerable step forward
towards a consensus-based definition ofthe final status
of Kosovo.

My country commends the political courage shown
by the two parties in overcoming the resentment and
the hostility of some of their people, who feared that
the agreement might sacrifice their interests in the
interest of a reasonable compromise. We urge parties
to rapidly the implement committee called for by
the "First agreement on principles governing the
normalization of relations" so as to bring about its
effective implementation. We believe that the first task
of the Committee must be to propose judicial reforms
in order to align legislation with the 15 points of the
agreement.

Togo also urges both parties to pursue dialogue on
the questions remaining in abeyance, particularly the
issues regarding those persons who have disappeared
or who are displaced, property ownership and the
integration of the Kosovo Serbs into central institutions.
Moreover, we welcome the progress achieved in other
areas of dialogue, particularly the exchange of liaison
officers, which should, as emphasized in the Secretary-
General's report, foster communication between the
two parties and the provisional agreement on customs
and taxation questions.

There is a risk that the normalization under way in
relations between Serbia and Kosovo might not achieve
its purpose ifthe peoples who are principally concerned,
particularly the Serbians in North Kosovo, are not
involved in the new dynamic. The many demonstrations
that the community organized before and after the
signing of the agreement to voice its hostility to any
connection with Kosovo and the demands put forward
by the representatives demanding the convening in
Serbia of a referendum on the Brussels agreement are a
major source of concern. That is why Togo urges Serbia
and Kosovo to take the necessary steps to explain the
basis of the agreement and the comparative advantages
that it affords to the various communities.

We encourage the Serbs in northern Kosovo who
believe that their concerns have not been sufficiently
taken into account to fully join in the process of
normalization and to play a part in the local elections to
be held in neighbouring municipalities. By doing that,
they will be able to form the association ofmunicipalities,
which will be in charge of the administration of their
municipal constituencies, pursuant to the 19 April
agreement.

My country wishes to welcome the fact that the
security situation has remained stable in Kosovo
during the period under consideration, despite tension
observed in the mixed zones in the north of Kosovo. We
also are concerned by the incidents involving the use
of firearms and explosives affecting both civilians and
personnel of the Kosovo security forces. We urge the
Kosovo police to continue their efforts to investigate
the most recent events affecting minority communities,
the defacing of property, acts of vandalism against
religious sites, the desecration of graves and other acts
of intolerance.

I would like to conclude by again expressing my
country's congratulations to the European Union, in
particular the European Union High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Baroness
Catherine Ashton, whose decisive role made it possible
for the 19 April agreement to be signed. We also wish
to thank UNMIK, the Kosovo Force, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and all partner
organizations standing with the Kosovo authorities in
the stabilization of the territory and the construction of
democratic institutions.

