Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's meeting under this format, which
is in line with our recent collective discussion on how
to modernize some of the working methods of the
Security Council.

Ukraine consistently supports the Middle East
peace process and the principle ofa two-State solution,
with Israel and Palestine coexisting in peace and
security. We are deeply concerned about the ongoing
escalation we are witnessing, not only in the rhetoric
of high-level officials on both sides but on the ground
as well.

The shooting of a Palestinian man inside a refugee
camp in East Jerusalem on 5 September, as well as
the exchange of allegations of ethnic cleansing by the
leaders of the two sides on 9 September, does not serve
the purpose of resuming Israeli-Palestinian talks in
good faith. These facts do not contribute to restoring the
atmosphere of trust between the two sides, so-needed
in the light of the prospect for possible talks between
Netanyahu and Abbas 4 in Moscow, Luxembourg
or elsewhere.

The recent escalation serves as yet another
reminder that the status quo is a road to nowhere.
We strongly believe that both sides must demonstrate
genuine restraint and refrain from the use of force,
which will only fuel the violence and lead to increased
casualties - all of which could play into the hands
of extremists who are trying to undermine the fragile
prospects for peace.

No one can reasonably argue that tackling this
challenge is possible without addressing its root causes,
as the unresolved status of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict ranks high on the terrorist agenda in the region
of the Middle East and North Africa.

The decision announced to suspend the Palestinian
municipal elections scheduled to take place on 8 October
is regrettable, as we believe that intra-Palestinian
reconciliation is an important precondition for reaching
a viable agreement with Israel.

We are convinced that the establishment of a stable,
peaceful and democratic Palestinian State is in Israel's
long-term security interests. However, the ongoing
process of settlement expansion and the legalization
of outposts could undermine the efforts of the
international community to achieve tangible progress
in the peace process.

Ultimate success depends upon a genuine
commitment by all interested parties. Diplomatic
efforts must be redoubled to contain and de-escalate
the latest wave of violence and to unblock Israeli-
Palestinian negotiations. Ukraine remains steadfast in
its support of any effort to restore the hope that a two-
State solution can be achieved through negotiations.

