The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Belarus, Brazil, Canada,
Costa Rica, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Japan,
Malaysia, Mexico, Nigeria, Pakistan, the Republic of
Korea, South Africa and Sweden in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President Mr. Listre
(Argentina), Mr. Laptenok (Belarus), Mr. Fonseca
(Brazil), Mr. Duval (Canada), Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Pal (India)
Mr. Widodo (Indonesia), Mr. Al-Douri (Iraq),
Mr. Aekasaka (Japan), Mr. Yahya (Malaysia),
Mr. Navarrete (Mexico), Mr. Apata (Nigeria),
Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan), Mr. Sun Joun-yung
(Republic of Korea), Mr. Nacerodien (South Africa) and Mr. Schori (Sweden) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the prevention of
armed conflict, document S/2001/574.

I will begin by paying tribute to my Jamaican
colleague, Foreign Minister Paul Robertson, who
presided over the Council debate on conflict prevention
last July. The Jamaican delegation deserves our
appreciation for its initiative in following up the issue
in a substantive manner.

The report of the Secretary-General before us
provides for the first time a substantive basis for our
discussion on conflict prevention. The need for such a
systematic approach has, however, long been felt. The
Agenda for Peace placed emphasis on prevention. Our
purpose today is to take the matter a decisive step
forward. The consultative and forward-looking
approach to the report and its recommendations by
participants in today's debate will facilitate that
process.

The General Assembly is expected to take up the
report on 12 July. That will also provide the occasion
for a more elaborate discussion. In our meeting today, I
shall encourage speakers to focus on the
recommendations, made specifically for action by the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the Deputy Secretary-General,
who will introduce the report of the Secretary-General.


