Mr. Munyampeta (Rwanda) (interpretation from French): It is a great honour and a great pleasure for me
to warmly welcome His Excellency Foreign Minister
Leonardo Simao of Mozambique. The delegation of
Rwanda wishes to convey its deep gratitude to the
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Mozambique for all the very useful information he has
just given the Council concerning the recent positive
political developments in his country.

On behalf of the people and Government of Rwanda,
my delegation wishes to pay a heartfelt tribute to His
Excellency Mr. Joaquim Chissano, the first elected
President in the history of Mozambique, for his keen
insight, his courage and his profound sense of democracy,
the cornerstone of lasting peace in Mozambique.
Naturally, the same tribute is due to the leaders of

 

RENAMO, who unflinchingly committed themselves to the
peace process in Mozambique.

I also wish to express my delegation's warm and
heartfelt congratulations to the Minister of Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Mozambique on his accession to his
important position, which is an eloquent tribute to the great
confidence the people and Government of Mozambique
have placed in him.
The delegation of Rwanda cannot fail to pay tribute to
the Secretary-General, our Security Council and the
Organization of African Unity - in short, to the efforts of
the entire international community - for their effective and
indeed decisive contribution to the very successful outcome
of the peace process in Mozambique.

My delegation welcomes the firm foundation that has
been laid for democracy in Mozambique, a democracy with
the added advantage of being multi-party. We also
congratulate all its vital elements in Mozambique who
resolved courageously, with good will, to bury the hatchet
and smoke the pipe of peace together.

The great success of the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique (ON UMOZ) is a source of encouragement to
the Security Council in its work and argues for the
deployment of ONUMOZ III. Further de-mining efforts
should be made in order to allow Mozambique to regain
ground on which to carry out in peace the country's
reconstruction and socio-economic development. I am well-
placed both to know the cost of the horrors of war and to
appreciate the very price to be paid for peace.

This is the occasion to express the hope that the arms
dealers who, from near and far, fanned the flames of war
in Mozambique, and who bear the grim responsibility of
having participated in its destruction, will become Good
Samaritans, ready to staunch the wounds of the sons and
daughters of Mozambique and take part in its reconstruction
and socio-economic development.

At a time when the international community is
concerned with helping Africa to heal the wounds of the
many victims of various conflicts, the delegation of Rwanda
dares to hope that Mozambique's shining example will
illuminate the path of national reconciliation and peace for
the rest of the continent. We know that peace is the alpha
and omega of all development. Happiness and long life in
peace to Mozambique! Happiness and long life to multi-
party democracy in Mozambique!

