Mr. Takasu (Japan): I thank Mr. Kai Eide and
Mr. John Holmes for their dedicated work and for
today's briefings on the situation in Afghanistan. I also
welcome the presence here today of Mr. Spanta,
Foreign Minister of Afghanistan, and of Mr. Qureshi,
Foreign Minister of Pakistan.

At the outset, I must express our strong concern
about the security situation in the country. Japan
strongly condemns the suicide attack on the Indian
embassy in Kabul on Monday. Such cowardly acts of
terrorism cannot by any means be justified. On behalf
of the Government and the people of Japan, I would
like to extend our deepest condolences and sympathy
to the victims, the bereaved families and the peoples
and the Governments of Afghanistan and India.

When we last met in this Chamber to discuss the
situation in Afghanistan in March (see S/PV.5851), all
speakers expressed their commitment to assisting
Afghanistan in its efforts to rebuild the country. Those
commitments are reflected in Security Council
resolution 1806 (2008), which extended and sharpened
the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). Since then, the strong
commitment of the international community has been
confirmed on various occasions, including at the
Bucharest meeting and the Paris Conference. Most
recently, the leaders of the Group of Eight (G-8)
yesterday renewed their commitment to support
Afghanistan at the G-8 Hokkaido Toyako summit. Prior
to that, the G-8 Foreign Ministers reaffirmed the
steadfast and long-term commitment of G-8 members
by issuing a standalone statement on Afghanistan at
their meeting in Kyoto last week. That statement
presented a comprehensive strategy of the G-8
countries to assist Afghanistan in achieving stability
and reconstruction.

On those occasions, it has always been stressed
that effective coordination among Governments and
organizations is essential. We look to UNAMA and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan to play an even greater role in
coordinating international efforts in partnership with
the Government of Afghanistan. It is for that reason
that the Security Council strengthened UNAMA's
mandate in March. Japan highly appreciates the
strenuous work carried out by Mr. Eide since assuming
his post in this difficult but Vital task. It is hard to
coordinate many actors unless they are willing to be
coordinated. For their part, the G-8 leaders renewed
their commitment to supporting UNAMA and Mr. Eide
in their role as overall coordinator of the efforts of the
international community.

As regards the Secretary-General's report before
the Council today (S/2008/434), Japan supports its
observation that UNAMA should be strengthened,
given the importance of the mission more effectively
discharging the duties entrusted to it. We look forward
to discussing in due course the details as to how to
implement those observations.

As we are set to discuss development challenges
facing Afghanistan, the recent incident underscores the
grim picture related to the security situation. The
international community and the Government of
Afghanistan together must make a great effort to
improve the situation. Japan values the commitment of
ISAF troop-contributing countries, renewed at the
Bucharest meeting, as well as that of participants in
Operation Enduring Freedom. Japan is continuing its
efforts by assisting the maritime component of
Operation Enduring Freedom in the Indian Ocean.
Security sector reform should remain a central focus.
In that regard, Japan continues to lead the ongoing
efforts related to the disbandment of illegal and armed
groups and will expand its training programme for
Afghan police officers. We are prepared to provide
additional equipment for the Afghan National Police.

On the reconstruction side, we welcome the
successful outcome of the Paris Conference, in terms
both of the political commitment demonstrated and of
the pledges made to help the country and its National
Development Strategy. On that occasion, Japan made
an additional pledge of $550 million in order to support
the implementation of the Afghanistan Compact and
the Development Strategy. With this new additional
pledge, our total pledge to Afghanistan has reached $2
billion. Most of our earlier pledges have been fully
disbursed. We wish international assistance to be
carried out effectively, with better coordination and
under the guidance of Special Representative Eide, to
bring tangible benefits to the people of Afghanistan. In
that connection, we support addressing urgently the
dire humanitarian needs that were described by
Mr. Holmes today.

I would like to stress, now more than ever, the
particular importance of the regional dimension.
Cooperation among Afghanistan and its neighbours is
essential to create stable conditions for Afghanistan
and for the region as a whole. Focusing particularly on
the border region of Afghanistan and Pakistan,
including the Federally Administered Tribal Areas, the
G-8 leaders reaffirmed the importance of economic and
social development along with counter-terrorism
measures in the border region. They expressed their
commitment to further strengthening the coordination
of their efforts in the border area in cooperation with
the respective countries, international organizations
and other donors. Prior to that, Foreign Ministers of the
G-8 decided to strengthen assistance and endorsed
more than 150 projects in the region being planned or
implemented by G-8 members. They also agreed to
establish a G-8 coordination arrangement with the
support of the Afghan and Pakistani Governments and
in support of UNAMA. I sincerely hope that these
efforts will contribute to stabilizing the border region
and enhancing the security of Afghanistan.

The next important step towards a stable and
democratic Afghanistan is to successfully hold
elections in 2009 and 2010. Thorough preparation will
be the key to success in this undertaking. We are
committed to supporting the work of the Afghan
Government and of the United Nations in this major
step, in response to the specific needs to be identified.

As the international community remains firmly
committed to supporting Afghanistan, we should better
cooperate and coordinate with the Government. In his
visit to Kabul just before the Paris Conference, Japan's
Foreign Minister Masahiko Koumura stressed to
President Karzai and his senior colleagues and Afghan
leaders the importance of strengthening their anti-
corruption and counter-narcotics efforts and regional
cooperation, in order to make maximal use of
international support. We very much welcome the
commitment reaffirmed by the Government of
Afghanistan at the Paris Conference to pursue political
and economic reform, including concrete steps to
combat corruption. We look forward to such reform
efforts bearing fruit and thereby contributing to the
stability and development of Afghanistan.
