Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2012/72) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and my
compatriot Edmond Mulet for having introduced it to
us. I would also like to welcome the virtual presence of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Farid
Zarif.

The report before us today leaves no doubt about
the important function that UNMIK is fulfilling in
Kosovo. We express our support for the Mission and
encourage it to continue carrying out its mandate under
resolution 1244 (1999) in all activities conducted in
Kosovo involving the entire international presence in
Kosovo, including the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force,
which must act with strict neutrality and impartiality.

We are concerned by the security situation in
northern Kosovo, which not only creates additional
challenges for the United Nations but also has a
negative impact on dialogue between the parties. We
encourage Pristina and Belgrade to take responsibility
for reducing tensions and to continue to use positive
rhetoric in their communications.

We welcome the fact that, despite the difficulties
described, the parties are focused on resolving their
differences through dialogue, as shown by the recent
round of talks facilitated by the European Union. We
likewise recognize the contribution that this dialogue is
making towards resolving practical issues, especially
those directly affecting the daily life of the population.
We note from the Secretary-General's report that some
agreements have been reached which we hope can soon
be put into practice towards the normalization of the
situation in the north, such as through the integrated
management of crossing points.

The incidents involving roadblocks and recent
protests are regrettable. We are also concerned by the
news of the referendum planned for mid-February by
the municipal authorities in northern Kosovo. In fact,
events remind us that it is impossible to separate the
situation on the ground from positions on the legal
status of Kosovo. Violence and unilateral actions must
be renounced, and attempts to change the legal status
by force must be shunned. We call on the parties to
pursue dialogue on outstanding issues in order to reach
a solid and lasting solution. We agree with UNMIK
that the time has come to show the courage and
pragmatism needed to achieve substantive progress.

We note the report on the work of EULEX in the
annex to the Secretary-General's report. It is important
to solidify efforts to move towards the rule of law in
Kosovo. From our own experience, we have learned
first-hand that strengthening the rule of law is essential
to achieving peace and justice and to fighting impunity.

We have also followed closely the accusations
made by Serbia against Kosovo authorities about
human organ trafficking. We note that Lead Prosecutor
Clint Williamson has assumed his position, and that the
report on EULEX describes the investigation as
complex and covering several jurisdictions. We hope
that all accusations will be investigated in detail and
that those responsible will be indicted. We therefore
hope that an arrangement can be reached to involve
UNMIK in the process of unravelling the accusations.

