Mr. Manzi (Rwanda): Your presence here
today, Mr. President, is a clear demonstration of the
importance you attach to the peace, stability, security
and development of the Haitian people. I would also like
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Ms. Sandra Honore, for
her informative briefing on the current developments in
Haiti and the work of MINUSTAH. We warmly welcome
her to the Council, as this is her first briefing, and we
wish her all the best in her leadership of MINUSTAH.

We also join others in welcoming the Permanent
Representative of China, as this is his first Council
meeting. We wish him success in his duties.

At the outset, let me commend the tangible
progress achieved under the leadership of President
Michel Joseph Martelly, particularly in the security
sector, the reconstruction process and various
socioeconomic sectors. We welcome the commitment
of the Government and its partners to fostering greater
alignment of international systems with national
priorities, increase transparency and strengthen mutual
accountability. We hope that those efforts will lead to
the rapid recovery of the Haitian economy.
Rwanda further acknowledges the importance of
the contribution of MINUSTAH and the international
community in supporting the stabilization process in
Haiti, including the strengthening of its legislative,
judicial and executive institutions.

It is indeed positive to also note that progress has
been made towards to the achievement of the four
stabilization benchmarks set out in the MINUSTAH
consolidation plan for Haiti. The Government-endorsed
United Nations integrated strategic framework for
Haiti is a good step in the right direction. It is in that
spirit that Rwanda calls upon all the relevant actors
and stakeholders to come together around a common
development strategy and ensure coherence among the
numerous initiatives in support of Haiti's development.
We encourage MINUSTAH and the international
community to continue to provide the necessary
assistance to the Haitian authorities in strengthening
Haiti's core governance structures and implementing
the Government's action plan for national recovery and
development as an efficient and coherent framework.

Following the establishment of the transitional
Electoral Council, earlier this year, Rwanda encourages
all parties to engage in a constructive dialogue in
order to reach a political consensus on the holding of
the partial senatorial, municipal and local elections.
We believe that the completion of that process will
contribute to the consolidation of democracy, allow for
the completion of the constitutional reform and provide
a strong basis for continuing reconstruction efforts.

With regard to the possible drawdown of
MINUSTAH, Rwanda is of the View that the process
should be in line with the security and political
conditions on the ground, instead of being driven by
a stipulated time frame. Furthermore, the Security
Council should closely monitor achievements in the
implementation of the MINUSTAH consolidation plan.

On the cholera epidemic, Rwanda remains deeply
concerned about its devastating consequences for the
Haitian population and calls upon all stakeholders,
including the United Nations, in close cooperation with
the Haitian Government, to continue to mobilize the
necessary resources and to assist in the efforts aimed at
treating and eradicating the cholera outbreak.

Equally important is the need for the international
community to invest more in quick-impact projects,
in partnership with the Haitian authorities and civil
society, in the areas of agriculture and environmental
protection in order to assist the Haitian Government
with the challenges in terms of food insecurity.
Finally, Rwanda will continue to support the
Government of Haiti in its reconstruction period, as a
police- and troop-contributing country to MINUSTAH.
Rwanda remains committed and stands ready to assist
the Government in professionalizing its police force.
It is also a great honour to have Haiti as a member
observer of the African Union, and we encourage the
Haitian authorities to further become a full member
of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
Africa.

