Ms. Durbuzovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of May, and to wish you and your delegation
every success.

We also welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and have
taken note of the fifty-fifth report (S/2019/364, annex)
on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, covering
the period from 16 October 2018 to 15 April 2019.

While it is apparent that numerous challenges lie
ahead on our path towards full-fledged integration
into the European Union (EU), our commitment and
dedication to facing and overcoming those challenges
remain firm. Having fulfilled the requirements for
the next step of the process, we hope that we will be
in a position to achieve candidature status for EU
membership by the end of this year, after the European
Commission finishes its analysis and presents its
conclusions to the Council of the European Union.

We thank the European Union and its member
States for their commitment to the EU perspective of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and other Western Balkan
States. We are grateful to the EU for its active support
to Bosnia and Herzegovina's European path and would
like to urge both the EU and its member States to
strengthen that support further. For our part, we have
intensified efforts in a number of areas relevant to
achieving that goal, which include the implementation
of the reform agenda and socioeconomic reforms as a
matter of priority, as well as our continuing work to
strengthen the rule of law and good governance.

The fostering of friendly and constructive
cooperation among the countries ofthe region on issues
of mutual interest remains a top priority of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's foreign policy. The cooperation of
Western Balkan States within the framework of the
Berlin process remains a key driver of their integration
into the European Union and of stability in the region.

Currently, Bosnia and Herzegovina presides over
the South-East European Cooperation Process, the
Migration, Asylum, Refugees Regional Initiative and
the Western Balkans Fund, which aim to promote
regional connectivity and collaboration. We are firmly
convinced that those initiatives and forums greatly
contribute to peace and stability in the region.

During the reporting period, Bosnia and
Herzegovina continued to fulfil its international
obligations with regard to countering terrorism and
violent extremism. The framework action plan and the
strategy for preventing and combating terrorism for the
period from 2015 to 2020 are being implemented.

The judicial institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina
continue to process individuals involved in fighting
on behalf of terrorist organizations, as well as those
who facilitate the recruitment of terrorist fighters. It is
important to emphasize that the strategy, in addition
to security measures, includes preventive activities for
deradicalization led by national stakeholders, such as
religious communities, educational institutions, civil
society organizations and the media.

In addition, Bosnia and Herzegovina's rule of law
and security institutions made progress during the
reporting period in combating organized crime, human
trafficking, drugs, corruption and money-laundering.
With regard to processing war crimes in domestic
courts, we would like to reiterate that fighting impunity
is vital for Bosnia and Herzegovina as a complex and
multinational State. In that regard, implementing the
national strategy for processing war crimes, regardless
of the national or religious origin of the perpetrators
and victims, is essential for reconciliation and long-
term stability.

Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to contribute
actively to international peace and security by
deploying its military and police personnel to United
Nations peacekeeping missions. Currently, we have
approximately 45 personnel serving in United Nations
peacekeeping missions worldwide.

With regard to the economic situation, it is always
important to stress that Bosnia and Herzegovina's
economy, like those of other countries of the region,
has been increasingly dependent on global economic
performance. Nonetheless, Bosnia and Herzegovina's
economy continued to improve on a modest scale, with
a growth rate of 3.1 per cent in 2018. Infrastructure
projects, on the other hand, are being implemented at a
slower pace. The unemployment rate dropped by 2.1 per
cent in 2018 in comparison to 2017.

Our focus and top priority in economic reform
programmes remains the creation of a legal framework
to improve the business environment and job creation
for young people. Currently, the main concern is the
significant outflow of young, skilful and educated
people, which could have a very negative impact on
future economic development. Massive investments in
infrastructure, health care and education are needed
to reverse that trend. We would be grateful for more
foreign direct investment in those projects and a wider
engagement of international financial institutions
in order to achieve greater success in tackling that
burning issue.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has also started a very
important planning, monitoring and evaluation process
in the field of social and economic development that
is fully in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. One of the areas of concern is the
situation of illegal migrants. The international migrant
crisis continues to pose a substantial challenge to the
States of the region and their economies. During the
reporting period, Bosnia and Herzegovina experienced
a significant increase in refugees and migrants, most
of whom crossed the border illegally. According to
the most recent data, the number of illegal migrants
detected in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 2018 is close to
24,000, most of them undocumented.

In response, Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities
have undertaken a set of comprehensive measures,
including in the humanitarian and security areas. In
that context, we would like to reiterate that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has been implementing its strategy in the
area of migration and asylum, together with its plan
of action for the period from 2016 to 2020, which sets
out Bosnia and Herzegovina's policy on migration and
asylum in accordance with the highest European and
international standards.

As the question of illegal migration is a cross-
border issue, we are also exploring possibilities for
improved cooperation with police agencies within
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as intensified
cooperation with neighbouring countries and the EU.
We therefore welcome the European Commission's
decision of 29 April on financial support for Bosnia
and Herzegovina's authorities in handling migration
and strengthening its capacity for border management.

The European Union-led Operation Althea has been
present in Bosnia and Herzegovina for many years. It is
important to emphasize that Bosnia and Herzegovina
has enjoyed respectable and fruitful cooperation with
Operation Althea, particularly in the areas of capacity-
building and the training of its armed forces.

Finally, we would like to express the readiness of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities to continue their
work in securing a better and prosperous future for its
citizens, as well as our gratitude to our international
partners for supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina on
that path.

