Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Mr. President, my
delegation joins others in congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We also wish to pay tribute to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Bulgaria,
for his stewardship of the Council last month.

We thank you, Mr. President, and members of the
Council for convening this very important open
meeting on the situation between Iraq and Kuwait, in
response to the request of the Permanent
Representative of South Africa, in his capacity as
Chairman of the Non-aligned Movement. My
delegation associates itself fully with the statement that
he made yesterday, outlining the position of the
Movement on this issue. This meeting is most timely
because the attention of the entire international
community is focused on the impending decision of the
Council.

Malaysia is among those who had called for this
meeting so as to enable the larger membership of the
Organisation to express their views before the Council
takes action on this issue. This is because the decision
that the Council is about to take on Iraq is of crucial
importance, not only to Iraq but also to the region and
the entire international community. We think it is
appropriate that, on an issue as important as this, the
views of all Member States of the United Nations be
heard. We thank the Council for the courtesy of
listening to the non-members first.

The issue before the Council relates to the return
of United Nations arms inspectors to Iraq, after an
absence of four years, to continue with the Council-
mandated task of disarming Iraq of the remaining
weapons of mass destruction that it is alleged to have
in its possession. That task has now been entrusted to
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC), established by
Security Council resolution 1284 (1999), under the
leadership of a disarmament expert of vast experience,
Mr. Hans Blix.

Under the terms of that resolution, the Council
entrusted Mr. Blix and UNMOVIC to carry out its
mandate, guided by the principles of professionalism,
independence, rigour and transparency, to ensure that
an effective inspection regime could be put in place.
The independent or United Nations character of
UNMOVIC is essential and must be preserved if it is to
carry out its work with credibility. This is particularly
important, given the well-known problems besetting its
predecessor, the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) which made that fateful decision to pull
out of Iraq just before the bombing raids of December
1998, thereby abruptly terminating its painstaking but
otherwise useful work.

Mr. Blix has already had initial meetings with the
Iraqi side to work out the modalities of the return of the
arms inspectors under the new name and mandate. He
awaits the green light from the Council before
proceeding to Iraq. With Iraq's acceptance of the
unconditional return of United Nations arms inspectors,
Mr. Blix is legally bound, under Security Council
resolution 1284 (1999), to proceed with the fulfilment
of his mandate.
Malaysia believes that with the assured
cooperation of the Government of Iraq, UNMOVIC
would be able fulfil its mandate and should proceed
accordingly, without the need for another Council
resolution. Mr. Blix, as we understand it, was ready to
proceed but became uncertain and confused as to the
purpose of the exercise, with the beating of the drums
of war coming to a crescendo. He now seeks guidance
from the Council, which is understandable if
UNMOVIC is to do its job well and has the blessing of
the Council.

However, any new instruction, if absolutely
necessary, must merely be to reinforce the thrust of
resolution 1284 (1999). Any departure from that
resolution - which would include, as widely
speculated, the threat of use of force, among other new
elements, some of which are unprecedented - would
only, and unnecessarily, complicate the work of
UNMOVIC. UNMOVIC must be given a chance to
complete the work of UNSCOM, and Iraq must be
given a chance to demonstrate full compliance and
cooperation with the United Nations and the
international community, without threats of the use of
force. We believe that Iraq has heard and will heed the
clear and unambiguous message of the international
community on the issue of its commitments regarding
its obligations.

Therefore, the issue before the Council should not
be one of authorizing use of force against Iraq on the
presumption of Iraqi non-compliance with resolution
1284 (1999), but one of allowing UNMOVIC to
commence its work in Iraq as expeditiously as possible.
The focus in the Council should be on promoting
United Nations diplomacy to resolve the problem
through effective inspections and weapons destruction,
not on legitimizing war against Iraq to effect "regime
change". Removing the head of State or Government of
a sovereign State is illegal and against the Charter, and
it must never be a project that has the endorsement of
this Council. The provisions of the Charter on this
matter are very clear and unambiguous, as has been
underscored by many speakers in this debate.

At the same time, the disarmament efforts must
be a part of a clear sanctions-lifting plan, so that the
debilitating humanitarian crisis in Iraq can be brought
to a swift end. The success of this current exercise
requires the fullest cooperation of the Government of
Iraq in every respect. It is time to bring to a close a sad
chapter in the history of the region and to forge a new
relationship among the regional States, one based on
reconciliation, trust and confidence with one another,
and a shared common heritage.

This, however, could only come about with Iraq's
full cooperation in other areas, under the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, including an
immediate accounting for and return of Kuwaiti
prisoners of war and missing third-country nationals, as
well as national archives and other properties illegally
taken from Kuwait during the Iraqi invasion of that
country. Only these actions on the part of Iraq would
ensure the return of normalcy in the relations between
Iraq and Kuwait. We would therefore urge Iraq not to
lose this window of opportunity and to do what is right,
in the interest of peace and tranquillity of its people,
the region and the world.

My delegation welcomes the fact that the issue of
Iraq is now being dealt with by the Security Council,
where it rightfully belongs. The matter must be dealt
with by the full Council, involving all of its members
at every stage of the deliberations. It must be resolved
through the Council's own mechanisms and processes,
based on established principles and norms of
international law and the Charter of the United
Nations. It is up to Council members to ensure and
preserve the integrity of its decision-making process
and to do their utmost to resolve the problem without
recourse to military action. The beating of war drums
and talk of "regime change" are, therefore, completely
out of place and unwarranted. They detract from the
business at hand, which is the dispatch of UNMOVIC
inspectors to Iraq, and complicate the situation.

It is clear that the overwhelming majority of the
international community does not wish to see or
support military action against Iraq. This is not
surprising, as no one wants to see the prolongation of
the utter misery of the Iraqi people after almost twelve
years of the most debilitating sanctions. The innocent
people of Iraq will be among the first and most
numerous casualties in any use of force against Iraq.
For their sake, war must be avoided. Diplomacy must
be given every chance to work. Its success far
outweighs, and is more enduring than, anything that
military action could bring to bear on the situation.

This is the message that the Secretary-General
himself has repeated often enough, both in the context
of the question of Iraq and other conflict situations. In
his opening address to this session of the General
Assembly on 12 September 2002, the Secretary-
General staunchly stood up for diplomacy and
multilateralism. The Council can do no less as
multilateralism, which entails United Nations
diplomacy, is the raison-d'etre of the United Nations.
He said it most poignantly at the second meeting of the
General Assembly's current session when, referring to
the sanctity of the rule of law, he declared:

ca

. every government that is committed to the
rule of law at home, must be committed also to
the rule of law abroad. All States have a clear
interest, as well as a clear responsibility, to
uphold international law and maintain
international order".

The alternative to diplomacy and the multilateral
process is recourse to the use of armed force, with all
its unintended consequences to peace, security,
including human security and development.
Unintended consequences could affect, as well,
international efforts to combat international terrorism,
which will surely be further complicated and may well
unravel in its wake.

Surely, with the ushering in of the new century
and millennium, and the high hopes and expectations
contained in the Millennium Declaration, the Council
will not wish to squander the gains garnered over so
many years of careful, painstaking and productive
diplomacy.

All Members of the Organization are custodians
of the Charter, but especially so the Members serving
on the Security Council, both permanent and non-
permanent. They must ensure that the Charter is upheld
and protected, not undermined or set aside. There must
be consistency and even-handedness in its actions and
decisions and no double standards. What is required of
Iraq, with respect to compliance with Council
resolutions, must also be required of others,
particularly Israel, which has ignored many of them
with impunity.

In dealing with this and other issues of peace and
security, the Council has a grave responsibility to
ensure that the international system, based on the
corpus of international laws and norms, will be
preserved and strengthened. Members of the Council
will have to ensure and satisfy themselves that their
action in the Council will serve the larger interests of
the international community, not just their own narrow
national interests. At the end of the day, the Council
will be judged as to whether its decision upholds
international law and international legitimacy,
strengthens the United Nations and the multilateral
process, promotes peace and security, or the opposite.
It will be judged as to whether by its decision the
Council chooses the path of constructive diplomacy or
that of destructive war, with all its implications to
regional and international peace and security.

This is, indeed, a heavy responsibility that each
member of the Council must bear on behalf of the
international community in whose name, and hopefully,
in whose interests, the Security Council acts. The
responsibility is particularly awesome for the
permanent members who, by virtue of the special
power vested in them, will determine, more than
others, the final outcome of this issue. We trust they,
and other Council members, will do what is right.

