Mr. Kobler (spoke in French): The Security
Council has received the Secretary-General's latest
report (S/2016/452) on the activities of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), which
details the work of the Mission since 26 February. The
report also sets out the political progress in Libya and
depicts the tragic humanitarian situation that is giving
rise to personal tragedies and collective suffering. I
therefore begin by emphasizing the humanitarian crisis
and the human tragedy afflicting Libya.

(spoke in English)
In the few weeks since the preparation of the report,
more than 6,000 families from Sirte alone have fled
their homes to escape the ongoing clashes and military
operations against Da'esh, not to mention the day-to-
day hardships of life under Da'esh. Many are taking
shelter in schools, universities and public buildings.
The number of displaced persons in Libya has reached a
staggering 435,000. The capacity of local communities
and aid agencies to host and provide assistance to them
has been stretched to breaking point.

In the month of May, 1,100 migrants died
tragically in the central Mediterranean Sea. On a single
day - 26 May - 500 migrants drowned off the coast
of Libya, including 40 children. To date, the number
of migrants who have drowned this year has increased
more than 30 per cent as compared to the same period
last year.

In a natural resources-rich country like Libya,
it is unacceptable that the health-care system is so
thoroughly dilapidated, that vital infrastructure has
been thoroughly damaged and that there are acute
shortages in health workers and essential medicines
and supplies.

All that is the consequence of the continued lack of
State authority in most parts of the country. Next week
marks six months since the signing of the Libyan Political
Agreement last December. The signing represented
the first time that the Libyan people had dared believe
again that peace and unity in Libya were attainable. It
was the first time they dared hope that guns, which had
brought untold suffering and destruction upon their
lives, could finally be silenced. Armed with nothing
but the legitimacy bestowed on them by the Libyan
Political Agreement, seven courageous members of
Libya's Presidency Council took the bold step, on
30 March, to courageously cross the sea from Tunisia
to Tripoli. Still, the sense of hope and optimism with
which people across Libya welcomed the signing of the
Agreement and the arrival of the Presidency Council
in Tripoli stands in contrast today to their sense of
growing impatience and concern.

At this critical moment in Libya's transition, facts
must be acknowledged as they are. It has been almost
five months since the Presidency Council submitted
a revised proposal for the Government of National
Accord. Today, Libya is still without a formally
endorsed Government. The implementation of the
Libyan Political Agreement has stalled because some
parties to the Agreement have failed to uphold their
commitments. The House of Representatives has an
integral role to play in Libya's democratic transition.
However, it must make progress in fulfilling its
obligations under the Libyan Political Agreement to
hold a vote on endorsing the Government of National
Accord. Given the scale of the problems facing Libya's
population, the country must have a functioning
Government, ministries and bureaucracy. The rapidly
deteriorating humanitarian situation and the escalating
military tensions linked to the fight against Da'esh
require boldness, determination and decisiveness.

I wish to take this opportunity to commend the
efforts of the Presidency Council over recent weeks to
seize the initiative and exercise leadership. It decided to
establish joint operation rooms to coordinate military
operations against Da'esh, and it instructed ministers
to begin work pending their formal swearing-in. Those
are steps in the right direction.

I welcome the League of Arab States declaration
of 28 May, which encouraged the acting ministers
of the Government of National Accord to work from
Tripoli until the House of Representatives formally
endorsed the Government. The League of Arab States
also recognized the Government of National Accord as
the sole legitimate Government for Libya and called
on Member States to refrain from communicating with
any other parallel executive bodies. I also commend the
efforts of the African Union and its High Representative
for Libya, former President Jakaya Kikwete. This
morning the Security Council heard a briefing by
Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
(see S/PV.7705). The contributions of the European
Union to peace, development and the fight against
human trafficking are commendable and invaluable.

If there is any hope for the Libyan people to exit
from the current situation that has engulfed their
country, there must be clear lines and principles. As a
matter of immediate priority, I propose the following
six points.

First, the Libyan Political Agreement, endorsed
by the House of Representatives on 25 January,
remains the sole legitimate framework for managing
the remainder of Libya's political transition until a
permanent constitution is adopted.

Secondly, the House of Representatives remains
the institution to endorse and swear in the Government
of National Accord. However, it must do so. After two
unsuccessful attempts, in February and April, it is high
time that the Speaker assume his responsibilities to
convene a parliamentary session free of intimidation
and threat, in order to take a vote on the proposed
Government of National Accord. I also suggest that the
House of Representatives request the League of Arab
States, the African Union, the United Nations and other
members of the international community to attend
those sessions as observers.

Thirdly, it is Vital that the Presidency Council works
in its entirety, with all nine members. I encourage the
members who do are not attending the meetings to
rejoin the Presidency Council.

Fourthly, the Presidency Council will need to move
quickly to meet the basic needs of the Libyan people.
Immediate steps are needed to ensure that shortages in
cash availability, food and electricity are satisfactorily
addressed without further delay. The United Nations
and its partners in the international community are
ready to assist.

Fifthly, the Presidency Council is the sole
legitimate recipient of international security assistance
in its capacity as supreme commander of a united
Libyan army.

Sixthly, averting hostilities among the different
Libyan security actors involved in the fight against
Da'esh requires an inclusive interim security
arrangement, including temporary command-and-
control arrangements for the army. There simply can be
no half-solutions.

There was considerable progress over recent days
and weeks in the fight against Da'esh. I commend all
those who have fought against terrorism in all parts of
the country, including in Benghazi and Derna. I deplore
the deaths of so many brave sons of Libya. Last week,
I visited Misrata and its hospital, with its wounded. I
have seen at first-hand the resolve and the commitment
to fight Da'esh.

However, I am also concerned about the military
situation in the country. The oil crescent region has
witnessed a build-up of military formations. Libyan
army units have moved into the area from the east.
Forces under the Presidency Council have been engaged
in clashes with Da'esh in areas west of Sirte. However,
uncoordinated military actions on the ground have
raised the spectre of direct clashes among the different
forces fighting Daesh. The possibility of renewed
military escalation in Libya should be a matter of grave
concern for all. Libyans must not fight each other. They
must fight united against the common enemy.
Our Mission has been actively engaging with
all sides to help build consensus around a unified
security architecture abd gas assisted the Presidency
Council with expertise and good offices. However,
we must recognize that Libya is a country awash
with weapons - 20 million pieces of weaponry in a
land of 6 million inhabitants. Those weapons do not
fall from the sky, but come in increasingly through
illegal shipments by sea and by land. Those arms fuel
the conflict. The shipments must end, if there is to be
any serious hope of bringing peace to Libya. Weapons
should go only to regular forces after approval by the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.

The volatile situation in Libya is prone to lead to
further war crimes. All military actors in Libya must
act within the bounds of international humanitarian
law, and those who do not must be brought to account.
I recently visited the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, to express
my support for the role that her Office can play in the
fight against impunity. The work of the ICC is needed
in Libya now more than ever. I ask all Member States
that share my concerns for the ongoing international
crimes in Libya to provide the Office of the Prosecutor
with all the required information - but, above all, with
financial resources to prosecute new crimes.

I would like to thank the Council for its close
engagement on Libya and for its support for a political
resolution there. As the report before the Council shows,
there is an urgent need for UNSMIL to re-establish its
presence in Libya.

The establishment of regular UNSMIL flights to
Tripoli has facilitated some direct contact with key
partners. However, such intervals of quick engagement
are insufficient. It is likely that the request for assistance
will increase as ministries and the bureaucracy become
functional again. It is essential that UNSMIL be on
the ground and ready to meet the immediate needs and
priorities of Libyans.

Allow me to add a few words in Arabic on the
occasion of the holy month of Ramadan.

(Spoke in Arabic)

Today is the first day of Ramadan, a month
traditionally associated with a commitment to peace,
justice, compassion and reconciliation. I hope that it
will in fact be a month of dialogue. I wish the people of
Lybia Ramadan Kareem.
