Mr. Djani (Indonesia): We welcome the adoption of
resolution 2463 (2019) today. The resolution is a product
of compromise that takes into account the concerns
of the new Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The peaceful transfer of power in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is a turning point in
the country's history. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) played an important role in
the process and will play the same vital role in making
sure that peace will last in the country. We welcome the
resolution, which ensures the ability of MONUSCO to
continue its role until the end of the year.

Indonesia also welcomes the resolution's
appropriate recognition of the important use of
community engagement to enhance MONUSCO'S
ability to support the Mission's protection and
implement its mandated tasks, including to protect
civilians. We look forward to the Secretary-General's
strategic review of the Mission and hope that the review
will be carried out in consideration of what is needed
by the Congolese people. Therefore, consultations
involving the Government, MONUSCO's leader and
the troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/ PCCs) are essential.

The peacekeepers' safety and security should also
be part of the review as they are becoming a cause for
concern in the field. We were saddened to hear the
reports of attacks directed against peacekeepers and
pay our respects to those who have fallen.

We recognize the leadership ofFrance, as penholder,
in leading the discussions of resolution 2463 (2019). As
we look forward to the next mandate renewal, we stand
ready to engage in discussion at the earliest opportunity
in order to adopt a more comprehensive draft resolution
and better accommodate the concerns of the Congolese
people; the Secretariat, which provides resources to
MONUSCO; the TCCs/PCCs, which send their men
and women to the field; and the members of the region
in the Council that are affected.

Indonesia is one of the largest TCCs/PCCs in
MONUSCO, and the role that it plays in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of armed groups in
the province of Tanganyika has been demonstrated.
Guns have been transferred to peacekeepers, showing
trust and confidence in our peacekeepers, but much
still needs to be done.

I should like to conclude by reiterating my
delegation's wish that the resolution that we have just
adopted will contribute to the promotion oflasting peace
and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
based on full respect for its sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We need to support the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

