Ms. Mulamula: I feel honoured to address the
Council today soon after my nomination as the first
Executive Secretary of the Conference Secretariat of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region. I would like to express my heartfelt
appreciation for having been given this early
opportunity to speak to the Council in my new
capacity.

I thank the Council for its timely initiative to
convene this meeting following the Second Summit of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, held in Nairobi on 14-15 December 2006 and
leading to the signing of the Pact on Security, Stability
and Development.

The continued good will and the unwavering
commitment of the Council to the Great Lakes region
in the search for durable peace, stability and
development is highly commendable. I wish to thank,
in a special way, the outgoing United Nations
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan,
and his Special Representative for the Great Lakes
Region, Mr. Ibrahima Fall, for their tireless efforts and
commitment to the peace process in the region.

You may wish to recall that the Council played an
instrumental role in the convening of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region. With the
African Union, the Group of Friends, countries of the
region and other people of good will, the Security
Council spearheaded that consultative and all-inclusive
process. It thus saw the convening of the first historic
Summit of the International Conference process in Dar
es Salaam in November 2004, which culminated in the
signing of the Dar es Salaam Declaration on Security,
Stability and Development in the Great Lakes Region.
06-67407

The Dar es Salaam Declaration set the vision and
mission for the Great Lakes, which needed to be
translated into concrete action. The countries in the
region, with the assistance and support of the joint
African Union-United Nations Secretariat, the Group
of Friends and United Nations agencies worked out
tangible projects, protocols, programmes of action and
follow-up mechanisms to give effect to the Dar es
Salaam Declaration. Those covered priority areas under
the four thematic areas of the Conference, namely,
peace and security, good governance and democracy,
economic development and regional integration, as
well as humanitarian and social issues.

I am happy to report that the Second Summit was
a culmination of that preparatory work, which led to
the signing of the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development, of which the projects, protocols and
Regional Follow-up Mechanism constitute integral
parts.

The Regional Follow-up Mechanism provides for
the establishment of a regionally-owned Conference
Secretariat, whose headquarters will be in Bujumbura,
Burundi, and I will be privileged to head that
Secretariat. It also established the Special Fund for
Reconstruction and Development, to be housed by the
African Development Bank.

The heads of State and Government have
declared their commitment to bring into effect and
implement the Regional Follow-up Mechanism, in
particular the Conference Secretariat, within three
months after the signing of the Peace Pact. The
Declaration adopted at the Second Summit spells out a
road map for the Conference Secretariat.

The tasks for the new Secretariat are enormous,
and among them is putting into place legal, financial
and administrative processes for implementing the
Pact. That includes recruitment of competent staff and
mobilization of resources for the start-up of the
Regional Secretariat in Bujumbura, as decided by the
Summit.

In that respect, I appeal to the Council to extend
the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the period up to March 2007, as
earlier requested by the Regional Inter-Ministerial
Committee, so as to assist the new Conference
Secretariat in its teething stage by providing technical
support and allowing a smooth handover of the residual
responsibilities to the new Secretariat.

Equally, I wish to reiterate the plea of the heads
of State and Government in their declaration to the
United Nations and the African Union to continue their
support for the new Conference Secretariat for at least
one year.

It may be recalled that the United Nations, though
its agencies, funds and programmes - including the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the Economic
Commission for Africa (ECA), Habitat and the United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), to mention
but a few - provided technical expertise, as well as
financial support, in partnership with the AU and the
Group of Friends, in the first phase of the International
Conference process. The appeal is to see this valuable
assistance and support extended to the new Conference
secretariat in its formative year and in the upcoming
critical phase of the implementation of the Pact.

Our new Conference secretariat is unique in its
kind given the challenges it is supposed to meet,
particularly that of reconstruction, and the wide range
of actors with which it is supposed to engage. Of
importance is the fact that it is formed by the very
countries that have emerged from war, which are
plagued by dilapidated infrastructure and poverty, but
which are committed to putting an end to this sad
chapter in the history of a conflict-ridden region.

The signing of the peace Pact by the leaders of
the Great Lakes region has demonstrated their political
will and determination to transform the region into a
space for durable peace, stability and shared growth.
The future of the Great Lakes region lies in the
comprehensive implementation of the Pact. As stated
by the Secretary-General, "The pact is not just a vision;
it is a programme of action."

I am personally encouraged by the renewed sense
of optimism and the readiness and great political will
of the leaders on the one hand, and, on the other, by the
enthusiasm and goodwill demonstrated by the
international community at the Second Summit with
respect to seeing peace prevail in the region.

In concluding, I would like to pledge my
readiness to work with the Council in pursuing our
common objective of achieving sustainable peace and
stability in the Great Lakes region. I look forward to
the Council's renewed engagement and support for the

implementation phase of the International Conference
process.

Lastly, Mr. President, I would like to assure you
that, as a secretariat established in the framework of
the International Conference on the Great lakes region,
we will continue to uphold the values of ownership,
partnership and complementarity that have guided the
Great Lakes region peace process thus far.

