Mr. Strnmmen (Norway): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Egeland for a very useful briefing
this morning.

Civilians have become the principal victims of
war, especially in internal armed conflicts. While
armed conflicts have always put civilians at risk, now
they are at the very centre of conflicts, as targets and as
objects of abuse and exploitation. Our response to this
development must be comprehensive and needs to
involve many different actors. In order to respond
effectively, there are a number of things that must be in
place.

Protection of civilians must be made an
overriding principle for international involvement in
conflict areas. For the Security Council, this means that
United Nations peacekeeping operations must be given
strong mandates and adequate resources to protect
civilians. The Security Council must systematically
apply the resolutions that have already been adopted on
the protection of civilians when adopting new
mandates and reviewing existing ones. The newly
updated aide-memoire of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the road map
are, indeed, very useful tools to this end. By building
on these adopted texts, the Council can continue to
spearhead the formulation of United Nations policy and
inspire the comprehensive response from the United
Nations system needed to provide efficient protection
for civilians in armed conflict.

Respect for international humanitarian law must
be reinforced as it is part of the bedrock of the
international legal order. Governments cannot interpret
these binding rules as relative norms that can be set
aside as new patterns of conflict develop. International
humanitarian law also applies in present-day conflicts.

We all know how media coverage affects our
perception of humanitarian crises. Once international
focus is turned away from a humanitarian crisis, the
sense of urgency lessens and funding is less readily
available. We must counteract this effect through
responsible donorship. Humanitarian assistance should
be based on needs, not on media coverage or other
political priorities alone. Unfortunately, humanitarian
aid has in many instances turned out to be a long-term
challenge. In appreciation of this fact, the Norwegian
Government continues to provide assistance to several
areas that are no longer in the headlines. The notion of
forgotten conflicts is an insult to those who are
exposed to our neglect.

Access to internally displaced and other
vulnerable populations continues to be a major
problem. Humanitarian organizations are too often left
alone to negotiate access with the authorities or armed
groups that see humanitarian aid not as impartial
emergency relief but as a strategic means to an end.
The international community needs to use its influence
to secure access for humanitarian aid behind the lines
of fire. In extreme cases, United Nations-mandated
troops may be required to create a secure environment.

Humanitarian actors must be allowed to carry out
their work. My Government is outraged by the
instances in which humanitarian actors have been
deliberately targeted. We need to engage in a broad
political dialogue in order to strengthen the legitimacy,
integrity and security of humanitarian action.

Several questions need to be addressed: first,
international agencies should take a closer look at how
they operate on the ground, in order to ensure
legitimacy and local support. We must avoid a situation
in which security arrangements for humanitarian
personnel create a greater distance between aid workers
and the local population.

Secondly, the international humanitarian dialogue
must be revitalized and broadened. As donor
Governments, we must be open to consultation and
coordination that cut across traditional divisions. Major
host countries of refugees, other countries in conflict-
ridden regions and traditional and new donor countries
alike should be more closely involved in cooperation
on how to prevent humanitarian suffering and ensure
access and opportunity to alleviate humanitarian
suffering.

Thirdly, as part of this dialogue, we need a more
thorough analysis and discussion of how humanitarian
agencies and military or peacekeeping forces can best
interact to increase security and access to vulnerable
groups without compromising the humanitarian
agencies.

Our inability to assist civilian victims of conflict
represents a challenge to the legitimacy of all efforts to
promote international peace and security. We are
therefore encouraged by the Council's continued focus
on these matters. We also appreciate the strengthened
cooperation between the United Nations and other
agencies. Norway has taken an interest in the issue of
protection of civilians in armed conflict for quite some
time. We shall continue to work actively to assist
policy formulation in cooperation with the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and other
interested Member States in the support group for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

