Mr. Braun (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank the Peruvian presidency of the Security
Council for organizing today's important debate, as
well as all the speakers who have contributed to it.

My country fully aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union,
but I would like to add a few comments from our
national perspective.

We highly appreciate the quality of the independent
progress study (see S/2018/86), and I wish to express
my country's support for the recommendations set
out therein and to express my thanks for the work of
the Advisory Group of Experts and the secretariat
established for the study, made up by the Peacebuilding
Support Office and the United Nations Population Fund.
I welcome the participatory and inclusive approach,
which made it possible to reflect the views of young
people around the world and to produce a study that
reflects their reality.

We hope that the idea of a new Security
Council resolution on youth, peace and security
will become a reality. It is essential to complete the
normative framework in this area and help reduce its
fragmentation. The study before us today presents
a unique opportunity for forward-looking strategic
planning to accelerate the implementation of youth,
peace and security programmes at all levels - national,
regional and global.

Too many young people around the world have lost
confidence in their Governments and in the international
community. They feel excluded from governance
systems, which creates a sense of injustice and of being
left behind. We must fight against the stigmatization of
young people, against prejudices and generalizations,
facilitate their inclusion in processes of peacebuilding,

economic growth and social development, because
young people are obviously our greatest treasure and
the future of the planet.
In that context, in order to promote a coherent
approach based on facts, Luxembourg is also in favour
of an annual implementation report by the Secretary-
General and the holding of annual open debates such
as this in the Security Council. In order to ensure the
legitimacy of these processes, the active participation
of young peacemakers will also need to be ensured.

Whether it be at the national or international level,
it is essential to build on young people's capacities for
action and initiative by providing them with the means
as well as the space necessary to enable them to build
inclusive networks that lets them be heard and fight
the structural obstacles that block their contribution to
peace and security. Thereafter, they must be involved
and recognized as equal partners, from the outset, in
peace and security initiatives that concern them.

In all of the foregoing, young people can count on
the ongoing commitment of my country.

