Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I too would like to thank
Mr. Haile Menkerios, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to the African Union (AU), for his
in-depth briefing.

When we talk about cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
Africa, two of the key concepts that arise are ownership
and partnership. We must balance ownership and
partnership to maximize each actor's comparative
advantages. The creation of the Organization of African
Unity and, later, the African Union (AU) signalled broad
regional ownership and consensuses on preventing and
resolving conflict.

One of the many important roles of the AU is its
ability to deploy peace-support operations swiftly
to harsh environments. Regarding partnership, the
United Nations Office to the African Union has been
playing a growing role that is driven by a need for
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU.
Both institutions can further develop joint planning and
decision-making processes, as well as concrete ways to
enhance their communication.

Secretariat-level cooperation is under way, in
response to the Secretary-General's May report
(S/2017/454), and regular direct interactions between
the Council and the AU Peace and Security Council are
essential in order to tangibly enhance our cooperation.
Japan also notes the interest shown during the recent
mission in the possible expansion of joint missions
going forward. Those could potentially provide
valuable insights to both Councils on the situation on
the ground.

I would like to emphasize that enhanced partnership
is needed not only as part of peace support operations
but also for conflict prevention and mediation, as well
as on addressing root causes of conflict. The trilateral
collaboration between the Council, the AU and the
Economic Community of West African States on The
Gambia is an excellent example. We also look forward
to an expanded conflict prevention role being played by
subregional organizations throughout Africa.

During our recent mission, the Council was made
aware of the AU's keen interest regarding funding
contributions in support of peace and security
operations. This requires further discussion in the
Council and the General Assembly as well as continued
efforts by the AU.

Mr. Llorenty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(Spoke in Spanish): Bolivia wishes to express its
thanks for the information presented by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Haile
Menkerios. We also take this opportunity to express
our thanks for the hospitality shown the members of
the Security Council during their recent visit to Addis
Ababa and to particularly thank you, Mr. President, and
the Government and the people of Ethiopia.

Bolivia reiterates its support for and commends
the work of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Secretary-General of the United
Nations in connection with the outcome of the first
annual conference of the United Nations and the African
Union (AU), held in April in order to foster a common
understanding of the root causes of conflict and to
promote consensus around the adoption of decisions.

We support the commitment shown by both
organizations to strengthening and improving dialogue
and mechanisms for cooperation and coordination
through the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security. The remits of the two organizations
provide a comprehensive strategic vision that will
make it possible to forge a stronger and more robust
partnership that will make it possible to address
the peace and security challenges faced by both
organizations, including disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration.

In that connection, we welcome the master road
map of the African Union on practical measures to
silence the guns in Africa by 2020 and its cooperation
in activities related to anti-personnel mines, as well as
the signing in June of a memorandum of understanding
between the AU Commission and the United Nations
Mine Action Service.

Turning to mechanisms for cooperation and
coordination, an example to be highlighted is the
deployment in 2007 of the AU mission in Somalia
and the support it provided in building the federal
system of that country and in the implementation of the
political road map, thanks to the joint efforts of the AU
and the Inter-Government Authority on Development
(IGAD). This progress has made it possible for the
United Nations and the African Union to establish a
partnership at the strategic and operational levels that
in the past 15 years has incorporated innovative work
methods, primarily in peacekeeping operations. In the
case of Somalia, this partnership made it possible to
establish a security pact involving mutual commitment
between the Government and its international partners,
highlighting the importance of a transition of the
security functions of the African Union Mission in
Somalia to the Somali forces.

In that context, the peacekeeping operations
deployed in Africa are a key tool for ensuring the
success of the ongoing quest for peace and security.
They are also a useful tool to confront challenges and
threats such as terrorism and humanitarian crises. This
is the case in the Lake Chad basin area, where the
United Nations, the AU and other international partners
are supporting the work of the Multinational Joint Task
Force in tackling Boko Haram.

Bolivia welcomes the signing of the agreement
on the provision of support and the memorandum
of understanding of 24 February between the AU
Commission and the countries that contribute troops in
the Lake Chad basin region, with a View to enabling the
international community to provide additional support
to the region.

In South Sudan, this support has been reflected in
the work of the AU Commission Chairperson and the
AU High Representative for South Sudan, who have
worked to ensure the inclusivity of the national dialogue
and the implementation of the agreement, in close
consultation with the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, IGAD and the United Nations. Bolivia
encourages these initiatives, including the deployment
of the Group of Five for the Sahel joint force, and we
agree with the Secretary-General, as stated in his report,
that it is important to complement those efforts with the

work done in Mali and coordinate them with the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali.

Bolivia underlines the growing level of strategic
partnership between the Security Council and the AU
Peace and Security Council and the commitment to the
development of a structured, equitable relationship,
focusing on strengthening mutual support and
continuing technical assistance on both political issues
and peacekeeping operations.

In that connection, Bolivia supports the Secretary-
General's statement in his report that coherence in the
decisions taken by the two Councils is crucial in order
to ensure greater impact and strategic convergence so as
to enhance our collective capacity to tackle challenges
of peace and security.

Moreover, we believe that we must continue to
explore various ways to provide support and assistance
to AU operations, pursuant to resolution 2320 (2016).
Against this backdrop, Bolivia supports the request made
by the African Union concerning flexible, predictable
financing and economic support for peace and security
operations. We highlight the importance of dialogue
and cooperation with regional and subregional partners
in order to prevent conflicts. The importance of this
cooperation is reflected in the joint efforts undertaken
by the Economic Community of West African States,
the AU and other international partners, including the
United Nations, which made it possible to avert conflict
in the Republic of the Gambia.

In the same way, Bolivia believes that success in
crisis resolution depends on the role assigned women
and young people in that area and therefore underscores
the need for both organizations to endeavour to ensure
that both these groups are fully integrated into all
activities related to peace and security.

To conclude, Bolivia deems it crucial to allow the
African Union to play a more central role in the making
of decisions on issues of concern to it, respecting the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
all of its member countries. It is key to abide by the
principle of finding an African solution to African
problems if we wish to be successful in overcoming our
common challenges.

