Mrs. Arce de Jeannet. (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of Mexico wishes to thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean- Marie Guehenno, for updating the Security
Council on developments in the situation in Kosovo in
general and in particular with respect to the activities
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), on the basis of the report of the
Secretary-General of9 October 2002 (S/2002/1126).

While the report, which is the reason for today's
meeting, does not address the municipal elections held
in Kosovo on 26 October, the Mexican delegation
wishes to speak about those first of all. Mexico would
like to highlight the importance of that electoral
process having taken place in a calm atmosphere and
without incident. The holding of elections in peaceful
circumstances and their results constitute a significant
step forward in the process of forming representative
organs with the participation of all ethnic and cultural
communities of Kosovo. However, Mexico is
concerned by the fact that the participation of the Serb
community in the election was low compared to that in
the elections of November 2001.

A very positive outcome of the 26 October
elections was that women represent more than 28 per
cent of the members of the 30 municipal assemblies.
This is a significant advance over the elections of 2000
when the proportion of women elected to the
assemblies was only 8 per cent.

With respect to the report of the Secretary-
General, the Mexican delegation has taken note of the
progress made in the area of the building effective
democratic institutions, and specifically through
training for members of the assemblies, the adoption of
laws on primary and secondary education, and in the
area of public health.

The Mexican delegation acknowledges the efforts
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo to change the political climate with a view
to bringing about the dismantling of parallel structures
and providing an incentive for all communities to
participate in the joint institutions. As suggested in the
report, security problems, inter-ethnic tension in the
workplace and limitations on freedom of movement
continue to be impediments to the participation of
minorities in the civil service. It is therefore essential
for UNMIK to continue to give priority to matters
relating the security situation in general and in specific
cases, as well as to measures to ensure greater freedom
of movement.

Among the challenges facing the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo and
UNMIK, Mexico would like to underscore the
importance of continued progress to bolster the rule of
law and the development of policies aimed at
establishing economic sustainability, particularly with
respect to the creation of jobs and the development of
the right conditions for the sustainable return of
refugees, and internally displaced persons. On the
question of refugees, we take note with satisfaction that
last year saw an end to the net departure of members of
minorities from Kosovo. But there is still much that
remains to be done in order to ensure the majority of
refugees return to their places of origin and find
acceptable conditions which will enable them to remain
there.

