Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by welcoming the Special Representative and
also His Excellency the Ambassador of Nepal. It is
very good to have him here and we welcome the
constructive relationship that the Government of Nepal
and the United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN)
have created between them.

My country very much welcomes the Secretary-
General's latest report on UNMIN. We do welcome
UNMIN's continuing positive role in Nepal's peace
process, and that includes the preparations for the
historic elections of 10 April. These, in turn, cleared
the way for the first meeting of the Constituent
Assembly on 28 May and the subsequent declaration of
Nepal as a federal republic and we were able to hear
from the Special Representative a little bit more about
the political context, which was very helpful.

Nepal's elections created the most diverse and

representative assembly in the country's history. The

result is a huge credit to Nepal and also a huge

opportunity - a real chance to strengthen Nepal's

democratic institutions and address the issues that
fuelled the conflict.

However, as the report makes clear and as we
heard from the Special Representative, challenges, of
course, remain. Despite elections and prolonged
negotiations between the parties, it has not been
possible to reach agreement on the formation of a new
government. The announcement of the election for a
new president on 19 July represents progress, but there
does seem a continuing lack of trust and consensus
between the parties.

Any further delay in forming the government
risks undermining the people of Nepal's confidence in
the democratic process and we hope, therefore, that we
can all recognize the importance of encouraging the
parties to work together, to respect the mandate given
to them following the elections and to establish a
government that can start to tackle the important
challenges facing Nepal. We stand ready, for our part,
to support that new government.

We agree with the Secretary-General that the
future of former combatants continue to be an issue of
special concern. A constant theme of the Secretary-
General's report on UNMIN has been the need to take
early action to resolve this issue, and it is disappointing
that, so far, the parties have been unable to reach
agreement on this important question.

We therefore believe that swift and full
implementation of the 25 June agreement is a priority.
This will require the reconstitution of the special
committee provided for in the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. It will also mean that, in accordance with
article 146 of the Interim Constitution, the inclusion of
representatives of the Assembly's political parties. The
United Kingdom agrees that UNMIN will be well-
placed to support this work through the monitoring of
arms and armed personnel and through the work of a
special political mission and, more generally, the
Special Representative.

My Government welcomes the proposed
reconfiguration of UNMIN. This will significantly
reduce staff levels, but it will also ensure the retention
of the core capacity in monitoring analysis and
political engagement to allow UNMIN to support
Nepal's peace process at the Government of Nepal's
request during the next six months. It is important that
the Mission continues to be responsive to the
requirements of both the governments of Nepal and
this Council and is able to reduce its presence further,
as soon as it is appropriate.

We welcome the letter and the subsequent
clarification that the Permanent Representative of
Nepal has been able to provide. We fully support the
extension of UNMIN's mandate for a further six
months and we hope negotiations on the draft
resolution to achieve this can be concluded quickly, so
that we can adopt it early next week.

We also agree with the Secretary-General that
there should be no need for UNMIN to continue its
arms monitoring function beyond the next phase of its
mandate. It is in the interest of neither Nepal nor the
United Nations for UNMIN to remain any longer than
is necessary. It is also clear that the precise timetable
for UNMIN's withdrawal will depend to some extent
on the willingness of the political parties to create the
conditions for that withdrawal. That means, in
particular, through implementation of the 25 June
Agreement. The Security Council must, in our view,
make clear its expectations of the parties in that regard.

I should like to conclude by offering our thanks
to Ian Martin and his team. We welcome his decision to
remain to see UNMIN through the next and final phase
of the process. UNMIN has played an important role in
supporting the peace process, and we look to the
Government of Nepal to make full use of the Mission's
expertise over the next six months.

