Mr. Sajdik: Ambassador Apakan and I have
today the honour to brief the Council from Minsk on
the evening before another negotiation round of the
Trilateral Contact Group and the four working groups
established by the Minsk agreements will take place.
This bears witness to the fact that the Minsk mechanisms
function on a regular basis and that there are many
different questions to be discussed and problems, also
of a current nature, to be solved.

The Trilateral Contact Group unites Russia
and Ukraine and the Special Representative of
the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), a
function presently held - as already mentioned by
Ambassador Apakan - by His Excellency Foreign
Minister Miroslav Lajeak of Slovakia, the President
of the General Assembly at its seventy-second session.
The Minsk platform foresees the participation of
certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions in
meetings. Resolution 2202 (2015), of 17 February
2015, in welcoming the declaration adopted by the four
leaders of the Normandy format on 12 February 2015,
has enshrined oversight by the Normandy four over our
Minsk deliberations. The latest meeting of that kind
took place in November 2018.

In today's statement on the occasion of the fourth
anniversary of the signing of the Minsk agreements, I
said that

"unfortunately, despite unanimous recommitments
to the Minsk agreements, a solution to the conflict
has not come nearer. In the region, confrontations
are still ongoing, causing suffering to the civilian
population and losses ofhuman lives, although their
number was considerably reduced in the course of
last year".

Having made, together with the Austrian OSCE
chairmanship in 2017, the protection of civilians a core
cause of our deliberations has - in close cooperation
with the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission and
international humanitarian organizations - helped
reduce the number of civilians casualties by more than
half in 2018, with that trend continuing this year.

Because of Ambassador Apakan's able guidance
of the security working group - for which I am very
grateful - the Trilateral Contact Group could adopt
decisions in the security field, as required by the Minsk
agreements, namely, the addendum to the package
of measures on the Withdrawal of heavy weapons, of
September 2015; the decisions on mine action and
prohibition of live-fire exercises in the vicinity of
the contact line, of March 2016; and the framework
decision on the disengagement of forces and hardware,
of September 2016.

Positive developments could also be achieved
in the economic field, especially with respect to
water deliveries, respective payments in the Luhansk
region and repairs of water infrastructure. Also in
2018, we observed encouraging efforts with regard to
maintaining mobile telecommunications across the line
of contact, which are especially Vital for the elderly
receiving their pensions on accounts in Government-
controlled territory. Moreover, the prolongation of
the special status of certain areas of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine
until the end of this year was an important political
achievement of September last year. The special status
is a cornerstone of the Minsk agreements.

There have also been setbacks. The conduct of the
so-called elections on 11 November 2018 in certain
areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions has not
helped strengthen the underlying spirit of the Minsk
agreements, namely, the unity and territorial integrity
of Ukraine. Important obligations have not been lived
up to. No disengagement has taken place so far in
Stanytsia Luhanska, which is one of the disengagement
zones that the sides had previously agreed on. The
access to the bridge on the northern bank of the
Seversky Donets River, at the crucial crossing point
near Stanytsia Luhanska, remains unrepaired, which
has absolutely dire consequences, in particular for the
elderly. With rising numbers of people crossing the
line of contact - an increase of 20 per cent in 2018
alone, reaching an average of 1.1 million crossings
per months, according to figures provided by the
International Organization for Migration - improving
the conditions at crossings and opening new entry-exit
check points has become very urgent, as has already
been mentioned by previous speakers.

Unfortunately, there has been no exchange of
conflict-related detainees since the end of 2017. We
have also observed a stalemate in the political working
group. I encourage the sides to allow the latter, with
the help of its tireless coordinator Ambassador Pierre
Morel, to widen the scope of its discussions.

I have now worked more than three and a half years
with the Minsk process. During that time, I have come
to the conclusion that the absolutely full implementation
of the Minsk agreements is essential to a peaceful
resolution of the conflict in eastern Ukraine. There is
simply no alternative.
