Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Cyprus, Malta, Turkey, Iceland and
Liechtenstein also align themselves with this statement.

We welcome the participation of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Steiner,
and Mr. Nebojsa Covie, Deputy Prime Minister of
Serbia, in this Council meeting and thank them for
their statements.

I should also like to thank Special Representative
Steiner for his leadership in the management of
Kosovo's affairs. Over the months of his tenure, he has
been able to make important progress on a number of
issues. The European Union has already expressed its
support for his priorities of laying the foundation for
economic development, fighting crime and violence,
and building a fair and just society with dignity for all
communities. We urge all actors in Kosovo to
concentrate their work on those priorities in a manner
consistent with resolution 1244 (1999) and the
constitutional framework.

These three priorities are closely interrelated. A
better functioning economy that improves the living
conditions of all Kosovars will undoubtedly encourage
refugee returns and discourage further emigration from
the province, as well as reduce the causes of crime and
violence. At the same time, the establishment of a
political culture based on the rule of law and the
eradication of organized crime and violence will create
an atmosphere more conducive to investment and
economic growth as well as to job creation. We
welcome the concept, being developed by the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, of
benchmarks that need to be met to measure progress on
the path to the future.

The European Union welcomes the progress
towards the formation of the provisional Government.
It is essential for Kosovo that the provisional
institutions of self-government work effectively in
service of the population and represent the multi-ethnic
character of the province. We encourage the application
of those same principles in the ongoing establishment
ofa civil service.

The Union has repeatedly stressed the
fundamental importance of fighting organized crime
and violence. While we welcome the improvement in
the overall security situation, we are greatly concerned
at the Secretary-General's affirmation that ethnically
motivated attacks continue. Democracy will not be able
to take root in Kosovo in an environment of insecurity
and fear. We encourage the provisional institutions of
self-government and all the parties to do everything
possible to end Violence and extremism. We condemn
the recent violent events in Mitrovica and welcome
Deputy Prime Minister Covie's statement that the
atmosphere of conflict, distrust and violence must
come to an end.

We support UNMIK in its efforts to establish its
full authority in the north of Mitrovica. We have also
welcomed the transfer to UNMIK by the Belgrade
authorities of Kosovo Albanians imprisoned in the
Republic of Serbia as a very positive step that will
contribute to creating confidence among the
communities in Kosovo. The Union urges all the
parties to continue cooperating constructively in the
other areas of interest provided for in the UNMIK-
Yugoslavia Common Document, in particular to
accelerate the process of determining the fate of
missing persons of all communities.

We welcome the work undertaken by UNMIK in
coordination with Belgrade to enable the return of all
refugees and internally displaced persons to Kosovo.
The past few years have demonstrated that, when
favourable conditions are created on the ground,
especially for the return of minorities, progress can be
achieved quickly. More than 1 million people are still
displaced in the region as the result of the conflict, and
all regional actors must spare no effort to create the
necessary legislative and security conditions for return
and to allocate the resources to ensure its sustainability.

Let me take this opportunity to reiterate our call
on the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to fulfil their international obligation of full
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia. That cooperation, along
with the affirmation of civilian control over the
military, will move Serbia and Montenegro one step
closer to European integration.

The European Union welcomes the South-East
European Cooperation Process summit in Tirana on 28
March and commends its members' wish to further
enhance regional cooperation. The rapprochement with
the European Union goes hand in hand with the process
of developing regional cooperation, which constitutes
one of the main targets of the stabilization and
association process.

