Mr. Gorelik (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Four months ago, in response to a request
from the Albanian Government and to an initiative by
Italy, the Security Council authorized the dispatch of a
multinational protection force to Albania. The force
became the central element of the international
community's response to the crisis in that country.

Today, we are pleased to note that the mandate of
the multinational protection force has been fulfilled. The
force deserves high commendation. It facilitated the
normalization of the situation in Albania, ensured the safe
delivery and distribution of humanitarian assistance,
provided security for representatives of international
organizations in Albania, and enabled the Albanian
authorities, in cooperation with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), to prepare
and conduct special parliamentary elections in a very
short time-frame.

We pay tribute to the countries that participated in
the force and, first and foremost, to Italy, the leader of
the operation.

From the very outset, Russia advocated the operation
of the force in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, the principles of the OSCE, and the decisions of
the Security Council. An important element facilitating
the success of the work of the force was that the mandate
had been clearly written. The Security Council set up
appropriate monitoring of the force's activities, inter alia
through regular reports. Effective interaction was also
established between the force and the relevant structures
of the OSCE. We believe that to a significant extent this
formula helped ensure the neutral and successful conduct

 

of the operation. We think it is very important that in future
too the Security Council should be kept regularly informed
about developments in Albania.

The process of achieving a settlement in Albania
provides another example of valuable interaction between
the United Nations and regional organizations such as the
OSCE on the basis of a comprehensive approach and a
rational division of labour. The Albanian operation applied
the principle by which regional peacekeeping forces would
be answerable to the Security Council, which bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security. The experience of the force will certainly be
useful in further improving cooperation between the United
Nations and its regional partners.

What has to be done in Albania today is to consolidate
the gradual move of the country towards democracy, the
rule of law and economic reform. We believe that a
solution to these crucially important issues within the
context of the process of national reconciliation will
become a priority for the new leadership in Albania. In our
view, the post-election statements provide prerequisites for
further gradual normalization of the situation, which would
be carried out primarily, of course, by the Albanians
themselves.

In conclusion, the Russian Federation, within the
context of the common efforts of the international
community and with a leading role for the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), will continue
to be prepared to provide assistance in the restoration of
peace and stability to Albania.

