The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Cote d'Ivoire, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate
in the consideration of the item, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gba (Cote d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (Spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/222, which contains the eighth report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its full
support for the International Working Group
(IWG) and endorses its seventh final
communique dated 19 May 2006.

"The Security Council welcomes the
launching of first pilot operations of public
hearings in seven locations, in particular in
Abidjan, in the South and in the North of the
country. It welcomes also the discussions
engaged by the Chiefs of Staff of the Defence and
Security Forces of Cote d'Ivoire (FANCI) and the

Armed Forces of the Forces Nouvelles (FAFN) to
initiate without delay the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme.

"The Security Council commends the Prime
Minister, Charles Konan Banny, for having taken,
in cooperation with President Laurent Gbagbo,
these concrete initiatives which constitute a first
step towards the implementation of the peace
process he leads. It reiterates to him its full
support.

"The Security Council calls upon the
community of donors to provide all the necessary
financial resources to the High Representative for
the Elections to support the full implementation
of his mission.

"The Security Council underlines that many
of the essential tasks envisaged in the road map
established by the IWG remain to be executed. It
reiterates its grave concern at the serious delay in
the implementation of the road map, as well as
the one expressed by the Secretary-General in
paragraph 74 of his report dated ll April 2006
(S/2006/222).

"The Security Council strongly condemns
the acts of violence against civilians, political
leaders and impartial forces. It demands that all
Ivorian parties refrain from making any public
messages that incite hatred and violence. It warns
all Ivorian parties in that regard.

"The Security Council invites the Prime
Minister and the Government of National
Reconciliation he leads to take immediately, with
the support of the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) in accordance with its
mandate, all the necessary measures to accelerate
the implementation of the road map, in particular
the DDR and identification operations, the
redeployment of the administration throughout
the territory and the reunification of the country.

"The Security Council calls upon the
Ivorian authorities to take without delay all the
necessary steps so that those responsible for
violence are identified and punished, to keep the
IWG and the Secretary-General informed in this
regard, and, in close liaison with UNOCI, to

ensure the full independence and neutrality of
Radio Television Ivoirienne (RTI).

"The Security Council urges all Ivorian
parties, including the Chiefs of Staff of FANCI
the

and FAFN, to closely cooperate with the Prime
Minister in order to create the conditions
indispensable for the holding of free, open, fair
and transparent elections by 31 October 2006.

"The Security Council invites the IWG to
report to it as soon as possible on its assessment
of the implementation of the road map.

"The Security Council underlines that
targeted measures are to be imposed against
persons to be designated by the Committee
established by paragraph 14 of resolution 1572
(2004) who among other things block the
implementation of the peace process, including
by attacking or obstructing the action of UNOCI,
of the French forces which support it, of the High
Representative for the elections or of the
International Working Group, or who incite
publicly hatred and violence, as provided in
resolutions 1572 (2004) and 1643 (2005)."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2006/23.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at I p.rn.

