Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to assure you of my full cooperation. My
congratulations go also to your predecessor,
Ambassador Tafrov, on the remarkable manner in
which he conducted our work. My delegation thanks
you for having organized this meeting on threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts. I should also like to thank the Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, Sir Jeremy Greenstock,
for his report to the Council as well as for the
supplementary information that he has given us. In
addition, I should like to express our gratitude to the
other members of the Bureau and to the support staff
for their high-quality contribution to the Committee's
work.

Since the sad events of 11 September 2001, the
issue of terrorism and its many consequences has
strengthened the international community's
determination to take aggressive and forceful measures
to eradicate that scourge. The implementation of
various Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions as well as measures taken by Member
States and by subregional, regional and international
organizations are part of that scheme. We welcome the
cooperation between the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the various actors, and we encourage them to
persevere on that path. We are convinced that that
would allow us, among other things, to coordinate the
activities of countries within their respective
organizations and to benefit from the comparative
advantages that that would offer.

One year after the adoption of resolution 1373
(2001), and after three reviews of the Committee's
work, one must welcome the submission of 265
reports, of which 179 are initial reports and 86 are
follow-up reports. An examination of most of them
reveals not only the political will of Member States but
also the Committee's determination to shoulder its
responsibilities effectively and promptly. My
delegation welcomes the work accomplished by the
experts, particularly in the context of providing
assistance to Member States that have expressed the
need for it. We appreciate the creation of a directory
web site on the issue, which deserves to be continually
expanded. Bilateral contacts between countries
requesting and furnishing assistance must be further
coordinated by the experts.

The fight against terrorism is a long-term
challenge. Therefore, I should like to make an urgent
appeal to the donor community to respond favourably
to the needs expressed by various States, with a view to
maintaining the current momentum. We urge the
Committee to pursue its work with transparency,
focusing its attention on the lessons learned from
examining the initial reports, which will allow it to
better orient its consideration of the follow-up reports
and thus to formulate useful recommendations for
Member States.

In conclusion, my delegation supports the
decision to renew the mandate of the Committee and of
its Bureau, as well as the new work programme
submitted for our consideration.

