Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): At the outset, I
wish to compliment you, Sir, for circulating a very
substantive concept paper (S/2014/30, annex). We
admire your paper because it asks us, States Members
of the United Nations, to step back and reflect. You
have asked us to parse the topic, to first understand the
anatomy and rationale of war, to identify the lessons
learned from wars, and to harness the energies of the
United Nations in the quest for peace and security. In
response to your piercing questions, we cannot come
up with cliche'd responses. This is a measure of your
success.
This is also a solemn occasion. We should remember
the dead and those who laid down their lives for peace
or who became the unintended and hapless victims of
war. Today's meeting should be about deepening our
understanding of war and peace, not about political
point-scoring or raising the spectres of past divisions
and enmities.

The First World War, in hindsight, was avoidable.
One historian has called it the twentieth century's
seminal catastrophe, but in hindsight we all have 20/20
vision. It is now evident that, last century, nations
were too quick to abandon diplomacy. That is not an
indictment but a conclusion. Diplomacy should never
be discontinued.

We know that war is brutal and recurrent. Wars kill,
maim, torture and leave a trail of devastation in their
wake. And yet they become a necessary evil because
nations constantly prepare for wars to deter aggression.
Sun Tzu, the Chinese philosopher, said that the greatest
victories require no battle. Clausewitz wrote that war
is the "continuation of policy by other means". War is
therefore a reality, and that is why we should always be
ready and equipped to avert it.

What are the lessons we have learned? One thing is
clear. This century, we should not repeat the mistakes
of the last. There should be no complacency. Never
should we lower our guard for peace.

The comparisons with the first decades of the last
century are eerie. The dawn of the last century was
imbued with hope and flush with new technologies,
both benign and harmful. The only difference is that
today's technologies are thousands of times more
beneficial or destructive. One hundred years ago, the
world did not have super-computers or weapons of mass
destruction. But today we do, and they are becoming
much more sophisticated by the day. Last century,
all sides plunged into a cataclysmic war while at the
same time denouncing it as ignoble. Apparently, in the
narrow sense, there was no casus belli for such a wide
global war. Nations were sucked into the war because of
their apprehensions and latent hostilities.

There is no such thing as permanent peace. If such
a state were at all possible, the world's warmongers
and pacifists would go out of business and the United
Nations never-ending task of saving succeeding
generations from the scourge of war would come to an
end. War can erupt anywhere and at any time. That is
why we need to be vigilant. The United Nations should
remain constantly watchful. There should be a system
in place to stem potential threats. The United Nations is
that system, but it should be used optimally.

Transient random eruptions of conflicts should not
be confused with deep-rooted inter-State tensions and
disputes. The desire for domination and hegemony can
cause war today, as it did a century ago. To avert war,
international politics should be guided not by zero-sum
mindsets, but by respect for the legitimate interests and
rights of other nations and peoples. We should strive to
work for security for all, not a select few.

We all know that wars are destructive, expensive
and debilitating for all. Once conflicts break out,
they should not be allowed to drag on for years. Swift
diplomacy should be set in motion to secure and
build peace. In the past century, we learned that the
stereotyping and mischaracterization of ethnic and
religious groups and communities led to wars and
horrendous pogroms. This century should not repeat
that mistake. From the ashes of the First World War, the
world extracted the principles - for instance, the right
to self-determination - on which the United Nations
was founded.

The United Nations is not getting the credit it
should for what it has done for peace. If there were no
United Nations, in all probability a third or a fourth
world war would have broken out. The United Nations
has made, kept, maintained and built peace around the
world. It has invested heavily in social and economic
development, human rights promotion and protection,
disaster relief and environmental protection. In the
past seven decades, the United Nations has been more
successful in dealing with conflicts within States than
between States. Festering disputes, which are much
more challenging for the Security Council, have been
shelved because of the dictates of realpolitik. The
United Nations is forced to grapple with contingent or
chronic conflicts by using the enforcement mandate
of Chapter VII of its Charter, but there is inadequate
utilization of Chapter V1 for the pacific settlement of
disputes and preventive diplomacy.

We urge the Security Council to use the full range
of diplomatic means in its toolbox: negotiation, inquiry,
mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement,
resort to regional agencies and arrangements and, last
but not least, the Secretary-General's good offices.
Engagement using those means, even if it is on a back
burner, is better than no engagement at all.

We have to strike a fine balance between
reconciliation and criminal justice. That is important,
not only to the healing process for societies and States
riven by conflict, but also to preventing relapses and
building peace. Again, in that context the Security
Council should not be oblivious to the root causes of
conflicts and wars. It is a fact that more money is being
spent on conflicts than on ways to deal with the drivers
of conflict. Poverty, hunger, competition over natural
resources, climate change, bad governance and a lack
of the rule oflaw propel people to conflict.

In a sense, contemporary doctrine and practice are
skewed more to conflict management than to conflict
prevention or conflict resolution. More efforts should
therefore be made to address the outstanding issues and
the socioeconomic drivers that fuel hostilities. In our
region, we seek peace, security, stability and prosperity
for all. We are exploring all avenues for conflict
resolution, reconciliation and economic cooperation.
We shall continue to support the United Nations
peacekeeping. It is incumbent on us all to oppose the
dark forces of extremist ideologies, terrorism and
asymmetric war that undermine peace and harmony.

Finally, we need a comprehensive reform of the
Security Council, which has been mentioned in the
Chamber a couple of times today. The reform should
reflect the aspirations of all States, not the ambitions of
a few. It should not replicate past patterns but prepare
us for a dynamic future.

