Mr. Yamamoto (United States of America):
Madam President, the United States commends you
and your Government, the United Republic of
Tanzania, for your important work on the draft
resolution on peace, security and development in the
Great Lakes region (S/2006/51).

The United States applauds the critical work of
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union,
and we share with the new United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission a commitment to sustain
political and economic development for fragile States.

We stand in solidarity with Ambassador Swing,
General Gaye, General Cammaert and the men and
women who courageously and heroically serve in the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

To the people of Guatemala and to the families of
the Guatemalan forces who paid the ultimate sacrifice,
we extend our prayers and condolences, and, above all,
our gratitude for their service. We also honour those
innocent victims who have died and continue to die in

the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda,
Burundi and Uganda each and every day.

We deplore the violence and condemn the
hostilities of the Forces democratiques de liberation du
Rwanda (FDLR), the Lord's Resistance Army, the
Forces nationales de liberation and other negative
forces and militias that continue to operate in the Great
Lakes region.

For over a decade now, the FDLR and those
negative forces have remained a threat. How many
more years must be wait? How much longer must we
stand witness to the continued violence and threats
from these negative forces? We also stand witness to
the devastation and human suffering caused by the
negative forces, armed groups and militias. Over
425,000 refugees, and a larger number of internally
displaced persons, underscore for each of us the
unfinished task that lies before us in the Great Lakes
region.

The United States commends in the highest terms
the Governments and the peoples of Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Uganda for their faith, trust, dedication and
commitment to working together in the Tripartite Plus
One Commission. Each of those four countries are
making a difference, not only for their own people, but
also in preparing a more secure and prosperous Great
Lakes region. We also extend our appreciation for the
support this has received from our colleagues in the
African Union, the European Union and the United
Nations.

Let me underscore to Council members the
commitment of the United States to the goal of peace
and security in the Great Lakes region and throughout
Africa. We call on the Council to continue to invigorate
its leadership and cooperation in ensuring a peaceful
and secure Democratic Republic of the Congo after the
elections this year and a new and vibrant Burundi, and
to support the struggles against the negative forces that
Rwanda faces each and every day, as well as the
struggles and challenges faced by Uganda. We should
all stand together, working together, to face the needs
of the refugees and the internally displaced persons in
the Great Lakes area. Let us renew our efforts and
dedicate them to those endeavours.

