Mr. Petrella (Argentina)(interpretation from Spanish):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on the effective manner
in which you have been presiding over the work of the
Security Council during the month of December. I also
wish to congratulate you on the initiative to convene an
open debate on this important issue. In view of your
experience and cool-headedness, we are convinced that
these complex issues will be dealt with in an appropriate
manner. Allow me to extend my congratulations also to
your predecessor, Ambassador A. Peter Burleigh of the
United States. His keen professionalism and positive
attitude towards all members and non-members of the
Council are truly appreciated.

The matter before the Council is particularly relevant
to Argentina, given its interest in peacekeeping and post-
conflict peace-building matters. In this connection,
experience appears to indicate that peace-building
activities raise at least two questions. The first is whether
peace-building activities have a basis in the Charter, and
the second is when is the best time to begin them?

With regard to the very concept of peace-building
activities, it is clear to us today that the concept of
international peace and security rests on more qualitative
and complex aspects than those which emerge from the
traditional interpretation of Article 2, paragraph 4, of the
Charter. This is logical because since the end of the cold
war, a strict interpretation of concepts established in 1945
no longer meets today's needs.

With regard to the second question - when is the
best time to begin peace-building activities - it seems to
us a forrnalist view which favours the legal end of the
conflict can actually undermine the inherent objective of
these peace-building activities. In fact, experience also
suggests, depending on the characteristics of each conflict,
the usefulness of anticipating peace-building activities
even before the conflict is formally ended. Obviously, this
assumes the minimal conditions for multidimensional
action.

Argentina has traditionally maintained that the
humanitarian, institutional, economic and ethnic
consequences of conflicts ShOW that much more than a
ceasefire is needed to initiate a lasting peace. At this
moment in history, when problems are essentially
problems within States, this is even more apparent.

The issues involved in Central America's
reconstruction demonstrated the far-reaching importance

 

of peace-building activities when such activities are taken
on, in a show of considerable maturity by the protagonists
of the conflict as their own objectives.

In the case of the United Nations Observer Mission in
El Salvador (ONUSAL), the United Nations Secretariat
played an innovative and central role in the negotiation of
agreements and the monitoring of peace-building. The
experience of the Representative of the Secretary-General
in this operation recalls the importance of cooperation
between the Security Council and financial institutions in
order to promote development.

In the case of Haiti, which is currently on the
Council's agenda, it seems clearly advisable at this time to
explore mechanisms for reconstruction, particularly in view
of the fact that the political situation in that country is
becoming increasingly stable. Just as in the case of
ONUSAL, reconciliation, democracy, good governance and
development represent the road to success. Also as in the
case of ONUSAL, in Haiti the work of the representatives
of the Secretary-General has been, and continues to be,
extremely useful.

We have mentioned these two cases because, in our
View, they represent positive experiences for other
undertakings. Moreover, these situations serve as examples
of the fact that in some regions, such as the Americas, the
concept of peace and security draws inspiration from the
qualitative elements we mentioned at the beginning of our
statement.

In conclusion, allow me to stress some ideas that we
believe might be useful in this respect.

First, as we said at the outset, we find ourselves at a
time when the concept of peace and security is based on
broader criteria than in 1945. This important characteristic
can be seen clearly in the examples of Latin America and
the Caribbean, to which I have referred briefly.

Secondly, peace-building activities do not necessarily
start with the signing of a peace agreement; they may begin
at a later stage of a multidimensional operation once the
minimum conditions for action have been met.
Thirdly, we should avoid any approach that tends to
involve exclusionary criteria. Coordinated efforts on the
part of the international community and of the various
agencies of the United Nations system are needed.
Likewise, in order for peace-building activities to lead to
durable peace and reconciliation, we must also create the
necessary conditions for sustainable development in the
context of democracy.

Finally, no operation of this kind can be successful
if it lacks the necessary funds or personnel. When donor
fatigue prevails, such issues require special attention. How
and from where should resources be obtained? That
question will have to be answered in future if we want to
keep in check problems that could ultimately also result
in considerable costs.

