Mr. Thomas (Antigua and Barbuda): The
Government of Antigua and Barbuda continues to
monitor the situation in Venezuela with great concern
and appeals to all sides to remain calm and focused on
the Montevideo Mechanism, which is being facilitated
by the Governments of Mexico and Uruguay and the
Caribbean Community. All parties involved should
resist any escalation of rhetoric, which does nothing but
undermine a regional effort to bring about peace.

As we have stated on previous occasions, that
matter is of grave concern to Antigua and Barbuda, as
well as to all countries within our region. We cannot
overstate the importance of our region remaining a
zone ofpeace. We have had decades of interference into
the affairs of countries within our region that have left
the region broken. We cannot and must not return to
those days. Settling conflicts in countries is firstly a
matter of internal affairs, with no outside interference,
and most of all, it is a matter of finding peaceful ways
to reach agreements to solve conflicts.

The Government of Antigua and Barbuda remains
concerned about the events of the past few days that
have resulted in the loss ofinnocent lives and increased
human suffering, and about the effects that this has
had on millions of Venezuelans, including women,
the elderly, the disabled and children. Therefore, my
Government believes that where there is a need for
humanitarian aid, the United Nations should always
facilitate any form of aid distribution and support.
The application of aid supply should be free from
international political influence and preconditions
and should be done in a manner that is consistent with
international humanitarian aid relief.

The Government of Antigua and Barbuda reiterates
that, as States Members of the United Nations, we are
bound by principles enshrined in international law.
Those principles make it abundantly Clear that no State
or group of States should interfere in the internal affairs
of sovereign countries. The Charter of the United
Nations also makes its abundantly clear, in Article 2,
paragraph 4, that

"all Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of
any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with
the Purposes of the United Nations".

This rule was enshrined in the United Nations
Charter for a good reason 4 to prevent States from
using force as they felt so inclined, either unilaterally
or by a self-selected few. Diplomacy, dialogue and
peaceful negotiations should always be encouraged;
in fact, history has taught us that diplomacy garners
greater results. Any other process, including military
intervention, will undermine the legitimacy of
the United Nations in promoting peace and risks
destabilizing the entire region of Latin America and
the Caribbean, resulting in damaging effects for years
to come.

As we have stated in this Chamber, unilateral
declaration of support for one side in Venezuela over
the other is blatant interference and uninvited influence
in the internal affairs of a sovereign country. It does
nothing but undermine a process that requires urgent
attention, international diplomacy and respect for legal
processes within the society. International sanctions and
the strangulation of a country's international finances
are tools that do nothing but hurt the most vulnerable
people of a society. We must cease the practice of using
international institutions built to serve as instruments
of cooperation as instruments of war. Might cannot
be right.

