Mr. Jeremie (Serbia): Thank you, Sir, for
convening this session of the Security Council.

Since our last meeting devoted to Serbia's
southern province of Kosovo, a new Government in
Belgrade has been confirmed by our National
Assembly. It represents a more hopeful Serbia,
confident in its engagement with the world; ready to
accelerate our progress towards full European Union
(EU) membership; willing actively to contribute to
building up regional peace; and firmly committed to
safeguarding the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
our country.

In other words, it represents a Serbia that is a
proud, European democracy, whose well-known
position on the unilateral declaration of independence
of our southern province remains unchanged. We
continue to hold that its attempt at secession
contravenes the United Nations Charter, the Helsinki
Final Act and other cornerstone treaties of the
contemporary international and European order.

We maintain that the unilateral declaration of
independence has also brought the explicit meaning of
resolution 1244 (1999) into serious question, as the
resolution clearly places a binding, Chapter VII
obligation on all Member States to respect the
sovereignty and the territorial integrity of my country.

A great majority of the Organization's 192
Member States have continued to abide by those
principles. On behalf of the Republic of Serbia, I want
to express my profound appreciation to them for their
commitment to their strict commitment to the rule of
international law and clearly state my country's
unbroken dedication to those same precepts.

Questioning the principle of sovereignty
anywhere in the world is a dangerous game, fraught
with precedent and political consequence. As a result,
international law and the strategic priorities of our
region are in danger of being sacrificed on the altar of
political expediency. As a result, we find ourselves
facing a perilous impasse today.

Serbia cannot accept, and will continue to
oppose, its own forcible partition. I strongly believe
that no country represented in this room would do
otherwise. I do not think there can be any serious doubt
about that. I want to emphasize something else about
which there should be no doubt: the Republic of Serbia
believes that meeting coming together in compromise
is the sine qua non of a more profoundly integrated
Europe and a more prosperous, interdependent world.

We believe in the peaceful and consensual
resolution of world disputes, including the one that we
are here to discuss today. Such an approach is the only
one that stands a chance of achieving a sustainable
solution to Kosovo acceptable to all stakeholders.

With that in mind, I now turn to the consideration
of the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in our
province of Kosovo, dated 15 July 2008 (S/2008/458).

I notice that its overall tone has improved over
previous ones in the sense that the criticism of the
Kosovo Serbs and Belgrade has subsided - a welcome
development. Yet, I must express regret at the report's
tendency to downplay the fundamental distinction
between positions that aim to uphold the primacy of
the rule of international law and those that aim to
sidestep its basic tenets.

I also regret that the United Nations has still not
released the findings reached by Mr. Ssekandi on
allegations that senior officials of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
ordered the use of excessive force on 17 March of this
year against Kosovo Serb demonstrators in the town of
5
Kosovska Mitrovica, as is plain from paragraph 7 of
the report.

In addition, I must highlight the fact that nowhere
does the Secretary-General's report explicitly condemn
the illegitimate adoption of a constitution by the
Kosovo Albanian authorities, a document that attempts
to eliminate any role or function of the United Nations
in our southern province. That so-called constitution
makes reference to implementing the Ahtisaari
Proposal, a document that has no legal standing in the
Security Council, much less in the Republic of Serbia.

We are facing a grave violation of resolution
1244 (1999). That fact should have been addressed
directly. Instead, the report merely asserts the existence
of a "profoundly new reality in which UNMIK can no
longer perform its tasks as an interim
administration".

Turning to a more general point, I must also
regretfully contrast the passive approach of the United
Nations on the question of defending its executive
authority mandated by the Council with its activism on
the matter of reconfiguration. Proceeding without the
Council's consent and against the clearly
communicated position of the Republic of Serbia, the
host-country of the United Nations Mission in Kosovo,
the Secretary-General had instructed his Special
Representative to start reconfiguring UNMIK.

The argument that was made to justify that
encroachment on the statutory prerogatives of the
Security Council was one of expediency: the Council
could not agree, but it was necessary to move forward
anyway. Imagine what could happen if some place
other than Kosovo is at issue in this Chamber - one in
which a different constellation of forces and interests is
in play. Would it again be appropriate to move ahead
without the Council's approval?

The way in which reconfiguration started was, in
our opinion, an inglorious episode indeed. But What is
now of crucial importance is for it to proceed in the
right way -with the full engagement of Serbia. It must
be completed with our acceptance and explicitly
approved by the Security Council. That is the only way
to deliver legitimacy and ensure sustainability of our
work.

With cautious optimism, I can say that my
meeting with the Secretary-General last week produced
an understanding that could hopefully lead to an

eventual agreement - one that would require, in the
end, approval of the Council. The voice of Serbia on
reconfiguration, and much else besides, should no
longer be avoided or disregarded.

Two days ago, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Lamberto Zannier travelled to
Belgrade for talks on the six topics of practical mutual
concern, in the language of the Report: namely, the
police, judiciary, customs, transportation and
infrastructure, boundaries and patrimony. That first
meeting was an important first step toward protecting
the well-being of Serbs and other non-Albanians in
Kosovo.

As the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General remarked to me, - and I will use his words -
"to solve problems together we must reach decisions
together". We fully agree. So, it is in that constructive
frame of mind that my colleague, Minister for Kosovo
Mr. Goran Bogdanovic, will meet with Mr. Zannier
early next week for talks on the judiciary and police in
Serb-dominated areas. The hard work of arriving at a
compromise is about to begin.

I want to be clear in saying that Serbia will spare
no effort honestly to engage with the United Nations in
forging an acceptable, forward-looking reconfiguration
arrangement, one that upholds the overall authority of
the United Nations, while opening up space for the
institutional inclusion of key regional organizations.

I must be equally clear in saying that
reconfiguration must not go beyond the red lines
marked out by resolution 1244 (1999). It must not in
any way infringe upon the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Serbia. Once explicitly
confirmed by the Security Council, such a construction
could go far in the direction of addressing the very
concrete and numerous challenges that the Serbian and
other non-Albanian communities in Kosovo currently
face.

Today, the situation on the ground is,
unfortunately, far from normal. I will limit myself to
citing three examples.

First, after the unilateral declaration of
independence, even fewer internally displaced persons
(IDPs) have returned to Kosovo than before - a total
of only 49 Kosovo Serbs from March to the end of
June, according to the Secretary-General's report. That
08-43933
clearly demonstrates the undercurrent of exclusion and
intolerance that permeates the province.

Secondly, following the unilateral declaration of
independence, cultural cleansing has returned. We have
witnessed the abominable act of paving over the ruins
of the recently destroyed Serbian church in the centre
of Djakovica, which compounded the physical
destruction with an attempt to erase every trace of its
very existence. We have also seen the defiance of the
municipal authorities in Decane in refusing to restore
the cadastral record of land belonging to the monastery
of Viskoi Decani - a UNESCO World Heritage Site
that has been rightly placed on its List of World
Heritage in Danger - notwithstanding two executive
decisions of the Special Representative ordering them
to do so.

Thirdly, since the unilateral declaration of
independence, the return of illegally-seized private
property has come to a standstill. More than 30,000
such cases are outstanding. Those affected - Kosovo
Serbs, overwhelmingly - barely manage in makeshift
dwellings or IDP camps, while Kosovo Albanians
continue to live in their homes and make use of their
agricultural fields without fear of arrest or prosecution.

In short, life for the most troubled community in
Europe is almost unbearable. For many living in
enclaves, their fate depends on how they feel they can
survive despite the hostility of their immediate
surroundings. For others, we are talking about a
community that is practically inseparable from the rest
of Serbia. False frontiers can create flashpoints, and so
can attempts at imposing so-called reality. We must be
very frank about that.

The only prosperous destiny for the western
Balkans manifestly lies in the European Union. Serbia
is very serious about rapidly securing its membership
in the EU. We have unmistakably demonstrated that
fundamental commitment in recent days by taking
decisive steps taken to reaffirm our full cooperation
with the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia in The Hague.

Serbia strongly believes in the power of the
twenty-first century values of Europe and their ability
to reconcile former adversaries. Consistent with those
beliefs, I say that it is time to turn the page on the
divisions of the recent past. By pursuing a policy of
peace through compromise, the western Balkans can
truly be transformed into a region that submits to the
rule of law while embracing the promise of Europe and
the principles that stand at its foundation. I see the
present as a historic moment as important for us as it is
for the European Union. Together, we can create a
region that looks to the future with optimism, proud of
its many identities and secure of its prospects. Such is
the Vision of the new Government of Serbia. That is the
true new reality we aim to achieve, together with our
partners and friends, and the strategic framework
informing our approach to resolving the problem of
Kosovo.

In conclusion, we hope that all in this Chamber
agree that a step in the right direction is making
reconfiguration acceptable to all parties present here,
starting with the Republic of Serbia. We intend to play
our constructive part without shying away from
exercising our right peacefully to defend our
sovereignty and territorial integrity, in line with
international law. By aiming to unite people and not
States - to use the formulation of Jean Monet, one of
the founding fathers of the European Union - we can
move that issue forward in concert. Together, we can
find a way back to our common home and ahead to our
common future.

