The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Nigeria.

We are very grateful to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his very insightful statement. I also
commend Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs John Holmes and High Commissioner for
Human Rights Pillay for their very enriching briefings.
We are grateful that, together, they have kept this
subject at the forefront of our concerted efforts to bring
peace and stability to the world.

Resolution 1894 (2009) laid out important
principles related to adherence to international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law and to best
practices for implementing civilian protection
mandates. In their 2009 joint study on the protection of
civilians in peacekeeping operations, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations highlighted
that the lack of clarity in the language of civilian
protection mandates could affect the effectiveness of
resources and training to meet civilian protection
needs. It is imperative that this be addressed.

It is also important that we monitor very closely
mandate implementation in the field. That is where the
Secretary-General's reporting capability and the work
of the Council's informal expert group on the
protection of civilians can add the most value by
reporting on the challenges in implementing the
protection mandate alongside other mission objectives.

To address the gap in the link between the
Security Council and activities in the field, it is
essential that the Council always be fully briefed in
advance of peacekeeping deliberations. We hope that
the Secretariat will draw from lessons learned in the
meetings with troop- and police-contributing countries
in order to add to the quality of the briefings.

We should not forget that civilians may also be
caught in the crossfire in circumstances where there is
no peacekeeping force in place. In such situations, the
Council must act swiftly and with purpose. The
10-43853
updated aide-memoire (see S/PRST/2009/l, annex) is
an invaluable tool that sets out pathways for analyzing
each situation and deploying the appropriate tools at
the Council's disposal. For that, we are grateful and
indebted to OCHA.

Nigeria reiterates the call on all parties to conflict
to respect the laws of armed conflict. Those parties
should manifest such respect by creating neutral zones
or corridors for the unimpeded delivery of
humanitarian assistance, so that civilians may be safely
evacuated or provided with assistance without threats
to their well-being.

In just over three weeks, the Convention on
Cluster Munitions will enter into force. That is an
important instrument in terms of marking consensus
against the use and stockpiling of munitions that cause
unacceptable harm to civilians. It also stigmatizes
those actors who do not adhere to its standards. It
marks a further step on the road to minimizing so-
called collateral damage in armed conflict. It is hoped
that it will also enhance capacity to better serve those
whom we have a responsibility to protect. By so doing,
we might establish conditions for a just and peaceful
world in which all can live in larger freedom.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Uruguay.

