Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for
responding to the request by the Arab Group to
convene this meeting.

Israel, the occupying Power, continues the bloody
military offensive against the Palestinian people and
the Palestinian Authority that it began on 28 September
2000. Beginning 10 days ago, it has continuously
escalated that military campaign by reoccupying the
city of Ramallah and destroying and laying siege to the
headquarters and office of President Arafat. Israel is
using helicopters, tanks and many other kinds of
weaponry in its offensive. Furthermore, it is
committing war crimes and acts of State terrorism -
crimes that one might find very difficult to believe
given that they are taking place in full View of the
world and at the beginning of the twenty-first century.
Suffice it to mention the Israeli brutality committed
during attacks against refugee camps in Jenin and
Balata and the old city of Nablus. After arbitrary
attacks by tanks failed to produce the desired results,
scores of missiles and rockets were launched by
helicopter gunships against the Jenin refugee camp, an
area no more than one square kilometre in size. The
purpose and the result in that case were the same: to
annihilate the camp and those in it. Equally ferocious
and arbitrary practices are being repeated at other sites.

Israeli occupation forces have killed no fewer
than 250 Palestinians and have injured scores of others.
Counting the victims has become impossible in the last
10 days. Israeli forces have also prevented ambulances
and medical teams from reaching the injured. Those
blocked have included the International Committee of
the Red Cross, staff members of which have been
victims of Israel aggression. Israel has also declared
many areas closed military zones and has forbidden
reporters from entering them. In an effort to keep the
world from seeing the new war criminals and to keep it
from recalling European cities under Nazi occupation,
representatives of the media have been the targets of
Israeli aggression.

Israeli forces have also caused the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation through their imposition
of curfews and by depriving inhabitants of access to
basic needs. Water and power have been cut off to vast
areas. Infrastructure has been destroyed. Homes have
been stormed. Mass detentions have taken place.
Buildings, cars and property have been destroyed. In
addition, the occupation forces continue their attacks
against mosques and churches and continue to lay siege
to the Church of the Nativity. Even the birthplace of
Christ has not prevented attacks against our people; it
will not deter these new war criminals.

The Israeli occupation forces have also
committed grave violations of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, of 1949. Accordingly, we once again call
for the High Contracting Parties not only to take the
necessary measures to guarantee respect for the
Convention in accordance with common article I, but
also to assume their duty to take the necessary legal
measures to bring to trial those who have committed
war crimes. We also call upon the Security Council to
consider the mechanism necessary to bring this about.
Until that time, we call on the High Contracting
Parties - in particular on those who have laws in place
regarding extra-territorial jurisdiction over war
crimes - to press charges against the war criminals,
prosecute them and bring them to justice.

We believe that the list should contain the name
of General Shaul Mofaz, the Israeli Army Chief of
Staff, who is personally responsible for many war
crimes committed by his forces. To that list we would
also add the names of many officers and soldiers of
Israeli military units and those of helicopter pilots who
have committed acts of premeditated murder against
civilians on specific instances and on specific dates.
We have documented such acts in 110 letters to the
Security Council - letters which could be considered a
record of such crimes.

Of course, responsibility for such war crimes falls
on Mr. Ariel Sharon and his Government. This is an
issue that can be dealt with at the appropriate time. We
and our future generations will never forget what has
befallen us at the hands of the Israeli side. There is no
doubt that a serious stand by the international
community against these crimes will help to end them
and ensure that they are not repeated, not only in
Palestine but throughout the world. Such a stand could
help heal the painful wounds suffered by our people.

Since 29 March, the overall military attacks and
the reoccupation of Palestinian cities have been taking
place after the Security Council adopted its important
resolution 1397 (2002). The major part of the offensive
took place after the adoption of resolution 1402 (2002),
and even after the adoption of resolution 1403 (2002),
which called for the implementation of resolution 1402
(2002) without delay. Once again, Israel, the occupying
Power, has chosen to ignore the resolutions of the
Security Council. It has done so in clear defiance of the
Council and in grave and ominous violation of the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
including Article 25. It is doing so not because of its
own strength, but because it relies on the availability of
the protection it needs whenever it becomes necessary
to resort to Chapter VII of the Charter.

Furthermore, Israel has chosen to ignore the
request made by President George Bush four days ago
for a cessation of military operations and a withdrawal
from recently reoccupied cities. President Bush also
asked that withdrawal take place without delay. High
officials later clarified that "without delay" meant
"now". Israeli tanks wreaked havoc on Palestinian
cities and towns, and military operations are
continuing. This arbitrariness must end now. Israel
must not be treated as if it were above the law, and the
members of the international community must take the
necessary measures to put an end to Israeli acts of
aggression and to the tragedy and suffering of our
people.
The question we must ask now is how our people
can trust any initiative. How can they trust the ability
and will of those who promoted such initiatives to
implement them so that the Palestinian people will not
ultimately be compelled to submit to the desires of the
Israelis?

We will try not to lose hope, although that will
require more serious international action. The
Palestinian leadership and President Yasser Arafat will
cooperate with those who brought about these
initiatives, including, of course, Secretary of State
Powell when he visits the region. At the same time, we
reiterate our call for an effective international presence
on the ground, in particular after the destruction
inflicted on the Palestinian police force and other
Palestinian security forces, so that upcoming
commitments can be implemented and so that we can
provide the necessary protection for our people. We
should also like to stress the importance of seeking a
comprehensive approach to the political situation and
to stress the need for the Security Council to participate
in taking the necessary measures in that direction.

Our people will not give up in the face of war
criminals. We will not give up our right to the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State with
holy Jerusalem as its capital. We will not give up the
dream of a just and comprehensive peace in the region.
However, the necessary first step is the immediate and
unconditional implementation of resolution 1402
(2002). Let us do that together. Let the Security
Council adopt an additional resolution reaffirming the
Council's serious commitment, and put an end to the
tragic humanitarian situation on the ground.

