Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in her new role, and
are grateful for her comprehensive briefing. We hope
that as the new Head of United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) she will be able to establish
a constructive dialogue with the country's authorities
and enable the Mission to function more effectively.
I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome
Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to the Council.

We hope that ensuring that the presidential
elections scheduled for 23 December are held on
time will help to reduce the tensions in society in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We believe that
for their part, the opposition forces should cooperate
more actively with the Independent National Election
Commission, recognize the proposed election dates
and refrain from any violence. However, MONUSCO's
role in organizing and conducting the elections should
not go beyond providing the national authorities with
technical and logistical assistance. In our View, the
Mission's main job is to improve the security situation.
In that connection, we would like to draw attention
to the recent increase in the activity of illegal armed
groups in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which have been conducting systematic
attacks on civilians, Government security forces and
peacekeepers. Changes in that negative trend should be
used as a chief indicator of the country's stability.

We were alarmed to learn that after years of calm,
clashes between the Hema and Lendu ethnic groups in
Ituri province in the country's north-east have broken
out again. We have taken note of MONUSCO's decision
to establish temporary bases in the area, strengthen
patrols and continue consultations with the parties.
The series of rebel attacks on peacekeepers at the
end of last year and the overall security situation the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo has led us
to question the conclusions and proposals in the report
on the Mission's strategic review. Before extending the
Mission's mandate, we would like to see more attention
paid to the following points.

The situation with the illegal armed groups
operating in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo is difficult and they are a very long way from
being fully neutralized. The Mission's mandated task
of protecting civilians from the armed groups running
rampant in the east continues to be strategically
important, and we think it would be ill-advised to divert
its attention from dealing with that to other issues. We
are puzzled by the Secretariat's rationale for its proposal
to end the Mission's stabilization efforts and reduce its
cooperation with Kinshasa in supporting camps for
former combatants. It will be impossible to find a long-
term solution to the problem of armed groups without
restoring the Government entities in the east and
settling the repatriation issue for former combatants.
Besides that, the proposal for redeploying units of the
Force Intervention Brigade is also unclear. According
to the Secretariat, they should be evenly distributed
among the four sectors of responsibility throughout the
country. The Secretary-General's most recent report
(S/2018/ 174) mentions the Brigade only once. And
yet in yesterday's meeting with troop-contributing
countries (see S/PV.8196), we were surprised to learn
of the lack ofjoint operations with Kinshasa against the
illegal armed groups.
It is regrettable that some of the proposals of
the strategic review are already being implemented
without the authorization of the Security Council. In
that regard, we would like to mention the concept of
protecting civilians through the projection of force. We
do not rule out the fact that its implementation could
lead to complications in communication within the
Mission and therefore, unfortunately, to a recurrence of
the December incident in Semuliki. Achieving tangible
results from new concepts takes time, as was the case
with the so-called rapid deployment battalions. We
recall that they became operational only three years
after that concept was approved.

Finally, we draw attention to the need to adopt
additional measures to ensure the security of
peacekeepers. Like many of our colleagues, we are not
satisfied with the information provided in the report
of the Secretary-General regarding the pace of the
investigations into the Semuliki incident.

With regard to the mandate, it is necessary to discuss
an entire range of difficult issues. For us, it is already
clear that last year's reconfiguration of the Mission's
strategic tasks neither improved its effectiveness nor
helped the situation in the country.

