Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I would like to take this
opportunity to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
and the Force Commanders for their briefings. They
are a valuable contribution to the current debate on
peacekeeping reform.

In a world where global security challenges are
increasing dramatically, we strongly believe that
peacekeeping should remain a crucial tool for the
maintenance of peace and security. We strongly believe
in it, we are largest contributor of troops among the
Western European and other States Group, and we are
continuing our efforts in this area. Yet resources are
limited and should be utilized a cost-effective way. We
need a more holistic approach, and peace operations
should be defined in a broader context of prevention,
peacebuilding and sustaining peace, in a sort of peace
continuum where the quest for political solutions must
be our primary goal.

Peacekeeping missions should therefore be regularly
reviewed to assess their effectiveness, adherence to
their mandate and the need for adjustments to address
evolving situations on the ground. This would make it
possible to identify and thereby fill in potential gaps.
In that context, it is of paramount importance to receive
briefings and evaluations from Force Commanders, and
to have in-depth discussions on possible options.

After listening to the Force Commander today,
we are concerned about the security situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We agree with
Lieutenant General Mbuyiselo Mgwebi that the threat
flaring up all over the country requires an even-more
mobile United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) to ensure the protection of civilians in
several provinces and to assist the Government in the
run-up to the election. In that context, flexibility is key.
We are confident that the last renewal of the mandate,
which also anticipates using troops and assets from
other missions in the region, will provide sufficient
flexibility, and that in coming months MONUSCO will
be able to improve its performance, thereby enhancing
its mobility and effectiveness.

The situation in the Central African Republic
is another example of the different challenges and
asymmetric threats peace missions face today. We
commend the robust posture of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, which prevented armed
groups in the Central African Republic from expanding
their control over larger swathes of the country. However,
it is very unfortunate that in recent weeks, the Mission
has been the target of a deadly attack that resulted in
the death of five peacekeepers and the wounding of
several others. We reiterate our heartfelt condolences to
the families of the victims in Cambodia and Morocco.
I too would like to take this opportunity to express my
condolences to the recent victims in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali.

On a positive note, I would like to underline the
support of the European Union Military Training
Mission in the Central African Republic, which is
making crucial contributions to restoring national
harmony. The involvement of regional actors and the
role of regional and subregional organizations is key
to establishing an effective and successful political
process. In that regard, the European Union can have a
major role in complementing the on-the-ground efforts
of other relevant players.

We also believe that the Mutual Engagement
Framework between the international community and
the Central African Republic is proving to be a valuable
instrument for cooperation and a clear example of how
the Mission's mandate can be linked to the political
process so as to enhance the local ownership of the
stabilization process and to prevent dependence on
the Mission.

As for the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force (UNDOF), its area of operations is quite risky
and the presence of non-State actors can lead to
unintended escalations arising from accidental clashes
between the parties. In the interest of preventive
diplomacy, it is advisable for UNDOF to strengthen its
coordination mechanisms with the parties, following
the same-region model of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon and its remarkable tripartite
coordination mechanism. The mechanism has shown
how important the coordination of the liaison function
can be for a peacekeeping mission to maintain stability,
defuse tension and prevent the escalation of incidents.

With regard to the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), after almost 14 years everyone recognizes
the success story behind that peacekeeping operation.
Over the years, the presence of the United Nations in
that country helped rebuild what a devastating civil
war had destroyed, leading the Liberian authorities to
assume full responsibility for their own security. At the
same time, the UNMIL case exemplifies a flexible and
modern approach to peacekeeping, based on a gradual
methodology in managing troops and police forces in a
country, on an appropriate integration mechanism with
the other regional peacekeeping operations, as well as
on coordination with the peacebuilding dimension - in
order to ensure an orderly withdrawal in March 2018. An
early disengagement could be counterproductive. Thus,
strategic patience must be at the core of our evaluation.

Finally, I want to thank the presidency for the
opportunity to listen to the Force Commanders and to
engage with them in a fruitful dialogue. We stand ready
to continue to discuss peace missions with troop- and
police-contributing countries, with the common aim
of having smarter peacekeeping missions that are as
effective and accountable as possible.

