Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Honore for her
briefing.

Nigeria commends the transitional Government in
Haiti for the significant progress made in overcoming
the political impasse that had affected its parliamentary
responsibilities. The promulgation of the electoral
law on 2 March demonstrates the firm commitment
of the Haitian authorities to democracy and good
governance. We urge the Government to sustain that
political momentum in good faith in order to foster
the necessary consensus for elections to be held as
scheduled. To complement those gains, it is vital that
the Electoral Council remain impartial, independent
and transparent. Those attributes will be essential in
building trust and confidence in the political process.
They will also be vital to the holding of free and fair
elections later this year.

It is essential to strengthen security and the rule
of law in Haiti. To that end, we recognize ongoing
efforts to strengthen and professionalize the Haitian
National Police (HNP) and other security structures in
the country, which will enable them to meet emerging
challenges. We note the continued increase in the
personnel strength of the HNP, which has placed it on a
trajectory to attain its target of 15,000 officers by 2016.
From a gender perspective, it is significant that 1,022
of the 11,900 police officers in Haiti be women. We
commend MINUSTAH for its close cooperation with
the HNP in addressing threats to security and safety.

It is imperative that programmes that promote
socioeconomic alternatives to violence be pursued
vigorously in order to tackle internal security concerns.
In that regard, we take note of MINUSTAH's initiatives
and welcome the 25 new projects for youth and
vulnerable communities approved for the 2014-2015
fiscal year. The launch of 56 new quick-impact
projects designed to strengthen State authority, address
environmental protection issues and enhance the rule
of law is a welcome initiative that will significantly
boost the reconstruction process.

The situation in Haiti is stabilizing and the country
is on a path to a peaceful, secure and prosperous
future. The current transition plan provides a feasible
and prudent way forward. The role of MINUSTAH
will remain vital as the Haitian authorities take on
more responsibilities during the drawdown phase.
International support will also be crucial, and we urge
donors and development partners to maintain and
indeed strengthen their engagement with Haiti.

We pay tribute to Special Representative Honore
and the men and women of MINUSTAH for their
commitment to attaining the Mission's mandate.

