Mrs. Kocyigit Grba (Turkey): Peace is the core
value and purpose of the United Nations, and we agree
that reconciliation is part of our comprehensive approach
to sustaining peace. In the absence of a commonly
accepted definition or guidelines for reconciliation,
we consider it both an objective and a process that
encompasses all three pillars of the United Nations.

First, we need national and regional ownership
to settle disputes. As such, reconciliation processes
must come from within the interested parties. It is
the primary responsibility of national Governments
to identify, drive and direct priorities, strategies and
activities for peacebuilding and sustaining peace. With
that in mind, in order for the reconciliation process to
be effective, the various narratives of the parties need
to be taken into account so as to build confidence and
mutual understanding,

Secondly, post-conflict reconciliation represents
a long-term process that addresses the root causes of
the conflict. That requires an understanding of the
grievances that lead to conflict by taking into account
the voices of women, young people and marginalized
groups. Since every conflict is different, a variety of
approaches are applicable, depending on the country-
specific context. Most importantly, there cannot
be a "one-size-fits-all" solution to promoting post-
conflict reconciliation.

Thirdly, we need wider and more effective use of
mediation and dialogue facilitation. We welcome the
Secretary-General's strong commitment to mediation,
and we were pleased to host him and his High-level
Advisory Board on Mediation in Istanbul, in conjunction
with the Sixth Istanbul Mediation Conference at the end
of last month. Panel discussions focused on the role of
international and regional organizations as well as on
that of emerging technologies, with participants from
the field of peace and reconciliation.

There is a need for mediation at all stages of the
conflict cycle, and mediation provides an important
tool for reconciliation at different phases of that cycle.
Timely intervention to reconcile the parties to nascent
hostilities before divisions become entrenched is crucial
to our prevention efforts. Therefore, reconciliation
should play an integral part in the overall conflict-
prevention strategy of the United Nations.

Reconciliation is also crucial at the post-conflict
stage in order to prevent the recurrence of conflict
by building more peaceful and resilient societies.
While formal reconciliation processes are critical to
sustainable peace, some of the most powerful forms of
reconciliation, in terms of restoring the social fabric,
are to be found in everyday life. In critical situations,
the starting point must be to ensure that adequate levels
of humanitarian assistance are available. Long- or
medium-term tools for reconciliation, such as education,
health care and demobilization and disarmament, are
often underfunded and can perpetuate social divisions
in post-conflict societies.

The needs and concerns of women and youth as well
as the reintegration of refugees and internally displaced
persons should be brought into humanitarian planning
and post-conflict responses at the strategic level.

Against that background, I would like to end by
emphasizing that actions speak louder than words. It is
time to put an end to the conflict in Syria, for example,
which continues to pain the collective conscience of
humankind. This is a conflict that has already caused
the death ofnearly 1 million people, displaced more than
12 million and forced half of them to leave the country.

It is imperative for the international community
to support the peace corridor, which would enable the
voluntary, safe and dignified return of the Syrian people
to their homeland. We will continue to work towards
the transformation of Syria into a democratic, secular
and stable country with secure borders, in full respect
of its territorial integrity and national unity.

Turkey stands ready to share its experience, gained
through active involvement in and support for the
recovery efforts of various post-conflict countries,
from the Balkans and the Middle East to the Horn of
Africa. We are committed to continuing our support for
the enhancement of the efforts of the United Nations in
that direction.

