Mr. Trautwein (Germany): At the outset, I would
like to extend my delegation's condolences to the
Governments of Turkey and the United Kingdom for
the tragic loss of life caused by the insidious bombing
attack this morning in Istanbul.

My delegation associates itself fully with the
concise statement that the representative of Italy
presented this morning on behalf of the European
Union. We also warmly welcome the important
participation of Minister Madeira and Deputy Minister
Shareef, as well as that of Special Envoy Mr. Walubita
and Special Representative Mr. Fall.

Germany is grateful and thanks the Angolan
presidency for the opportunity to discuss the
international conference on the Great Lakes region.
The idea has been on the agenda of the Security
Council for a long time. It is only now that the
conditions in the region are beginning to improve in a
way that would allow such conference to address the
economic, security, humanitarian and cultural issues
that for a long time have generated regional instability.

Like its partners in the European Union, Germany
fully supports the initiative for the Great Lakes region
conference to be held under the auspices of the United
Nations and the African Union. With the progress we
are currently witnessing in the peace processes in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Burundi, the
convening of the conference is indeed timely.

Allow me to make some comments on the
concepts and observations contained in the report of
the Secretary-General.

First, I would like to comment on African
ownership. We see regional and African ownership of
the conference - and indeed of the entire process -
as one of the pillars of the conference and as vitally
important for its success. Ultimately, only through the
political commitment of all the countries concerned can
sustained peace and development be achieved in the
region.
It is common practice in an international setting
to name agreements after the place where they were
signed. Thus, we have agreements named Lusaka,
Luanda, Pretoria, Sun City, Arusha and Dar es Salaam.
That fact alone highlights that throughout the long,
often difficult and still ongoing process for durable
peace and stability in the region, the efforts of African
countries and their leaders have been indispensable. We
hope that all African countries wishing to contribute to
the conference or to continue their contribution to the
peace processes in the region will be given the
opportunity to do so.

Furthermore, the conference can build on many
African institutions and mechanisms that are already in
place. We believe that it would be useful for the
conference, where appropriate, to draw on the
experience and resources of the New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD), the East African
Community, the Southern African Development
Community, the African Development Bank and others
for a consistent and integrated approach to the issues
that will be addressed during the conference.

My second point concerns the role of the
international community. The second pillar of the
conference, in our view, is support from the
international community. That support can and will
take many forms and will undoubtedly come from
diverse forums - one being the Group of Friends that
is in the process of being formed. We are grateful to
Canada for its leadership on that initiative.
Mobilization and coordination of donor contributions
will be one of the objectives of the Group, but it will
also be a forum for discussion of mutual expectations,
concepts, ideas and procedures. As a member of the
Group of Friends, Germany will support the
preparatory process and measures that have been
decided upon. Other forums will include the existing
bodies and frameworks for economic cooperation, in
order to avoid duplication of efforts and mechanisms
and dispersal of contributions. A coordinated approach
will contribute to the efficient use of financial
resources and personnel.

My third comment is on expectations. Germany
firmly believes that expectations for the initial stage of
the conference should not be set too high. There are
many obstacles to overcome that, until recently,
seemed insurmountable. The decision to design the
conference as a process, rather than as a one-time
event, accurately reflects the complexity of the issues
that need to be dealt with. A successful outcome of the
first phase of the conference would be agreement on a
set of principles and clear benchmarks to assess their
implementation. We believe that that is not an
unrealistic objective, provided that the focus of the
conference is on the thematic areas the Secretary-
General has outlined in his report.

The fourth point I should like to make is on the
thematic areas of the conference. After returning from
its mission to the region in June this year, the Security
Council once again stated its belief that a conference
on the Great Lakes region could help to address and
resolve long-term peace and security issues. The
countries of the Great Lakes region have obligations
towards their people, their neighbours and the
international community. Those include respect for
human rights and international humanitarian law,
ending the culture of impunity and cessation of the
illegal exploitation of natural resources and of support
as well as of support to armed groups and movements.
All of those issues can be adequately addressed within
the framework of the four thematic areas that have
been identified. Indeed, all of those issues are
interrelated. Peace and development are two sides of
the same coin: without peace, there can be no
sustainable development, and without development,
peace will remain fragile. Economic cooperation in the
Great Lakes region cannot be separated from other
confidence-building measures. We are confident that
the actions the conference agrees on will reflect that
interconnection.

My last comment is on the involvement of civil
society. We welcome the intention to involve civil
society. We are interested to learn how this
involvement will be ensured and how concerns from
different walks of society can be addressed throughout
the process. The Security Council has recently
reiterated that women must be included in all peace-
building and development processes. We hope that the
rather broad aim of "taking the gender perspective into
account" will translate into the participation of women
on an equal footing and at all stages of the process.

Additional information on the involvement of
other stakeholders and the private sector would also be
welcome.

In concluding, I should like to briefly touch upon
an important element of peacekeeping in eastern
Congo, namely the weapons embargo relating to North
and South Kivu and Ituri. The Council should shortly
address the question of strengthening the embargo so
that it becomes an effective instrument. Indications that
various actors are violating the rules set forth in
resolution 1493 (2003) need to be followed up. We
must respond in an efficient and effective manner to
violations of Security Council resolutions if we want
embargoes to have a deterring effect.

Regarding Burundi, the agreement between the
Transitional Government and Conseil national pour la
defense de la democratic/Forces pour la defense de la
democratic (CNDD/FDD) that was signed on 16
November in Dar es Salaam is encouraging. Should the
Forces nationales de liberation (FNL) still fail to enter
into negotiations with the Government within the three-
month period as set out by the regional initiative and
instead resort to military means, the Council should,
among other options for a comprehensive ceasefire,
consider a weapons embargo against Rwasa's FNL. We
must not allow one militia group to become an obstacle
to peace and stability and thus prolong the plight of the
people in Burundi, hampering at the same time
the efforts to make the Great Lakes conference a
success - a success which is so badly needed by the
peoples of the entire region.

