Mrs. Zerkal (Ukraine): First of all, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for Malaysia's initiative
to hold this important debate. Let me also express my
gratitude to today's briefers, in particular to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict for her hard work.

The delegation of Ukraine aligns itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union
and would also like to make a number of points in its
national capacity.

Ukraine welcomes the latest report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict (S/2015/409).
We consider this document to be an extremely important
tool in preventing children from engaging in conflict.

Unfortunately, as stated in the report, there were
unprecedented challenges in 2014 with regard to the
protection of the tens of millions of children growing
up in situations affected by conflict. It also notes that
mass abductions of civilians, including children, have
become an increasingly prevalent feature of conflict in
many situations. We regret to say that our country has
been suffering from such outrageous acts for more than
a year as a result of Russia's ongoing aggression.

Despite the fact that the current report of the
Secretary-General's does not cover the situation in
Ukraine, I would like to draw the Council's attention
to some striking statistics previously unimaginable in
my country. As a result of the Russian Federation's
aggression against Ukraine, the number of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) is constantly growing. As
of June, Ukrainian authorities have reported more
than 1,325,000 IDPs, 150,481 of them children. As of
31 March 2015, 1,086 children had lost their parents.
At least 68 children have been killed and 176 wounded
in eastern Ukraine since the beginning of the Russian
Federation's aggression. The human rights mission in
Ukraine and the World Health Organization believe that
the actual number of fatalities is considerably higher.

Seven children's hospitals and three schools have
been destroyed in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions as
a result of shelling, and 47 medical facilities and 177
educational institutions have been heavily damaged.
The whole world is witnessing, and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special
Monitoring Mission has confirmed, that it is Russian-
backed terrorists who stand behind the murders of
Ukrainian children. There have also been abductions
and illegal transfers of children to Russia. For example,
61 orphans were abducted on 26 July 2014 from an
orphanage in Luhansk and illegally transferred to
Russia. A group of 16 children was allegedly abducted
and transferred to Russian Federation territory on
12 June 2014 by armed groups and returned to Ukraine
on 13 June 2014.

Rising concerns about abductions were expressed
during an open debate of the Security Council in March
2015 (see S/PV.7400). Yet Ukrainian authorities, along
with the OSCE monitors, have continued to report
numerous incidents of child abductions by Russian-
backed terrorists. According to current data, 126
occupants of the Krasnodon regional orphanage, of
whom 80 are children, are still being held in the zone
controlled by militants. Most of those in the institution
are seriously ill and are not able to move on their own.
The 195 people in the Rovenky regional orphanage, of
which 27 are children, have also not been evacuated.
In addition, two children's tuberculosis facilities in
the city of Alchevsk cannot be evacuated from the
zone affected by the conflict. Horrific facts have
confirmed the cynical and manipulative attitude of the
militants towards children. Decree No. 17 of the so-
called Council of Ministers of the Donetsk People's
Republic, dated 25 June 2014, forbids moving children
outside the Donetsk region, although the same decree
allows children to be moved exclusively to the Russian
Federation.

Furthermore, Russian-backed terrorists are
reportedly recruiting child soldiers to fight against
the Ukrainian army and Ukrainian people. Many such
facts have been registered by the OSCE monitoring
mission. Among those manning the checkpoint at the
north-eastern entrance to Shyrokyne in the so-called
Donetsk People's Republic, the monitoring mission
reported seeing young female and male armed persons.
Some of the male individuals appeared to be minors. At
a checkpoint on the outskirts of the so-called Donetsk
People's Republic-controlled city of Makiivka, 10
kilometres east of Donetsk, OSCE monitors observed
a child, approximately 12 to 14 years old, wearing a
camouflage uniform and holding an AK-47 rifle.

Against such atragic background, Iwouldlike to take
this opportunity to urge, as we have time and again, the
Russian Federation to stop providing weapons, military
equipment, financial resources and mercenaries to the

illegal armed groups in eastern Ukraine. I would like
to stress that the outrageous accusation made today by
the representative of the Russian delegation that the
Ukrainian army was allegedly killing children in the
eastern region of Ukraine is indeed a brutal attempt
to lay the blame at someone else's door. The United
Nations and other international actors should be granted
full access to the conflict zone in order to monitor the
situation. That is the only way to prevent the further
suffering of our children in the territories in the Donbas
currently under the control of the terrorists.

At the same time, my country reiterates its
commitment to the promotion and protection of the
rights of the child and will work as hard as possible
to support the efforts being exerted to that end within
the framework of the United Nations system, regional
organizations and civil society in support of the
"Children, Not Soldiers" campaign. In that regard, we
are ready to provide the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
with all available data on the situation with respect to
children in Ukraine and the violations of their rights
as a result of foreign aggression, so that they can be
properly reflected in the next thematic report.

