Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Special Coordinator,
Mr. Alvaro de Soto, for his active work in the structure
of the Quartet of Middle East moderators and also for
the briefing he gave us today on the situation in the
region. His analysis of events matches the Russian
View as to how the situation in the Middle East is
developing. Of course, the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
continues to be a determining factor for the fate of the
region. The lack of a settlement for that conflict is a
contributing factor to the periodic worsening of the
situation in the Middle East.

Russia believes that a political solution to the
problem between Israel and the Palestinian National
Authority does exist. The programme of action to that
end is well known, namely, the road map, which was
adopted by both parties to the conflict. The main role
here, as was rightly stressed by Mr. De Soto, should be
played by the Quartet of international mediators.
Russian contacts in the region show that the leadership
of Israel and the Palestinian National Authority do not
question the significance of the road map and the
Quartet as a mechanism for collective external
influence towards a settlement of the situation in the
Middle East. Another matter is how to enhance the
effectiveness and functionality of such machinery. In
that respect, it is important to implement the decision
of the Quartet taken at the September 2006 meeting in
New York. We also need to bring the road map into
accordance with the current reality of the region.

Members of the Quartet could discuss those
issues during the next meeting, which is now at a
planning stage. In practical terms, we feel it would be

timely and useful to support the authority of the
Quartet, which is preparing for a meeting between
President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority
and Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert. That could
give a positive impetus to the entire range of
Palestinian-Israeli relations. Unfortunately, there has
been no progress on the question of creating a
Government of National Unity in the Palestinian
territory.

Talks on that issue between President Abbas and
Prime Minister Ismail Haniyeh have reached a dead
end. At the same time, the situation in the territory may
be going out of control owing to the factional clashes
there. The humanitarian situation there is still critical.
We feel, therefore, that the international community -
in particular, the Arab States - should help the
Palestinians to find a consensus agreement. Of course,
we must find a solution as soon as possible to the
problem of the release of Israeli Corporal Shalit. We
cannot solve the Palestinian problem separately in a
bilateral framework, without dealing with the linkages
with other regional crises. Therefore, we must revive
the Israeli-Syrian dialogue and the very much-needed
political dialogue between Damascus and Beirut. In
addition, there must also be meetings between Prime
Minister Siniora and President Al-Assad.

We understand that Syria is ready for such
contacts, and we hope to also find such a constructive
attitude in Beirut. If we examine the Lebanese situation
we can feel that events are progressing in the right
direction. In particular, we are satisfied that the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) is
continuing, although the situation in Lebanon remains
fragile. The full implementation of all of the provisions
of resolution 1701 (2006) must proceed in such a way
as to ensure that further tensions do not arise among
the various political forces and confessional groups of
the country.

We continue to support contacts with the
Lebanese parties and encourage them to consolidate
their platform for the post-war recovery of their
country. It is essential to recall the inadmissibility of
the Israeli practice of Violating the air space of
Lebanon. In addition, we are concerned by the
humanitarian situation in Lebanon. Russia is helping to
alleviate that situation by sending engineers to
Lebanon, who will work for the next two months to
restore highways, rebuild bridges and demine work
sites. Russian soldiers are working in Lebanon on the
basis of bilateral agreements with the Lebanese
Government and in accordance with the appeal for
assistance for Lebanon contained in resolution 1701.

