Mr. anald (Norway): Norway welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and supports the conclusions
and recommendations for action contained therein.

It is Vital that all United Nations mandated
peacekeeping operations be provided with a mandate
that takes protection fully into account. Operations
must be authorized to take all necessary action to
protect civilians. That means that the potential
consequences for civilians must be factored in the
planning as well as the execution of such action.

Effective protection of civilians requires close
cooperation among a broad range of actors, including
the military, the police, as well as human rights,
development and humanitarian workers. An integrated
approach is key to ensuring that all parties work
together to maximise protection. Integration must be
based on a common strategic plan and a shared
understanding of priorities. Further, in order to make a
real difference, the local community needs to have
ownership of the strategy and the goals of the
operation.

Norway is deeply concerned about the continued
use of sexual violence as a method of warfare that each
year destroys the lives of thousands of women and
girls, as well as men and boys. The report by Under-
Secretary-General Sir John Holmes to the Council in
September on the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo was, indeed, alarming.

The response by the Security Council to sexual
and gender-based violence in situations of armed
conflict must be intensified. It is totally unacceptable
that United Nations officials should be inactive
witnesses to such atrocities, or even worse, be
participants in such acts.

Norway supports the proposals for action in the
report of the Secretary-General, including the need to
report such crimes to the International Criminal Court
not mentioned again and to consider sanctions against
Member States and non-State actors that perpetrate
such crimes. Further, we support his recommendation
to establish ad hoc judicial arrangements to address
sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in other situations where impunity prevails.

A key challenge is the need to eliminate the
immense humanitarian impact of cluster munitions.
Reports indicate that 98 per cent of the victims of
cluster munitions are civilians. This is the reason why
the Norwegian Government initiated an international
process aimed at prohibiting cluster munitions. The
first Conference on Cluster Munitions took place in
February this year and resulted in the Oslo Declaration,
which is supported by some 80 States. The aim is to
ensure an end to the use of cluster munitions and to
secure adequate assistance to affected peoples and
communities.

