Mr. Yang Lee (Republic of Korea): At the outset, Sir,
I would like to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December. I am confident that your experience and wisdom
will enable the Council to discharge its responsibilities
effectively. I take this opportunity also to convey my
delegation's deep appreciation to your predecessor,
Ambassador Al-Khussaiby of Oman, for his excellent
guidance of the Council's work last month.

Turning to the item under discussion, I should like to
thank Ambassador Emilio cardenas of Argentina for his
statement, which conveyed the general sentiments of
numerous Member States on the consultations between the
Council and the troop-contributing countries and presented
some specific proposals for improvements.
As one of the strong supporters of these consultations,
the Republic of Korea is pleased to note that the tripartite
mechanism has now become a regular feature of the United
Nations and has proved useful since it was put into place
through the Security Council presidential statement in
November of last year. However, we feel compelled to
point out that the consultations have also revealed many
limitations and shortcomings, some of which I should like
briefly to mention here today.

It was often the case that meetings were convened
only moments before the expiration of a mandate. My
delegation is of the View that such meetings require much
better organized preparation and scheduling, as envisaged
in the presidential statement.

The briefings at the meetings sometimes offer no
new elements additional to those already made available
to the troop contributors through the published report of
the Secretary-General. Furthermore, the recommendations
and views expressed by the troop contributors in the
course of these tripartite consultations have not been
adequately reflected in subsequent decisions of the
Security Council, and for many troop-contributing
countries the unpredictability of the fate of their own
troops remains a persistent concern.

It is in this context that the Member States have
again placed strong emphasis during the current session
of the General Assembly on the critical importance of the
United Nations peace-keeping operations for the
maintenance of global peace and security, and underlined
the need to improve the existing arrangements for
consultations among troop contributors, the Security
Council and the Secretariat.

The Republic of Korea fully recognizes that the
Security Council bears primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
therefore assumes the overall political responsibility for
all the peace-keeping operations of the United Nations.
However, we must not overlook the fact that the success
of the United Nations peace-keeping operations is equally
dependent on the active support and participation of the
Member States, particularly the troop contributors. It is
for this reason that my delegation supports the proposal
further to improve the existing mechanism of the tripartite
consultations, through the establishment of a subsidiary
organ under Article 29 of the Charter, as suggested in the
statement of Ambassador Cardenas.

Given the limited military planning capability of the
United Nations Secretariat, my delegation believes the
proposal is particularly pertinent. With such a formal
mechanism for consultations in place, the views of the
troop contributors could be more clearly conveyed to the
Security Council on the operational issues germane to the
specific mission, including those of a military nature, so
that the Council could make more informed decisions.

 

My delegation believes that increased transparency and
democratization in decision-making, together with an
adequate information-sharing system, is of vital importance
for maintaining both broad support and a strong mandate,
which are considered as the main factors necessary for the
success of peace-keeping operations.

