Mr. Klein (spoke in French): I am honoured to be
here to brief the Security Council in my capacity as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Coordinator of United Nations Operations in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. At a time when the role and
achievements ofthe United Nations in the settlement of
inter-ethnic conflicts are the object of close scrutiny by
the international community, I am pleased to report that
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) has resolutely embarked upon the proper
path and that it is making most impressive progress.

(spoke in English)

Before turning to the progress of UNMIBH, I
must emphatically reject two allegations that have
gained currency in public discourse and that have a
bearing on our mission: first, the claims by some
commentators that the United Nations is unable to
perform the tasks of the "new international
peacekeeping" in this period of inter-ethnic conflict
and failed States; and secondly, that self-sustaining
peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina will require decades,
not years.

It should be recalled that in the former
Yugoslavia, which is in some senses a paradigm of the
failed State and inter-ethnic conflict between
populations emerging from non-democratic traditions,
only two international peacekeeping missions have
finished successfully. From the beginning of the
Yugoslav conflict, the ground-breaking United Nations
Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ensured that
war did not spill over into that fragile republic. And
from 1996 to 1998 the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium (UNTAES), with the strong support
of the Security Council, a robust force structure and a
clear mandate under a single chain of command,
successfully retained the multi-ethnic character of the
region of Eastern Slavonia as it was transitioned back
to Croatian control.

Those two missions, one regrettably forgotten by
commentators and the other often overlooked,
demonstrate that with the right mandate, resource
support and organizational structure, the United
Nations has the ability and experience to manage
complex conflicts. I do not deny that the international
community faces a steep learning curve in meeting all
the new challenges of peacekeeping. But, as a general,
an ambassador and an operational peacekeeper, I can
honestly say that no organization I have been involved
with is further along on that learning curve than the
United Nations. It is my firm commitment to the
Security Council that UNMIBH will add another
successful mission to the much overlooked list of
United Nations successes.

The second claim I reject is that it will take
decades of intensive and expensive intervention before
the international community will finally conclude that
the creation of a sovereign, democratic and multi-
ethnic State of Bosnia and Herzegovina is somehow
"mission impossible". I suggest that avoiding that
outcome depends almost entirely on our own policies
and actions.

The people of Bosnia and Herzegovina are now
living in a kind of Balkan no-man's land, unsure of
their identity and of their place in the modern world.
For centuries, the decisions which affected them were
made in someone else's court: Istanbul, Vienna or
Belgrade. Their region was the historical political and
religious fault-line between Europe and the Orient. It
was where the military borders were drawn.
Consequently, they were unable to participate in the
democratic evolution of Western Europe. Their
development was frozen in the political construct of
group rights, not individual rights protected under the
rule of law. And they were open to manipulation and
chauvinism which, three times in the past century,
necessitated massive international intervention and
tempo-centric solutions that carried the seeds of even
greater conflicts in the coming years.

The international community has a historic
opportunity to put an end to the cycle of regional
instability and external intervention, but it requires
bold solutions and major steps. Bosnia and
Herzegovina must not continue to be confined to the
fringes of Europe. It needs to be brought into a larger
European space where it can be given the attention,
encouragement and mentoring it requires to become a
stable and self-sustaining member of the wider region.

Everything we are trying to do depends on
making a credible commitment, now, to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's entry into Europe. From refugee
return - why would any refugees in Europe want their
children to grow up in a Balkan no-man's land? - to
keeping youth in the country and not in visa queues;
from seriously attacking cross-border crime to breaking
the hold of extremist politicians and partitionist
tendencies: it all depends on changing the optics of this
country, and of its neighbours, away from parochial
sectarian divisiveness by giving them regional identity
and inclusiveness.

The solutions that have worked inside Western
Europe to defuse ethnic separatism should be applied
to the Balkans. We should not fear that this will open
the floodgates to undesirable elements. The reality is
that the undesirable Balkan elements are already in
Europe. Keeping the ordinary citizens out of Europe
only denies us their cooperation in fighting our
common problems: political extremism; organized
crime; trafficking in people, drugs and arms; and
illegal immigration.

Moreover, imposing strict conditionality on entry
into Europe merely plays into the hands of those
politicians who do not wish to be brought under the
intrusive scrutiny of European legal and human rights
institutions. The dysfunctional triumvirate model of
political organization in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
exemplified by the failure of the three Presidents to
uphold their commitments made before this Council in
the New York Declaration, enables one or the other
politician to ensure that the conditions set will never be
met.

Regrettably, five sets of internationally run
elections in five years have not yet had the desired
effect of empowering democratic leaders who place the
interests of all the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina
above their own. Even though the people themselves
are tired of political exploitation - as is evidenced by
the strong popular support of the international
community every time local officials are removed from
office - during election campaigns the three main
nationalist parties consistently feed off each other,
denying political space to alternative parties and
candidates. No local election has yet been fought on
non-ethnic and non-ideological grounds. Too many
elections can be as debilitating and demoralizing as too
few.
Despite this, we should not be pessimistic, far
from it. The progress that has been made in the face of
entrenched political obstruction has been substantial.
But it has been expensive, arduous and slow. At a time
of many calls on the attention and resources of the
international community, it is necessary to plan the
next steps in the Balkans on the basis of objective
analysis. If you keep doing what you have been doing,
you will keep getting what you have got.

Let us recognize that the strategy of exclusion
from Europe together with piecemeal military
intervention has been a failure. We need to have as
much vision now as our fathers did when they
successfully planned the reconstruction of Western
Europe after the Second World War. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is not mission impossible, and it does not
have to be a never-ending story, if we get our own
policy settings right and pursue vigorously the target of
European political inclusiveness.

I turn now to the work of UNMIBH. The
Secretary-General's report, which is before you, details
key achievements made by a mission that is
dynamically on course. There has been tangible
progress in all our core mandate areas of police
restructuring, police reform and judicial reform.

Last Tuesday, 6 June 2000, at Sarajevo airport,
we inaugurated the multi-ethnic State Border Service
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This is the first and only
executive agency operating under the joint State
institutions rather than the ethnically based entities. It
is a major step towards building State identity,
combating national and transnational crime and illegal
immigration and preparing for entry into Europe.

On 5 June, I inspected the successful physical
integration of the Ministry of the Interior in the
Herzegovina-Neretva canton and welcomed the
appointment of 70 judges and prosecutors to new
multi-ethnic judicial institutions. UNMIBH has led the
way in enabling Croats and Bosniacs to work together
on the west side of the divided city of Mostar for the
first time since the beginning ofthe war.

In April 2000, the first Bosnia and Herzegovina
United Nations civilian police contingent was deployed
to East Timor, where they are performing well. As a
further demonstration that even former combatants are
willing and able to work together harmoniously and
effectively, we are new training 16 military officers to
serve as United Nations military observers, and we
have begun preparations to create a multi-ethnic
logistics and engineering company for future United
Nations missions from all three sides.

On 20 January, we inaugurated the multi-ethnic
Brcko district police force. The ethnic composition of
the force reflects the evolving demographics of the
district - 45 per cent Serbs, 37 per cent Bosniacs, 16
per cent Croats and 2 per cent other - in a unified
force, but the hiring of individual police officers was
based strictly on professional competence.

Also in January, the ethnically separate
Federation anti-terrorist specialist police units were
restructured and physically integrated. Within the
coming weeks, restructuring and retraining of the
equivalent units in the Republika Srpska will be
completed, and they will be transferred from SFOR
supervision to civilian control under UNMIBH
monitoring.

These tangible and important results that have
been achieved over the past six months are only one
part ofthe overall work of UNMIBH.

One of the yardsticks by which UNMIBH's
ultimate success will be measured is its contribution to
changing the composition of the police forces to better
reflect the multi-ethnic communities they serve and to
provide confidence for minority returnees. We have
placed the highest priority on the recruitment,
deployment and transfer of minority police officers.

By the end of this October, over 600 minority
cadets will have been trained or be in training in the
two police academies we established last year. This
progress is encouraging, but clearly it is not sufficient.
We need more to have a quicker and more substantial
impact.

The Ministerial Consultative Meeting on Police
Matters (MCMP) that we established in March is
starting to produce results. The basic conditions of
employment for returning minority police officers have
been settled. The first list of such officers is being
processed. Moreover, the respective Ministers of the
Interior have now requested that the MCMP agenda be
expanded to include police cooperation in other areas,
such as fighting illegal immigration.

I am pleased to report excellent progress in data
collection and initial screening for the Law
Enforcement Personnel Registry that we established
last November to register and conduct background
checks on all police personnel throughout the country.
Last week we reached over 10,500 registrations, out of
a total force of some 20,000.

The second phase of this project is beginning. All
re-registered police will be tested, detailed background
checks will be conducted and final certifications will
be made. Concurrently, this process is assisting us to
determine accurately the correct ethnic composition of
the respective police forces and to identify displaced
officers for possible return to their places of origin.

Minimizing political influence by creating a
professional civil service is a serious challenge for all
international efforts throughout Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Police Commissioner programme
that has been introduced in the Brcko district and in the
State Border Service has established the precedent of a
single chain of command under a professional and
independent police commissioner who is selected on
merit, not ethnicity.

This is a quantum leap away from the current
administrative structure of every joint institution which
is a "rotating ethnic triumvirate" of political
appointees, a model ensures that there is no
accountability, no responsibility and no continuity.
Establishment of a police commissioner post, filled
through open competition, is a major step forward for a
professional civil service and administration.

We are also working to ensure objectivity in the
judicial system, which has been rendered dysfunctional
through political intimidation and lack of enforcement
of decisions. However, the court police project remains
in its initial stages, hampered by a lack of resources
and legislative authority. The establishment of court
police is absolutely essential to complement the
judicial reform process. Until citizens know that
witnesses will be protected and court decisions will be
enforced, even an effective police force and an
independent judiciary will not be able to guarantee the
rule of law.
The role of UNMIBH with respect to refugees
and displaced persons is to monitor police actions in
establishing a safe environment for their return. The
International Police Task Force (IPTF) monitors
evictions, compiles comprehensive data on return-
related incidents and assists the local police to develop
comprehensive security plans against ethnically
motivated intimidation and crime. In a period of major
spontaneous returns to difficult areas, such as Prijedor
and Gorazde, our role is an essential complement to the
excellent work of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees.

In all of these endeavours our focus is to ensure
that police performance meets professional standards.
This requires co-location of IPTF officers with local
police for the purpose of monitoring and mentoring and
the provision of training. In 1998, UNMIBH had 25
IPTF liaison officers in police stations. As oflast week,
over 700 IPTF officers were providing day and night
oversight in 256 of the 318 local police stations in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

But the key to self-sustaining police reform is
professional training. The excellent performance of
local police during the recent municipal elections
demonstrates that our training is working. We have
now completed our essential programme of human-
dignity and transitional training for every local police
officer to be aware of the basic requirements for
democratic policing. Henceforth, IPTF will provide
such training only to local police trainers, who will
then assume the responsibility of training their own
personnel under IPTF monitoring, thus freeing our
resources for more extensive co-location.

Our aim is to create an effective educational
infrastructure within one year so that the local police
can become self-sustaining in their training
programmes. Our focus on train-the-trainers
programmes has already resulted in local police
instructors teaching the basic cadet training courses at
the two police academies. The next step is to extend
this to specialized areas such as management,
community policing, firearms and traffic.

Let me now turn to UNMIBH's work in the area
of judicial reform. As I have often said, if police
reform is not accompanied by judicial reform, it is like
trying to clap with only one hand. Regrettably, the
excellent judicial system assessment programme will
be brought to an end towards the end of this year, at a
time when there is a need not only to continue judicial
reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina but, indeed, to
quicken the pace. It is imperative that there should be
no gap when this programme is handed on to another
organization. Those entrusted with this programme and
with the new judicial review process must be
competent professionals who have the confidence and
trust of the local judicial community. The overall
management of the judicial reform and review should
remain the responsibility of the Office of the High
Representative, which should be assisted by another
expert international organization. We favour the
Council of Europe, or, to completely preserve
continuity, expertise and resources, the United Nations
Development Programme is another possibility.

The Council of Europe is an ideal partner because
it was influential in the gestation of JSAP and is
familiar with its work. It is active in judicial reform,
including the drafting of key legislation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the development of norms and
standards for European judicial systems generally. A
field presence of the Council of Europe would
significantly add to its ability to contribute to law
drafting and the judicial reform process.

We understand that the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) is also a possible
candidate as an organization to succeed the judicial
system assessment programme. This requires cautious
consideration for two main reasons. The local history
of the OSCE in this area of work has been
characterized by arbitrary decisions to cut successful
programmes, which have resulted in a significant loss
of credibility with the local community; and its staffing
and recruiting policy militates against recruiting
personnel with the necessary skills and experience. The
cost of a continuing programme - whoever runs it -
is approximately $1.5 million. We believe that the
Council of Europe could attract such support.

The progress that UNMIBH has made has
brought us to the point where, alone among the
international agencies, we can begin to envisage an end
stage for our particular slice of the international
mandate in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are preparing
a medium-term plan for the fulfilment of our core
mandated tasks by December 2002. Last month, I
convened a weekend strategy-planning workshop of all
senior field personnel to develop specific integrated
objectives for the coming six months, and modalities to
reach those objectives. Tangible benchmarks were
established for each field office, together with
performance indicators. The workshop was also
instrumental in the development of a major IPTF
reorganization designed to put more IPTF officers in
co-located positions in sensitive areas in the field.

Through these measures I am seeking to ensure
that our organizational structure and culture is
performance-oriented and results-based, and to extend
this approach to the work of each of our personnel.
This will also enable us to constantly review resource
levels with a view to progressively reallocating and
reducing them as programme objectives are met. The
work we have done in our train-the-trainers programme
is one example ofthis strategic approach.

This concludes my briefing on the achievements
and plans of UNMIBH. Permit me briefly to comment
on other matters affecting our work.

So much of the international effort in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has been about physical reconstruction.
The Peace Implementation Council has now set its
sights on repairing the institutional infrastructure and
concentrating on economic and corruption-related
issues. This is an essential and timely endeavour. But it
is my conviction that we must also not neglect the
importance of social reconstruction. This is why I have
been advocating several key projects to foster the
development of State identity and social reconciliation.

I strongly support the development of a Bosnia
and Herzegovina national university consisting of
multiple campuses with international accreditation. We
must give the young people a path to the future and
entry into the modern world so Croats will not go to
Zagreb and young Serbs will not go to Belgrade.
Otherwise, Bosnia and Herzegovina will lose its best
and brightest hopes for the future.

Restoration of a spirit of religious tolerance is
essential for the long-term future and distinctive
identity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is my hope that
an international benefactor will come forward to endow
a cornerstone inter-religious project involving the
simultaneous reconstruction of four historic places of
worship to symbolize the rejuvenation of the spirit of
religious tolerance that dominated the history of this
region for all but the past century.

I have also supported efforts to reconstruct the
Sarajevo-Pale road. The collapse last year of the main
artery between the eastern Republika Srpska and the
national capital sent a symbolic reminder of wartime

separation. It must not be allowed to continue because
of lack of funds.
In the time available I have been able to highlight
only some of the achievements of the past six months.
UNMIBH's tasks are complex and labour-intensive.
Real progress is being made, but there are severe
challenges ahead, including accelerating the rate of
minority returns, particularly to the Republika Srpska,
and bringing the eastern part of the Republika Srpska
into the national domain as a constructive
constitutional partner. Also, we are mindful that we
function in a broader environment in which
responsibility for peace implementation is shared
among a number of actors, and that much of what we
do, individually and collectively, is strongly affected
by developments in the wider region.

I have consistently maintained that as long as
there are not democratic regimes in Zagreb and
Belgrade, everything we seek to do in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is problematic. The accuracy of this
analysis was underlined in the release of recordings
from 1999 of the late President Tudjman's instructions
to senior Bosnian Croat officials, who were told to play
along with the international community while
continuing to work for partition. The change of
Government in Croatia has already had a major,
beneficial impact on our work in areas such as Mostar.

The Milosevic' regime in Serbia remains the
fundamental obstacle to improved regional peace and
stability and a better life not only for the Serbs but for
all people there. IfI were to identify three international
priorities of an essentially political nature for bringing
self-sustaining peace to Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
would choose entry into European institutions; the
strongest possible measures to encourage and support
democracy in Serbia; and more intensive efforts to
apprehend war criminals. Until one identifies and
punishes the guilty, one can never absolve or free the
innocent.

(spoke in French)

The events that occurred last year once again
showed that tangible progress is possible, but that if it
is to be achieved, intensive, coordinated and robust
commitment is necessary at the international level. I
am fully aware of the urgent needs for human and
financial resources for peacekeeping in other parts of
the world. But it is with the continued support of the
Council, as well as through the dynamism and
determination of the men and women working on the
ground for the United Nations, that UNMIBH's basic
mandate can be discharged in the next two and a half
years. For the time being, I believe that we have to stay
there so that we can leave later.

Next month we will move into our new
headquarters, United Nations House. That House will
include most of the United Nations family in Sarajevo.
Using the money that we saved by terminating our very
expensive leases on the five different locales we had
been renting, we have restored and are now using a
dormitory that had been bombed, which will later be
returned to Sarajevo University.

I take this opportunity to invite members to the
inauguration of the new United Nations building in
Sarajevo. Citizens of 13 States members of the Council
and 60 other nationalities are working for UNMIBH in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are witnessing
international cooperation for peace. I encourage
members to come see for themselves what their
compatriots are doing in support of international peace
and the United Nations.

In a region that remains unstable and tense, I
actively urge members to abide by their commitment to
a sovereign, multi-ethnic and democratic Bosnia and
Herzegovina strongly anchored in its European context.
The Security Council should not grow weary in any
respect whatsoever, be it in compassion, politics or
contributions. It should give us the tools and we will
complete the job.

