We convey Cuba's warmest greetings and support to the Security Council presidency of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. We are confident of the leadership and substantive support it will bring to the work of this organ as a worthy representative of the States of Latin America and the Caribbean. We are seeing today a constant violation of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and an increasing resort to the use or threat of use of force in international relations. It is impossible to any longer sustain an international order that is unequal, unjust and anti-democratic - one that replaces solidarity with selfishness and the legitimate aspirations of millions of people with the interests of a minority. The irresponsible behaviour of the United States is the major danger to international peace and security. It promotes conflicts as well as unconventional and trade wars in all regions of the planet. It sponsors the forceful overthrow of sovereign Governments. It encourages terrorism, promotes racist and supremacist views and imposes severe unilateral coercive measures while completely ignoring international law. With unprecedented power, it maligns and attacks multilateralism, withdraws from international bodies such as UNESCO and the World Health Organization in the middle of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and uses financial blackmail against agencies of the United Nations system. It walks away from important international treaties, such as the consensual agreement with Iran, as well as international disarmament and arms control instruments and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, while at the same time producing unsustainable and irrational production and consumption patterns that destroy the planet's equilibrium. It accounts for 38 per cent of global military spending - exceeding $1.917 trillion in 2020. It is militarizing cyberspace and modernizing its nuclear arsenals. In its race for weapons, it is squandering resources essential for the sustainable development of our peoples, while at the same time refusing to cooperate to confront the multiple global crises brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic. In its drive to reimpose the Monroe Doctrine, it is undermining the Proclamation of Latin America and the Caribbean as a Zone of Peace, by threatening and carrying out aggression against countries that do not bend to its will. It has taken new steps against Cuba to tighten the long-standing genocidal, economic, commercial and financial blockade, even in this time of pandemic. With absolute cynicism, it is determined to discredit the medical cooperation extended by our country and threatens those Governments that opt to exercise their sovereignty in soliciting our help. Achieving a world of peace, justice and development requires addressing the root causes of conflicts. As the historic leader of the Cuban Revolutions stated, "From the dawn of humankind, wars have arisen for fundamentally one reason: the desire on the part of some to strip others of their wealth. Once the mindset of plunder disappears, the mindset of war will vanish as well." We reiterate the Secretary-General's urgent call for an "end to the sickness of war" and "an immediate global ceasefire in all corners of the world", along with the "waiving of sanctions that could harm the capacities of countries to respond to the pandemic". We cannot put off ending the imposition of unilateral coercive sanctions, which have been rejected by the United Nations. The unpayable foreign debt that is threatening the survival of the peoples of the South - now aggravated by the socioeconomic effects of the pandemic - must be forgiven. Against that complex backdrop, it is the duty of all countries, and especially of the members of the Security Council, to defend multilateralism and the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, including respect for the sovereign equality of States and their political unity, independence and territorial integrity, as well as the peaceful resolution of conflicts and refraining from the use or threat of use of force in international relations. We should seek to ensure that the Security Council meets its overriding responsibility for maintaining international peace and security and respects the mandates entrusted by the Charter to other organs of the Organization, especially the General Assembly. Let us strive for the promotion of peace, solidarity and development. Let us build an international order that is democratic, fair and sustainable.
