Mr. Eitel (Germany): Germany voted in favour of this
resolution giving the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL) an enlarged mandate. We believe that
this is necessary to enable UNOMIL to play an effective
role in the further peace process. We wish to stress,
however, that UN OMIL can be effective only with the full
cooperation of all parties, the Liberian National Transitional
Government and the Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS).

The recent developments in Liberia lead us to be
hopeful. The establishment of the Council of State and the
implementation of a comprehensive cease-fire are important
first steps to build on. Further concrete steps will have to
follow. We look forward to the complete disengagement of
the warring parties, creating the necessary conditions for the
quartering of troops in assembly sites and for their
disarmament and demobilization. Only under these
conditions will UNOMIL be able to fulfil its mandate. We
therefore call on the warring parties to make the Abuja
Agreement the lasting foundation for a peace settlement in
Liberia.

International assistance will be necessary to sustain the
peace process, especially within the framework of the
demobilization of the armed units, and to re-establish an
economic foundation for Liberia's further development.
The Conference on Assistance to Liberia, with its initial
pledges, has shown that the international community is
willing to do its share. Only if former combatants,
refugees and internally displaced persons are able to earn
a living within a functioning national economy can we
hope for a permanent and peaceful settlement of the civil
war. Humanitarian assistance, which should take into
account the long-term needs of the country, will now, at
this initial stage of the peace process, play a crucial role.

Further assistance, however, will also depend on the
warring parties' providing credible proof of their sincere
commitment to the peace process by abiding strictly by
the Abuja Agreement. Only under this condition can
continued international assistance for the peace process be
maintained.

The present mandate of UNOMIL will expire on 31
January 1996. At that time, the Council will have to
reconsider UNOMIL's options in Liberia in the light of
progress made in the peace process. The next steps in the
peace process should therefore be undertaken without
delay. We hope that a lasting cease-fire will enable
ECOMOG, even within its present means, to deploy
rapidly throughout the country. Such urgent action seems
to be required to maintain the momentum towards peace
in Liberia. In accordance with this resolution, the United
Nations and the member States of the Economic
Community of West African States would thus continue
their efforts towards peace in Liberia, setting an example
of complementarity and cooperation.

At the beginning of today's meeting, we heard the
Permanent Representative of Liberia praise the essential
role played by Nigeria in fostering the peace process in
his country. It is therefore with even greater dismay that
we have learned that, indeed, 10 minority leaders have
today been hanged in Nigeria. Together with other
Governments - for example, the Government of Italy -
the German Government has worked for the worldwide
abolition of the death penalty. We shall continue to do so.

If the shocking news I have just mentioned should
prove to be correct, my delegation cannot but join those
delegations that have preceded me in expressing their
utter dismay over these executions.

