Mr. Thiiresson (Sweden): I thank you, Sir, and
through you President Bachelet for the opportunity to
address the Council on behalf of the Nordic countries
on this very important topic. The Nordic countries also
wish to thank the Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Ambassador Patriota of Brazil and Nobel Peace Prize
Laureate Leymah Gbowee for sharing their valuable
insights today.

Development is always political, and particularly
so in contexts marked by armed conflict and violence.
Neither peace nor development is only about agreed-
upon words on paper; both are societal processes,
upheld and pushed forward by people. As the Security
Council remains seized of threats to peace and security,
it is crucial to consider, as we do today, the underlying
factors and causes of conflict and relapses into conflict.
How can we prevent situations from ever having to end
up on the Council's agenda?

Inclusive development holds a key to the answer.
As this debate attest, there can be neither peace nor
development without the active participation of the
many, including of course the most marginalized. For
example, systematic economic and social exclusion and
inequalities drive a lot of today's conflicts. At the same
time, it is people in conflict-affected and fragile States
that lag the most behind in fulfilling the Millennium
Development Goals. People in conflict-affected and
fragile States are stuck in a trap of poverty and violence.

Root causes and drivers of conflict and violence
must therefore inform development cooperation.
Conflict analysis - outlining and understanding these
causes and drivers - is key. We need to understand
the factors - for example, political, economic, social,
and historical - that directly influence the forms
and dynamics of conflict and violence. We need to
understand what separates and what connects people
and groups.

If, for instance, your group identity or belonging
determines your access to security, to justice, to land, to
jobs, and to political influence - or, to put it differently,
if your group identity puts you at risk of exposure
to harassment or violence on the part of the national
police, systematic discrimination by the authorities,
land deprivation, and lack of influence - then all
development efforts targeting these areas will have
a bearing on the conflict. Building trust between the
State and society and within groups will increase
social cohesion, which is at the centre of inclusive
development.

Development can be inclusive and thereby reduce
poverty, break the cycle of violence, and prevent new
conflicts from emerging or returning to conflict if all
groups of people, including the most marginalized,
contribute to creating opportunities, share the benefits
of development, and participate in decision-making.
Inclusive political participation in peace processes,
elections, constitutional processes, or decentralization
efforts are ways to non-violently resolve and prevent
conflict. The Security Council has a crucial role to play
in formulating mandates to support such participation,
and should continue to do so effectively.

In this context, let us also remind ourselves that
women represent, in many cases, more than half of
the population. Any effort that does not involve them
is doomed to fail. Women's participation is critical to
peacemaking, to peacekeeping and to peacebuilding.
The Security Council has a special responsibility to
ensure the presence and active involvement of women.
We commend the Council for its efforts in this regard,
and encourage it to continue to focus on the issue of
women, peace and security in all its aspects.

Having spoken about the Council, the Nordic
countries would like to see the Council encourage
the Secretariat, including Special Representatives
and Envoys, to pay increasing attention to inclusive
development, and in particular the lack of it, in their
briefings and reports. We also urge the Council to
utilize the whole variety of formats it has at its disposal;
the more the Council can learn from the experiences
and work of other actors, the better prepared it will be
to respond efficiently to challenging situations.

Let us also take a moment to reflect upon the overall
United Nations involvement in the nexus of security
and development. We all agree that the United Nations
needs to deliver as one. In its resolution 2086 (2013), the
Council recognized the important role of peacekeeping
missions in assisting host countries in developing critical
peacebuilding priorities and strategies and in helping
to create an enabling environment for relevant national
and international actors to perform peacebuilding tasks
and to implement early peacebuilding tasks themselves.

The use of inclusive United Nations mediation
should be further developed. Mediation should be used
in all stages of the conflict cycle. In this sense, the
Council sets the path for the ensuing peacebuilding,
for example by meeting the need for a professional,
legitimate, accountable and impartial security sector
and judiciary to build trust not only with people for
peaceful conflict-resolution, but also with economic
actors. As peace operations often do the initial work
in supporting the host country, it is important that
the rest of the United Nations and other development
actors follow suit. Currently, several layers of actors
work in development, peacebuilding and State-building
at the international, national, regional and local
levels. In order to enhance and make development
and peacebuilding initiatives more effective, greater
coherence and coordination are needed. Common and
nationally owned and led strategic goals should be
pursued by all actors.

As part of building sustainable peace, healing the
wounds of society can determine whether peace and
stability will be sustained in the long run. Dealing
with grievances or hatred over past atrocities through
reconciliation or transitional justice processes is
necessary for societies to move on and break with the
violent past. Development cannot be business-as-usual
after a conflict, but needs to be inclusive also in the sense
of dealing with issues central to sustainable peace. To
prevent future conflict and insecurity, decisive action
needs to be taken to face climate change. Climate
change is a threat multiplier. Today, unfortunately,
the world is facing the risk of additional temperature
increases of over 2 degrees Celsius. Climate change is
therefore expected to pose a major strategic security
threat in the future.

The year 2015 is the year of the three reviews: on
peace operations, peacebuilding and the global study
on women, peace and security. This year will thus bring
us an opportunity to examine our overall efforts to
building sustainable peace. The Nordic countries hope
that all three reviews will enlighten us as to how to do
this better, inclusive development being an important
piece of the puzzle.

The Nordic countries have been promoting stand-
alone goals on peaceful and inclusive societies, gender
equality and good governance in the post-2015 agenda,
which are key contributors to poverty eradication and
sustainable development. Inclusivity is at the heart of all
this. The post-2015 agenda will be central in identifying
where to direct our efforts in coming years, and should
serve to inspire the Council's actions as well.

