Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to express our gratitude to the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
Judges Jorda and Pillay, and also the Prosecutor, Carla
Del Ponte, for their comprehensive briefings on the
work of the Tribunals.

As is well known, the Tribunals were established
by the Security Council as temporary judicial bodies,
with a View to restoring and maintaining peace in those
regions, to holding accountable the main perpetrators
of serious international crimes and to promoting
national reconciliation. It is quite obvious that the
deadline sketched out for those bodies is now expiring.
Such a lengthy existence of ad hoc Tribunals becomes
increasingly difficult to justify, from both the political
and practical points of view.

As far as the ICTY is concerned, the most timely
issue at present is the establishment of a final deadline
for its temporary jurisdiction. This task was supported
by the Security Council in its resolution 1329 (2000).
The Russian Federation has made concrete proposals in
this area, and we are counting on the Council to
continue its consideration with a view to reaching a
consensus.

The ICTR, first and foremost, faces the task of
enhancing the effectiveness of its activity. Of course,
the Tribunal has recently increased its capacity for the
trial process, and we note the measures undertaken for
significant improvement of its administrative and
management capacity. At the same time, a great deal
remains to be done.

We are carefully studying the proposal of the
President of the ICTR that the institution of ad litem
judges be introduced into the Tribunal. Naturally, this
request deserves comprehensive consideration by the
Security Council, equal to that given a similar request
last year by the judges of the ICTY. I would like to
emphasize the rule - based on the United Nations
Charter and other fundamental norms of international
law - that the primary responsibility for punishing
those guilty of war crimes and other serious
international crimes remains with States, and this fact
remains unshakeable. International criminal courts in
this case play an important but subsidiary role, since
they are not in a position to replace national systems of
justice.

At the current stage, we will strive towards more
active involvement of the national court systems of the
States of the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. The
Tribunals need to focus on specific crimes where, for
various reasons, States are not in a position to conduct
investigations independently.

In this connection, we cannot agree with the fact
that the Prosecutor has virtually already set up a
timetable for conducting numerous additional arrests
for some years to come. If such an approach were
retained, even bearing in mind the ad litem judges, the
ICTY and the ICTR could function for a very, very
long time to come. We doubt the legal validity of such
plans. It is very difficult, for example, to believe that
all 136 people recently coming under suspicion by the
Office of the Prosecutor really are the major organizers
and instigators of genocide on the territory of Rwanda.

We also have questions about the validity of the
Prosecutor's plans to conduct at least 36 more
investigations by the end of 2004 with regard to the
150 suspects in the former Yugoslavia. The
continuation of such a policy would in fact mean a loss
of confidence in the national court systems of the
Balkan States and Rwanda.

We note with satisfaction that today the
Presidents of the ICTY and the ICTR and the
Prosecutor talked about the need for further reliance on
national legal systems. We hope that these words will
be translated into practical steps with regard to the
Tribunals" activities.

We also would like to recall that the Security
Council, in its resolution 1329 (2000) - which
established the institution of ad litem judges in the
ICTY - took note of the position of the Tribunals
regarding the fact that they must try the leaders and not
the secondary figures. The aforementioned policy of
the Prosecutor seems to us a departure from the
positions of the Tribunals themselves as set forth in the
resolution. At the same time, I would like to say that
the ICTY and the ICTR should not go beyond the
sphere of their competence. They should not pass
political judgement on the nature of the cooperation of
States with the Tribunals.
With regard to the ICTY, all the States of the
former Yugoslavia recently have been showing
readiness for constructive cooperation with the ICTY.
This establishes a good basis for the earliest possible
conclusion of that body's work.

We have also drawn attention to reports in the
Yugoslav news media that Ibrahim Rugova intends to
give the Security Council information on the training
of terrorists in the territory of Kosovo. In the same
reports there is mention that the ICTY thus far has not
begun any investigations of former members of the
Kosovo Liberation Army, which carried out reprisals
against Serbs after the introduction into the province of
international forces in June 1999. Now many of these
figures are preparing to enter the Government of
Kosovo that is being formed. Thus, we trust that the
Yugoslav Tribunal will increasingly rely on
cooperation with the national court systems of the
countries of the region and will give greater attention
to investigations of crimes on the territory of Kosovo.

