Mr. Thiebaud (France) (interpretation from French):
My delegation welcomes the decision the Council has just
taken to extend the mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) until 15 May 1995.

This resolution sends the right message to the parties
concerned, since it confirms the international community's
commitment to securing a political settlement of the
Abkhaz conflict while respecting the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Georgia. The
maintenance of a United Nations presence in Georgia is
legitimate; the Secretary-General recognizes in his latest
report that this presence, in close cooperation with the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) peace-keeping
force, is playing a stabilizing role.

The situation in Abkhazia is indeed disquieting. There
has been no progress on the issue of displaced persons, and
this state of affairs is making it impossible to solve the
humanitarian problems effectively. The political process is
at a standstill and it is to be feared that it will remain there
so as long as the return of the refugees is not ensured in
secure conditions and in accordance with the agreements
undertaken. This is a key factor for the stability of the
region and for the return of the peoples concerned to
normal living conditions.

Thus our Council, by today reaffirming its readiness
to support the efforts to achieve a settlement, expects the
parties to demonstrate without delay their resolve to break
the present deadlock. The resolution we have just adopted
calls on them first of all to comply with their
commitments, to refrain from any action which would
impede the political process, and to intensify their efforts
to achieve a comprehensive settlement under United
Nations auspices. It is clear that the thorough review our
Council will undertake at the beginning of May will take
these critical elements into account.

In this respect, my delegation lends its full support
to the Secretary-General for the personal assistance that
he is ready to give, as well as to the mediation role
played by Mr. Brunner, with a view to restarting the
negotiating process. Doing our utmost to promote this
process should be our primary concern.
