Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Helen La Lime, and Ms. Marie Yolene Gilles for their briefings. We regret the attack on the office of the foundation run by Ms. Gilles. We hope that the details of that incident will be investigated as soon as possible. Indeed, tomorrow, the Dominican Republic, alongside several members of the Security Council, will hold an Arria Formula meeting on reprisals against women human rights defenders and women peacebuilders who cooperate with the Security Council and its subsidiary bodies. The Dominican Republic would like to take this opportunity to lend its support to Haiti's President, Jovenel Moise, in his quest for an inclusive dialogue with the objective of establishing a consensus-based Government. It is of great concern for the Dominican Republic to see the deep social, economic and political crisis in Haiti and the lack of progress in holding a national dialogue that would lead to the formation of a national unity Government capable of taking the country out of this multidimensional crisis. According to the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/123), the progress achieved during the reporting period is very minimal on essentially all the six benchmarks. That, in turn, indicates that the process to improve the country's ability to achieve political stability, peace and security and sustainable development is at a standstill. Due to its profound impact on economic growth and social stability, the political crisis has become the fundamental driver of that stagnation. This situation is among the reasons that we expressed our disagreement here in the Security Council with regard to the withdrawal of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) in the midst of an elections process that remains undefined, fragile and without an agreed- upon road map. The establishment of new peacekeeping configurations in countries in conflict should not be based solely on cost, but on an objective analysis and the presence of sound institutions capable of assuming the transferred responsibilities. Despite our repeated warnings to defer the operationalization of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) until after the elections and prioritize finding a solution to the political crisis before the transition, the Council proceeded to withdraw thepeace mission - MINUJUSTH - and establish the political mission on 16 October 2019. Sadly, we can see the chaos that has resulted today: a deep-seated constitutional crisis, rampant violence caused by the illicit trafficking and unmeasured proliferation of small arms, light weapons and ammunition, which are contributing significantly to organized crime - including gangs, in turn leading to assaults, kidnappings and murders - and thereby jeopardizing the security gains achieved over the past 15 years by the peace missions and exposing the population to high levels of insecurity. It has also led to a humanitarian situation that has been exacerbated by the lack of access to basic services for the majority of the population, including, according to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, a forecast that, by this coming March, 4.6 million Haitians - approximately 40 per cent of the population - will suffer severe food insecurity, with 2.1 per cent of children suffering from severe acute malnutrition. This widespread crisis. situation is hardly encouraging for BINUH to fully implement its mandate and move forward a sustainable development agenda. We regret that the situation of insecurity has already claimed the life of a BINUH independent contractor. We hope that the decision to withdraw MINUJUSTH in the conditions I have just referred to, without an adequately equipped police force, will serve as a lesson to illustrate what the Council must not repeat in another country. In order to help the Haitian people at this unfortunate juncture, BINUH must thoroughly examine the root causes of the crisis and subsequently, while working to improve the current conditions, join forces with the country team and the Government in their activities to eradicate the underlying sources of the problems. Accordingly, strategies and projects will be established on sound foundations serving as a pillar based upon which, in the long term, Haitians can take control of their own destiny. In conclusion, we thank the United Nations, the Organization of American States, the Caribbean Community, the European Union and the Apostolic Nuncio of the Holy See in Haiti for their contribution to the dialogue process. We also acknowledge the work of the Permanent Representative of the United States to the United Nations, Ambassador Kelly Craft, in her search for solutions to the Haitian crisis. We call on all national actors to iron out their differences and work together in the search for peaceful and inclusive solutions that will open up the path leading towards better living conditions for all the people of Haiti. The unity of a country in times of crisis must be the focus of concerted efforts to ensure the well-being of a people. We call on the international community not to lose hope in the transformations that its efforts will bring about and to continue supporting the Haitian people to alleviate the humanitarian crisis that is affecting the best of Haiti - its people.
