Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening this important open
debate on small arms and light weapons and for your
leadership on this issue. I welcome the briefings by
the Secretary-General and the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Prince Zeid. I also thank Karamoko
Diakite, for sharing his personal experiences of the
horrific impact that these weapons can have.

By the time I finish delivering this statement, six
more people will have been killed as a direct result of
small arms and light weapons. The human cost of these
weapons is astonishing owing to their illicit transfer,
destabilizing influence and misuse. Every year, enough
ammunition is manufactured to kill every single
person in the world twice over. Every year, 8 million
new weapons enter into circulation. When States fail
to control the supply and sale of these weapons, they
not only jeopardize the safety and security of innocent
people across the world, they also fuel instability and
threaten international peace and security. Therefore,
the need for collective action is clear. In 2013, the
Council spoke on the issue for the first time. Today,
we return under the Lithuanian presidency to the issue
to reflect on how far we have come in addressing this
scourge, and what more needs to be done.

The United Kingdom welcomes the draft resolution
proposed by the presidency. It aims to strengthen
the international community's ability to counter the
challenges posed by the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons and to build on resolution 2117 (2013).
It would help to improve the United Nations work
and support the Arms Trade Treaty. We place a high
priority on addressing the threats posed by small arms
and light weapons, and believe that there are three key
areas where we can contribute.

First, we support greater efforts to ensure effective
stockpile management, removal and destruction.
Proper storage prevents the flow of these weapons
into the hands of those who seek to misuse them. It
helps curtail an illicit economy where supply feeds
demand, and it helps ensure safe storage and removal,
preventing incidents like the one in Libya in November
2013, in which over 40 people were killed in an arms
depot explosion. Indeed, it is Libya that presents the
greatest concern to my Government on the issue of
small arms. The vast, unsecured arms and ammunition
of the Al-Qadhafi era are now fuelling the instability
and violence facing the country and the region, and it
is this instability that has allowed human traffickers
and criminal gangs to thrive and send thousands of
migrants to their deaths in the Mediterranean.

That is why the United Kingdom has planned to
commit over $30 million to assist Libya with arms and
ammunition management. We are providing a senior
disarmament adviser to work with the United Nations
and the Libyans, and we stand ready to increase our
efforts to match the scale of the challenge. A political
solution remains vital to this effort, and we reiterate
our support for Special Envoy Leon. We urge all sides
to engage in talks to agree a national unity Government
and implement a ceasefire.

Secondly, the United Kingdom will continue to

champion the implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty.
As the world's first legally binding treaty regulating the
international trade in conventional arms, it shows how
much we can achieve when we work together, so let us
seize the momentum it has created. It is a historic treaty
and it has the ability to change the lives of those most
affected by the supply of illegal small arms and light
weapons.

To do so, we should ensure that the core structure
and functions of the Treaty are effective and cost-
efficient. We look forward to negotiating the rules of
procedure for the Treaty, establishing a secretariat
and encouraging open and accessible transparency
reporting. As we approach the first conference of
States parties in August, we will continue to lobby
our international partners to support and accede to
the Treaty. We want as many countries as possible to
join us. We stand ready to offer our expertise, where
possible and appropriate, to any State that wants to
accede, yet lacks the capacity to do so.

Finally, let us not lose sight of the disproportionate
and distressing impact that small arms and light
weapons have on women and children. As the Secretary-
General makes clear in his report (S/2015/289), sexual
and gender-based violence is often perpetrated by
individuals and militias armed with these weapons.
In this fifteenth anniversary year of resolution 1325
(2000), we welcome the report's recommendation to
give greater recognition to the impact of these weapons
on women and children. But women can also play a
key role in resolving these problems. Women can help
combat and eradicate the illicit transfer, the destabilising
accumulation and the misuse of small arms. They can
do so by participating in all programmes, planning and
implementation processes, including at grass-roots
level. In the United Kingdom's national action plan on
resolution 1325 (2000), we pledge that women will play
a key role to control the use of small arms and light
weapons, and we call on other Members to do the same.

