In recent years, the international community has taken important steps to address the problem of conflict-related sexual violence. However, in his annual report (S/2020/487), the Secretary-General once again reports a large number of cases of sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict areas. In addition, a large number of abuses go unreported due to fear and stigmatization of victims or restricted access. The coronavirus disease pandemic further exacerbates the situation. In many places, the crisis has resulted in reduced social control, more difficult access to assistance or judicial authorities, and obstacles to sexual and reproductive rights. Belgium thanks Germany for organizing this important debate. We also thank the briefers. Their statements remind us that the current situation requires additional efforts and renewed commitment. I would like to address three points: the importance of a survivor-centred approach, the need for effective implementation of our commitments, and the need to address the root causes of sexual violence. First, survivors of sexual violence are not a homogenous group. Whether boys raped in the Central African Republic, sex slaves of Da'esh or mothers of children born out of violence in South Sudan, survivors all have their own stories. They all need tailor-made solutions. They need justice, access to health-care services, psychosocial support, meaningful reparations or socioeconomic support to reintegrate into society. Although the issue of reparations after conflict-related sexual violence has received increasing global attention, the actual provision of reparations remains, unfortunately, an exception. Yet efforts to provide reparations to survivors of conflict-related sexual violence have had positive effects in Colombia. The same goes for Iraq, where a relief programme for survivors saw initial grants disbursed last year. We must learn from the experiences of survivors to better prevent further violations; better recognize early-warning, signs such as discrimination, hate speech and incitement to violence; and improve the gathering of evidence, and Belgium welcomes the draft Murad code in this regard. My second point is on the effective implementation of the commitments. The level of compliance with Security Council resolutions remains low - too low. The figures speak for themselves; no more than one State actor has been removed from the list annexed to the annual report since its inception, while 71 per cent of the parties having made no commitment have been on the list for more than five years. What survivors want, though, is an end to impunity. They want justice. Documenting crimes is an essential step. We commend the efforts of the Special Representative in this regard. The presence of women protection advisers on the ground has also contributed to improving the quantity and quality of information. Let us safeguard the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict- related sexual violence. Access to justice is also crucial. However, such access in conflict areas is often insufficient due to inadequate normative frameworks, the limited capacity of rule-of-law institutions or a lack of trust in State actors, who themselves may perpetrate violence. Belgium supports and commends the work of the United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict in that regard. In the Central African Republic, for example, the experts contributed to the organization of a session of the Bangui Court of Appeals on sexual and gender-based violence cases. The Security Council can also act directly. In all its resolutions on sexual violence, it refers to the instrument of targeted sanctions against parties committing sexual violence. To date, however, no perpetrator has ever been targeted by sanctions for acts of sexual violence. What is the point of our intentions if they are not translated into concrete action to the benefit of survivors? Crimes of sexual violence will stop only if we address the root causes of sexual violence. Let us therefore work together for gender equality, for the genuine participation of women in peace processes, for the inclusion of women's empowerment at the heart of prevention measures, for increased support for women's organizations and human rights defenders, and for greater efforts to further pursue the path set out by resolution 1325 (2000). A decade after the first United Nations report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2010/181), sustained action and continued political pressure are still needed to change the situation. Ending sexual violence against women and girls and ensuring sexual and reproductive health and rights are also key elements of the Belgian National Action Plan on women and peace and security. I wish to reconfirm, here and today, our continued commitment. Belgium, the European Union and the United Nations remain partners in this important fight.
