Mr. Nebie (spoke in French): At the outset, I thank
the Security Council for the opportunity to brief it on
the current situation in the Central African Republic.

It is thanks to the support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) that I am
speaking to the Council from the city of Bouar, about
450 kilometres north-west of Bangui in the prefecture of
Nana-Mambe're. My briefing will focus on the following
points: the status of implementation of the road map
of African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in
Central Africa, the agenda of the Initiative and the
impact it has had on the ground.

With regard to the status of implementation, the
panel of facilitators undertook a first field visit in
November and December 2017 to meet with the senior
military and political leadership of 14 armed groups
recognized by the Government. The main objectives
of the field mission were to establish initial contact
between the armed groups and the panel of facilitators
with a view to creating an atmosphere of trust, deliver
a message from the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission to the armed groups, invite them to join
the Initiative's road map, and hear the armed groups'
demands. At the end of the first field visit, the main
concerns voiced were political, socioeconomic,
security-related, administrative and judicial. In
addition to meeting with armed groups, the panel
also met with local players in civil and political life
to hear their concerns. In the interests of transparency
and openness, the results of these conversations were
shared with the Head of State, the President and other
the senior-ranking members of the National Assembly,
the political parties, the diplomatic corps, civil-
society organizations and the general public through a
press conference.

Secondly, with regard to the agenda of the Initiative,
from 19 February to 17 March the panel will have been
in the field for its second visit, during which it will meet
the same players as in the first field visit. The main
objectives of this round are to extract written demands
and proposed solutions from the parties, build on the
trust established between the panel and the armed
groups in the first round, prepare the armed groups
for dialogue with the Government, obtain a firmer
commitment to non-violence, and create conditions that
ensure the safety of all populations and respect for State
authority and humanitarian actors. At the end of this
second round, the groups' demands will be submitted
to the Government for study. A seminar on capacity-
building for the peaceful resolution of conflicts and
crises will be organized for the armed groups and
local players in civil and political life. After that, the
dialogue with the Government will be organized.

Thirdly, with regard to the Initiative's impact, signs
of hope for a peace agreement were already perceptible
at the end of the first field visit. All the armed groups
with which we met welcomed the message of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, who
called on them to join the peace and reconciliation
process and to end all forms of violence. They have read
the content of the Initiative road map and are committed
to reporting back to their respective bases. They shared
their concerns with the panel of facilitators and showed
their willingness to discuss issues of concern with
the Government.

During the first round, it was also agreed to
establish a permanent contact group between the
panel and the armed groups. Through this mechanism,
the panel questioned armed groups that had engaged
in confrontations or shown a desire to undermine
peace. This effort has contributed to lowering tensions
in certain regions, causing some leaders of the
politico-military movements to change their positions
and accept diplomats and prefects in their areas, as
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga mentioned earlier, and to
persuading others to agree to renounce confrontation
and enter into the disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration programme. These
results are also the combined outcome of the efforts
of the Central African authorities and the integrated
action of all partners in the international community,
who have been resolutely committed to finding peace
in the Central African Republic. In this respect, I
welcome the Security Council's adoption of resolution
2387 (2017).

In conclusion, and to make a recommendation on
security, a small amount of progress has clearly been
made, but it is progress all the same, particularly when
we keep in mind the depth and duration of the crisis
in the Central African Republic. It is true that what
follows is likely to be difficult, but all those living in the
Central African Republic have witnessed the progress
made thus far and expressed optimism and hope for a
peaceful resolution of the crisis in the country.

I therefore renew my plea for the continued
support and solidarity of the Security Council and the
international community as a whole for the Central
African Republic, specifically by encouraging President
Faustin Archange Touadera and his Government to
selflessly pursue their many efforts that are beginning
to yield good results, by making a forceful appeal to the
armed groups to fully participate in the dialogue process
that is currently being prepared, and by assisting the
panel so that it may continue to develop its programme.

I also take this opportunity to reiterate my thanks
to Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations and
Head of MINUSCA, and his entire team for their full
support and assistance in the ongoing political process.
My thanks also go to the European Union and other
development partners.

The five minutes allocated to me could not be
enough to outline in full detail what is happening in the
Central African Republic. But we who are on the ground
are committed and determined, and we believe that the
Central African people deserve our assistance through
to the end of this effort and that we shall achieve peace
in the Central African Republic in 2018.

