President Preval (spoke in French): I thank you
wholeheartedly, President Santos Calderon, for giving
me the opportunity to speak one final time to a United
Nations body as President of Haiti, in particular since
this meeting has been specially dedicated to the
situation in my country.

The 25 years of Haiti's political life following the
1986 departure of the Duvalier dictatorship have been
characterized by so much instability that, I am sad to
note, in one-quarter of a century I am the only
President to have completed a first and then a second
constitutional term and the only one in 25 years to
never have been jailed or exiled.

My first term was inaugurated in 1996 with the
presence of the United Nations Support Mission in
Haiti; in 2000, with security and stability apparently
restored, United Nations troops left Haiti. These events
qualify me, I think, to make a modest contribution to
the discussion this morning with respect both to my
compatriots and to the United Nations, which it is my
pleasure once again to thank for assisting Haiti during
our difficult moments past and present.

To my compatriots who are living with the
legitimate pain of the presence of foreign soldiers on
our soil, I say that the United Nations peacekeeping
operations were made necessary each time by
instability created by the citizens themselves. Foreign
interventions on our soil have always been preceded,
for example in 1993, by a military coup d'e'tat, or in
2004, by internal fighting that led to the breakdown of
the democratic process resulting from the toppling of
the constitutional President.

I therefore call on Haiti's future executive and
legislative leaders emerging from the recent elections
to govern in a spirit of peace, openness, inclusion,
dialogue and respect for the rights of association and
expression. I also call on the opposition to adopt a
positive attitude of cooperation, even in its role as
Government critic. I call on all Haitian civil society
organizations, and in particular our press, to make
better use of a freedom that has cost so much, yet
remains incompletely mastered.

Allow me to commemorate within this forum the
memory of a courageous journalist, Mr. Jean
Dominique, who was assassinated on 3 April 2000 in a
cowardly manner. Eleven long years later, we still
await the conclusion of the judicial investigation of
that crime.

Finally, I say to the people that stability also
requires a realistic understanding of the serious
challenges to be addressed by the new entering
Government, especially following the disaster of
12 January 2010.

On 31 March 2010 here at United Nations
Headquarters, the international community promised to
provide significant resources for Haiti's reconstruction.
The Interim Haiti Recovery Commission referred to by
President Clinton has made progress. I call on donors
to hasten disbursements because, in spite of the
courage and patience of the Haitian people, patience
has its limits.

To the United Nations system, and particularly to
the Security Council, I would suggest some reflection
on the effectiveness of interventions that have led to
nearly 11 years of military presence in a country where
no war is being fought. Since 1993, Haiti has seen
successively the United Nations Mission in Haiti, the
United Nations Support Mission in Haiti, the United
Nations Transition Mission in Haiti, United Nations
Civilian Police Mission in Haiti, the International
Civilian Support Mission in Haiti, and, since 2004, the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). Apart from MICIVIH, established in
1993 pursuant to General Assembly resolution 47/20 B
with the mandate of observing and promoting human
rights, all the other missions were established by the
Security Council with a peacekeeping objective.

While it is true that in 1993 the first
peacekeeping mission risked clashing with the Haitian
armed forces that had carried out the bloody coup of
1991; and that in 2004 another had to contend with
heavily armed organized groups, then that possibility
justified a significant military presence. But once the
danger of violent confrontation had passed, the
peacekeeping operations did not adapt quickly enough
to the new situation.
Instability in Haiti is, as President Santos
Calderon stressed, fundamentally due to
underdevelopment - in other words, unsatisfied
elementary socio-economic rights. Tanks, armoured
vehicles and soldiers should have given way to
bulldozers, engineers, and more police instructors and
experts in support of the judicial and penal systems.

On 14 May 2006, at my swearing-in ceremony, I
emphasized that need, but unfortunately my words
went unheard. I hope that after 11 years we will be able
to draw the conclusions that can help strengthen
stability in Haiti in the way that I have just noted.

Clearly, reorienting peacekeeping missions does
not exclude the work of other specialized institutions,
such as the World Bank, or United Nations funds and
programmes, such as the World Health Organization,
UNESCO, the Food and Agriculture Organization, the
World Food Programme, UNICEF, the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations
Development Fund for Women, and so forth. Let me
repeat that military deterrence is only one aspect of the
quest for stability and should not be mistaken for the
whole. Stability will be achieved only by Haitians
themselves, with, of course, the solidarity of the
international community, which can assist them in
building those institutions essential to the rule of law.

The drug problem remains another source of
political instability in Haiti. Haiti neither produces nor
consumes drugs. As long as there is a demand for drugs
in northern nations, the producers and traffickers will
continue to use weaker countries for their manufacture
and transit, and will strive to weaken those countries
further by fostering corruption, destabilization and
violence. Haiti is thus a victim of countries that
consume drugs, as are the producer and other transit
countries. The consumer nations should therefore
institute a policy of reducing demand, at the same time
as or even before combating drug trafficking, whether
in Haiti or the producer and transit countries.

No demand means no production and no supply.
It is time that the drug problem was tackled globally
and that drug reports no longer merely stigmatize the
producer and transit countries that are victims of the
demand. I cannot say how many times I have appealed
to the United States authorities, particularly the Drug
Enforcement Administration, for strengthened
cooperation in the fight against drug trafficking. In this
regard, I am a firm supporter of resolution 1892
(2009), which, in paragraph 11, invites "Member
States, including neighbouring and regional States, to
strengthen their engagement with the Government of
Haiti" to address cross-border trafficking, not only of
drugs but also of arms.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
Haiti's psyche has been drastically affected by the
enormous number of crimes against individuals that
our people have suffered during the past 50 years
without receiving justice, from the establishment of the
Duvalier dictatorship to the present day. That impunity
is still intolerable and continues to present an obstacle
to the quest for social pacification. There is no question
that justice must take its course, and it is urgent that
the Haitian State work to strengthen the judicial system
so that independent authority can accomplish its
constitutional mission. It is also extremely important
that the truth be revealed in all its nuances. To that end,
civil society should be mobilized, I suggest, through a
memory, truth and justice commission to be set up and
implemented by an independent organization - a
national office for the protection of citizens.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
noting in his report of 24 March that:

"It will also be incumbent upon the incoming
Administration to build on the achievements of
the Preval presidency, which put an end to State-
sponsored political violence and allowed Haitians
to enjoy freedom of association and expression"
(S/2011/183 *, para. 82).

My wish, in fact, is that the democratic gains be
maintained and that the people of Haiti, both the
governing and the governed, with the support of the
international community, take up the tremendous
challenges of the reconstruction and re-establishment
of our country resulting from our endemic poverty and
especially from the consequences of the natural
disasters that hit us in 2010.

I thank Mr. Mulet very much and congratulate
him on the work done by MINUSTAH under his
leadership.

