The President: I thank the representative of
Guinea for his kind offer of cooperation.

I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity.

As a future member of the European Union,
Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement that will be
made shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Denmark on behalf of the European Union. I would
like to make some additional comments of particular
importance to my country.

Presiding over the Security Council in its open
meeting on Kosovo is of significant importance to
Bulgaria. The situation in the province continues to
have a great impact on the whole region of South-
Eastern Europe. Like other delegations, we are
convinced that a visit by the Council to Kosovo and the
region would be useful with regard to political
developments.

On the eve of the municipal elections in Kosovo,
Bulgaria is confident that the process of democratic
institution-building, the establishment of the rule of
law, the strengthening of overall security, economic
recovery and respect for human rights are gradually
becoming an integral part of everyday life in the
province. My country strongly endorses the efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Michael Steiner, and of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to
normalize life in Kosovo.

The United Nations plays a central role in the
province, clearly defined in Security Council resolution
1244 (1999). We consider the presence of UNMIK and
KFOR in Kosovo to be a key factor, providing a
favourable environment for its democratic transition
and transformation.

The progress achieved in building multi-ethnic
provisional institutions of self-government in Kosovo
under the constitutional framework is remarkable. At
the same time, we deem the attempts of extremists to
contest or undermine the supremacy of the United
Nations jurisdiction in the province totally
irresponsible and unacceptable.

Bulgaria would like to reaffirm its strong support
for Mr. Steiner's sustained efforts to establish the rule
of law in Kosovo through UNMIK's policy of zero
tolerance of crime and violence. Bulgaria continues to
stress the need to finally complete the investigation of
the cruel assassination in 1999 of the Bulgarian citizen
and United Nations offlcial Mr. Valentin Kroumov and
to punish the perpetrators.

Bulgaria commends the determination of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and of
UNMIK to bring to justice those responsible for acts of
violence, regardless of their ethnicity. Neither the rule
of law nor reconciliation among Kosovars of all
communities can be established without allowing the
law enforcement authorities to do their work. We
deplore the recent acts of violence against UNMIK
police and KFOR and consider them an irresponsible
challenge to United Nations authority in the province.

My country believes and fervently hopes that
Kosovo's future will be a multi-ethnic one. No other
solution should be tolerated by the international
community. Therefore, we urge Kosovo's institutions
of self-government, UNMIK and the Belgrade
authorities to work together in a cooperative way and
to find a lasting solution to the refugees' problems.

Throughout the past decade of violence at its
western borders, Bulgaria has played a significant role
in the stabilization of the region. We will remain
committed to that role in the future. Bulgaria is
participating with a substantial number of officers,
nearly 100 persons, in Kosovo's civilian police force,
and one platoon under KFOR command. My country is
providing additional personnel for the forthcoming
municipal elections in October under the monitoring
mechanism of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. We shall continue to provide
the necessary support for peacekeeping operations in
the Western Balkans region.

However, the rule of law and democratic
governance cannot operate in an economic vacuum.
Here I agree with what was said earlier by the British
delegation. Economic stability guaranteed by
substantial infrastructural investment - let me call it
"infrastructural revolution" - in the region is needed
as a precondition for sustainable development and
prosperity. The improvement of general living
conditions for all Kosovars - regardless of their ethnic
origin i is evident, but the process of healing the
wounds of the past needs more time. Therefore, the
international community must take a realistic and
constructive approach to the time frame for the post-
conflict rehabilitation and development of Kosovo.
Bulgaria is adamant that Kosovo's future lies in a
united Europe created by the process of European
integration.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

