Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom sponsored resolution 2036 (2012)
because the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) needs the right support to help it work with
the Somali security forces to secure a more stable and
peaceful Somalia. The resolution gives AMISOM. the
troops and resources necessary to enable it to
effectively capitalize on the gains already made and to
increase the military pressure on Al-Shabaab.
I am grateful for colleagues' support during the
negotiations on the resolution. It marks an important
step in advance of the London conference on Somalia
tomorrow, which will look at the wider international
approach to Somalia.

The Council's decision today was informed by a
joint United Nations-African Union planning on
AMISOM. in a technical assessment mission, the
development of an African Union-AMISOM. strategic
concept and the Secretary-General's special report
(S/2012/74) on AMISOM. The AMISOM. strategic
concept and the Secretary-General's report gave the
Council a clear view on what AMISOM. needed to
make progress in Somalia.

AMISOM. needed troop levels to increase to
17,731, and it needed more sustainable and predictable
funding. The resolution adopted today gives AMISOM
those tools, increasing troop numbers to the required
level and increasing funding for the AMISOM
operation from the United Nations logistical package.
The resolution also gives AMISOM. a clearer mandate
to operate, promoting effective regional coordination
and cooperation and stressing the importance of the
development of effective Somali security forces. That
is important to ensure that military action in Somalia is
undertaken carefully and contributes to the wider
political strategy for Somalia.

An expanded and better resourced AMISOM. will
help increase areas of stability in Somalia. It will help
the political process in Somalia by enabling Somalis
outside the capital to take part in the political and
constitutional process, making that process more
representative and legitimate. Expanding AMISOM. to
areas beyond Mogadishu will increase the pressure on
Al-Shabaab and further decrease the space available
to 1t.

Capacity-building needs to be at the heart of the
relationship between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) and its subregional organizations.
That will help those organizations to deliver the
responsibilities they have assumed for peace and
security on the continent and to build on the progress
made in developing the African peace and security
architecture. We encourage the cooperation and
coordination between the AU and the United Nations
on AMISOM. to continue and to develop in the future.

The United Kingdom recognizes the important
role that regional organizations can play in the pursuit
12-23786
of peace and security in Africa and elsewhere.
AMISOM's success demonstrates that. The resolution
adopted today provides AMISOM. with the support it
needs and deserves.

