Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for this fresh opportunity for
dialogue with our police commanders and the Security
Council in the framework of following up on last year's
resolution 2158 (2014). I am pleased to see here three
high-level officials of our police components, and I
fully agree that our dialogue must be as interactive as
possible.

I wish at the outset to make a few brief remarks.

First, while we most often associate peacekeeping
with military Blue Helmets, in reality the protection
of civilians is frequently primarily the responsibility
of the police. The reason is very simple: these men
and women have been trained, and their vocation is to
engage with the community, analyse potential threats
and, if necessary, take action. Police forces throughout
the world probably represent the greatest reservoir of
expertise in the area of protection. It is a reservoir that
we have only just started to tap into, but I think that its
potential is considerable.

It is clear that over the past 10 years, the number
of police troops in missions, of which 10 have civilian-
protection mandates, has nearly tripled, to almost 13,000
police deployed, most frequently with multidimensional
mandates. I therefore take this opportunity to welcome
this expansion and thank the aforementioned for their
contributions.

In fact, the face of the United Nations police is
very frequently the one that local communities see
first, because it is they who have a relationship with the
community, who build relationships at the local level and
reflect one ofthe principles ofpeacekeeping: that it must
be people-centred. Indeed, their contribution has been
reaffirmed in the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446).

Protection must start out as unarmed protection,
through the building of relationships with the community.
But it cannot be ruled out that this protection might
become, in very specific circumstances, a physical
contribution that, when circumstances dictate, requires
the use of force. For example, the Bangui task force,
in its normal configuration, was under the authority of
the police component; then that was changed, for the
time being, following the incidents that took place at
the end of September. But we did see clearly the role
that the police played in protecting, inter alia, camps
for internally displaced persons, and also in preventing
attacks that could have resulted in many victims, for
instance when one of the camps was attacked by 200
armed ex-Seleka members. I think, therefore, that this
is very important. At the same time, the police presence
tends to decrease the number of zones to which our
missions have access and where the host Government
authorities themselves may have reason to intervene.

Ultimately, we have developed a mode of operations
that is being used, for instance, by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, where joint operations
with the Haitian National Police, United Nations police
and the United Nations military components have
allowed the the re-establishment of a certain degree of
security in the Grand Ravine slums of Port-au-Prince,
and enabled the delivery of humanitarian assistance
and medical care, as well as the restoration of order.

It can never be reiterated often enough that host
States have the primary responsibility to protect, and it
is clear that a peacekeeping mission's mandate is very
often linked to whether or not the host State authorities
are able to take up their policing responsibilities. That
is why training is a critical mission of United Nations
police. We have seen how the restructuring and
operationalization of the various police services and
gendarmerie have required vast resources in Haiti, but
we must also recognize how in Mali, for instance, some
8,800 Malian personnel have already been trainined by
our police.

I wish to make two points before I conclude. The
first concerns capacities. We have made great strides in
predeployment training on the ground. We must make
every effort to continue to professionalize our police
contingents and ensure that they are up to their job.
This will also require us to make the best use of the
standing police capacity. It is equally important that
we place growing emphasis on specialized police units
and greater language capacities. I cannot overstress the
importance of that. I am in ongoing contact with the
International Organization of la Francophonie on this
issue.

We also need more female police officers and
women's units. Our experience in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Haiti and Liberia confirms
them as a component of engagement that is extremely
important and very useful, and we should make greater
use of them.

We must also coordinate all components with the
mission advisers for the protection of civilians, child
protection, women's protection and gender. All of this
is the primary responsibility of our police leadership,
and we must continue to work on that. I recall that this
year we have drawn up our first policy document on
the protection of civilians in peacekeeping, along with
guidelines for the military. We are in the process of
drafting guidelines for the police, and will be happy to
share them with the Security Council.

In conclusion, I would urge the Security Council,
through you, Sir, to always communicate its directives
and requests to us as clearly as possible. We will
be able to do our jobs effectively only if we have
a crystal-clear strategic policy and if we enjoy the
Council's support - as we generally do - vis-a-vis the
host countries, which are not always as receptive as we
would wish. Let us continue to strive in that direction.

