Mr. Takasu (Japan): Let me also begin, Madam
President, by welcoming the holding of this open
debate under your presidency. I should also like to
express my deep gratitude to President Clinton, United
Nations Special Envoy for Haiti. I am also grateful for
the briefing by Special Representative Annabi. I also
welcome Prime Minister Michele Duvivier
Pierre-Louis and thank her for her presence here today,
and in particular for the hospitality extended to our
mission a few months ago, which was extremely
productive and useful for all of us.

In the past six months, several important events
have served to heighten interest in supporting of Haiti.
In particular, the donors conference held in
Washington, D.C., was very important. Many
countries, including Japan, expressed strong support
for Haiti's development. Part of the challenge now
before us is twofold. First, the international community
needs to attach much more importance to, and focus
on, development in Haiti. The second objective is to
mobilize support and broaden the basis of that support
to deal with current issues confronting Haiti, such as
recovering from a series of hurricanes, food insecurity
and youth unemployment. We very much believe that
today's timely debate in the Council will contribute to
those two objectives.

The three important statements we heard this
afternoon contain priority concerns and prescriptions
we should jointly focus on. I would like to discuss only
three essential points regarding the stabilization of
Haiti. The first point is the political process.

After the Security Council mission to Haiti, the
senatorial elections took place, representing an
important political process. We welcome the fact that
elections were successfully organized without major
disruption. However, to increase public engagement in
the political process, it is critical for the Government to
initiate legal action against the crimes alleged to have
taken place in this process. Depending on progress in
future political processes, including in the forthcoming
elections to the Chamber of Deputies and the
presidential election, there is a possibility that
domestic tensions may rise. The international
community must continue to carefully monitor the
political situation in the country.

The second point relates to the security situation,
which has been relatively calm thanks largely to the
efforts of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH). We welcome the good progress
that has been made, particularly in building the Haitian
National Police. At the same time, we must be mindful
that the situation remains fragile and that social unrest
may occur again if poverty is not alleviated and basic
livelihoods for the population are not secured.

It is important to note that the Haitian National
Police has not reached the necessary capacity to
conduct policing successfully without the support of
MINUSTAH. Continued technical support from
MINUSTAH will be indispensable until at least 2011,
when the Haitian National Police will achieve its target
of building a strong professional force of 14,000. We
believe, therefore, that the presence of MINUSTAH
troops and police will continue to be critical, and we
are thus in favour of the extension of the Mission's
mandate, but we also expect that MINUSTAH will
implement its mandate effectively and efficiently to
meet the benchmarks in its consolidation plan.

The third point concerns economic and social
development. The biggest challenges in Haiti are
underdevelopment and poverty. In order to stabilize the
country, food security and job creation in particular are
two of the issues that must be tackled urgently and
forcefully. Those countries that made pledges at the
donors conference should give concrete shape to their
support, and efforts must be made to broaden the
political and financial support base and to improve
coordination.

In that connection, Japan pledged $50 million at
the conference to support the implementation of the
Poverty Reduction Strategy. Since then, we have sent a
mission to discuss the details of this implementation,
consulted with the Haitian Government and decided to
offer support in the fields of food security, health care,
education, human resource development, the
environment and disaster protection. It is also good
news that the Paris Club countries have cancelled the
country's entire bilateral debt.

In order to create jobs and promote vibrant
economic activity, however, we believe that not only
the support of the public sector but also the active
engagement of the private sector, including the
diaspora, are essential. We should make much greater
effort to bring about tangible change in people's daily
economic life by facilitating trade and investment
involving the private sector. In this regard, I commend
the initiative of President Clinton to lead an
international trade mission of private investors to Haiti
in October. We hope that the mission will have a
positive influence on the stabilization of the country
and promote investment in various sectors in the near
future. The Haitian Government, for its part, needs to
ensure that the legislative and regulatory environment
and facilities in the country are not only attractive to
investment, but also conducive to transparency in the
market.

I would like to conclude by thanking those
countries that have contributed valuable troops, police
and logistical support, as they have helped to bring
about significant improvement in stabilization under
difficult circumstances.
