Mr. Fiallo Billini Portorreal (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the
holding of this informative meeting. We thank Special
Representative Zahir Tanin for his briefing on the
situation in Kosovo from 16 October to 15 January. We
would also like to thank the representatives of Serbia
and Kosovo, who are with us today.

We welcome Mr. Tanin's introduction of the
Secretary-General's detailed report (S/2019/102). The
Dominican Republic believes that much progress has
been made on the ground, despite the many setbacks
since the deployment of the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK), pursuant to
resolution 1244 (1999). We note that Belgrade and
Pristina are on the right track to a lasting normalization
of their relations, through the facilitation of the European
Union. However, it is fitting to urge the parties at this
time to adopt more flexible positions and to commit
themselves to supporting the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999) and the 2013 Brussels Agreement.
We recommend that the necessary initiatives be taken
to reduce tensions and that communication between
Pristina and Belgrade be reopened in order to give
way to a constructive exchange that will allow them to
continue to make progress in the negotiations to reach
a solution.

Our delegation believes that it is necessary to
redirect our efforts towards the common good, to foster
intercommunal trust and to seek a viable agreement
for all exclusively through political dialogue. In that
regard, we support opening new spaces to strengthen
the leadership of women and young people so that
they can begin to play a more influential role in the
dynamics of the normalization process.

The Dominican Republic supports UNMIK and
therefore recognizes the impact of the situation on peace
and security throughout the Balkan subregion. In that
regard, we reaffirm our belief that the parties will reach
an agreement based on the principles of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, multilateralism, the Charter of
the United Nations and the provisions of international
law. We believe that now is the time to conclude the
long chapter of fruitless confrontations and to allow for
the possibility of a future where respect for peaceful
coexistence is the lasting bridge to the sustainable
development of their communities and the solution of
present and future problems.

Lastly, we thank UNMIK, the Kosovo Force, the
European Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe for their work in Kosovo in the
quest for peace, under the auspices of the Council.

