Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Let me start by mentioning
that Georgia fully associates itself with the statement
by the observer the European Union. Allow me to add
some comments in my national capacity.
First of all, I, too, would like to join in expressing
sympathy to the families of the victims and to
remember those who fell to the terrorist attack against
United Nations headquarters in Baghdad on this sad
anniversary day: Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Ms. Nadia
Younes, Mr. Jean-Selim Kanaan and others.

Let me express my gratitude for this timely
opportunity to address the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and, more important, to
consider ways to increase the effectiveness of the
United Nations community in that regard.

Today, unfortunately, the urgent nature of this issue
is underscored by the ongoing tragic developments in
the Middle East and other places of the world. While
reflecting on the importance of our endeavours, we
have to confess that millions ofpeople worldwide suffer
from armed conflict and its consequences, are deprived
of their fundamental rights and freedoms, separated
from their families and expelled from their places of
permanent residence. In that context, the role of the
international community is crucial in undertaking
immediate and concrete actions to protect lives of
civilians and ensure their basic rights.

The problem of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and from its consequences is especially painful
for my country, as five years after the Russia-Georgia
war it continues to suffer from the effects of the armed
conflict imprinted on lives of hundreds of thousands of
Georgian citizens. In spite of numerous international
calls, emanating, inter alia, from the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions on the
subject of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
refugees, and notwithstanding the serious concerns
raised by the relevant United Nations agencies,
hundreds of thousands of IDPs and refugees continue to
be deprived of their internationally recognized right to
return to their homes in a voluntary, safe and dignified
manner.

In spite of the comprehensive efforts of the
Government of Georgia to alleviate the burden of the
displaced, the failure of a relevant actor to recognize
their inalienable right to return prevents any sustainable
solution. Furthermore, that creates an obstacle to the
implementation of international humanitarian law,
human rights law and refugee law, not only in Georgia,
but worldwide.

The continuous endeavours of the Geneva
international discussion co-chairs, among them the
representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Antti Turunen, and other United Nations actors who
aimed to remedy the humanitarian challenges, have
been repeatedly undermined. Those endeavours, which
the Government of Georgia highly values, still require
continuous political support and practical assistance
from the United Nations community.

Five years after the war, unfortunately, the
unresolved conflict continues to exacerbate the
already fragile humanitarian situation, and it affects
the everyday lives of the local population. The
Government of Georgia is extremely concerned about
the humanitarian and human rights consequences of the
installation of barbed-wire fences and embankments in
the Tskhinvali and Abkhazia regions, a process that
has been intensified since January. As a result, local
residents were compelled to leave their permanent
places of residence, thereby creating a new wave of
internally displaced persons and refugees.

People residing within the Tskhinvali and
Abkhazia regions of Georgia and in the adjacent areas
are deprived of their fundamental rights and freedoms,
including, but not limited to, the freedom of movement,
the right to receive education in their mother tongue,
and other civil and economic liberties. Sadly, the drastic
regulations imposed for crossing the occupation lines
and heavy restrictions on the freedom of movement
extend even to the most vulnerable of the population
seeking immediate medical assistance.

Another vital matter pertains to the ability of the
international community to assess and monitor the
human rights situation in the areas where the central
Government is denied its sovereign rights and that are
under foreign effective control and military presence.
After the unilateral blocking of the mandate of the
United Nations monitoring mission in Georgia in 2009,
the vacuum in terms of international presence has not
been overcome. As a result of artificially imposed
obstacles, the European Union Monitoring Mission, the
only international mission on the territory of Georgia,
lacks the ability to thoroughly implement its mandate
and monitor the security and human rights situation
inside the regions of Georgia.

In those circumstances, to comply with the human
rights law, a party exercising effective control has the
primary responsibility to provide such protection of
human rights, and accountability for violations in the
case of their infringement.

The paramount problem - clearly stressed by the
European Union - concerns the importance of safe
and unimpeded humanitarian access to the conflict-
affected population. The Government of Georgia
urges the relevant party to grant unimpeded access by
humanitarian organizations to the conflict-affected
population residing in the Georgian regions under its
control. We believe that humanitarian issues should
not be used as instruments for political considerations,
but should be implemented purely on the basis of
humanitarian needs. The relevant international actors
must be allowed to carry out their activities according to
their respective mandates. International humanitarian
law prescribes the threshold for the minimum level of
protection for the civilian population; that needs to be
respected by all.

Strengthening our common efforts to protect
civilians in armed conflicts is our responsibility, which
is fully realized by every member of the United Nations
family. We need to take concrete and tangible steps
to alleviate the consequences of armed hostilities on
civilians and to safeguard their rights and freedoms.

I would like to once again subscribe to the European
Union statement and to call on all the relevant actors in
ongoing armed conflicts and hostilities to ensure rapid,
safe and unimpeded humanitarian access to affected
populations. For its part, Georgia stands ready to
contribute to concerted international efforts and ensure
more effective protection of civilian populations during
armed conflicts and in the post-conflict phase, while
also siding with the global effort towards peace and
security.

