Mr. Macay (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) is a priority for Belarus in the area of
international security. Adopted more than a decade
ago, resolution 1540 (2004) is more needed than
ever as a mechanism for ensuring and strengthening
international security. We believe that, above all, the
best way at the national level to prevent the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) involves an
effective mechanism for counteracting the illegal trade
in WMDs and related materials.

Belarus pursues a consistent and responsible
policy in this area and is party to all major
international agreements on nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation. We became the first State to
voluntarily renounce the possession of the nuclear
weapons inherited after the collapse of the Soviet
Union. In 1996, exactly 20 years ago, we completed
the full removal of nuclear weapons from the territory
of Belarus.

Belarus remains committed to resolution 1540
(2004). In 2012, Belarus, in close cooperation with
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and the Office for Disarmament
Affairs, adopted a road map for the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) at the national level. Special
attention was paid to export control, as well as to the
control of biological materials. A number of measures
enshrinedinthe roadmap have alreadybeenincorporated
in our national legislation. For example, Belarus has in
place a multilayer system of export controls that allow
us to efficiently counteract the spread of WMDs and
related materials. When developing that instrument, we
took into account best practices in the nuclear sphere.

In 2016, we adopted a new edition of our laws on
export control, a well as a new edition of our laws on
the sanitary epidemiological welfare of our population.
This document includes, inter alia, improved rules
on the storage, transport and procedures regarding
pathogenic microorganisms that fall into risk groups 1
to 4 of the World Health Organization. Belarus is open
to active cooperation with States in the region ofEurasia
on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). A
prime example of that cooperation was the trilateral
meeting for a peer review between Kyrgyzstan and
Tajikistan supported by Belarus, on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), which was held in the 2+1
format in Minsk in 2016. That review was the second
event of its kind in the OSCE region - in the whole
world, for that matter - and the first meeting to be
held in a trilateral format. We intend to continue
provide assistance to Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and other
States in the implementation of such a vitally important
international tool, namely, resolution 1540 (2004).

We are planning to hold another seminar for
members of the Commonwealth of Independent States
on the implementation of this resolution. The first
such seminar was held in 2013 in Minsk. It produced
informal recommendations on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

