Mr. Roet (Israel): The alarming threat of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
to non-State actors continues to grow. Advances in
science and technology, alongside the evolving nature
of terror, present challenges never before seen.

To stop the proliferation of chemical, biological
and nuclear weapons to ill-intentioned actors, the
Security Council adopted resolution 1540 (2004), the
only legally binding document dedicated specifically
to the non-proliferation of WMD and their means of
delivery to non-State actors, especially terrorists.
Israel understands the severity of this issue first-
hand, as our citizens live under constant threat, both
conventional and unconventional. As such, we consider
the non-proliferation of WMD a top priority.

In recent years, the absolute norm against the use of
chemical weapons has been eroded and challenged time
and again. Failing States have transformed the Middle
East region into a breeding ground for terrorists. The
recklessness of some States has aggravated the threat of
proliferation of WMD to non-State actors.

The Al-Assad regime's systematic use of chemical
weapons has incentivized terrorists and non-State
actors to obtain the materials and know-how to produce
and deploy WMD. It is clear, therefore, that the
responsibility for the proliferation of chemical weapons
in Syria lies squarely at the feet of Al-Assad.

The United Nations-Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) found both the Al-Assad regime and
Da'esh guilty of employing chemical weapons against
innocent civilians. Last fall, after the JIM. concluded
that the Syrian regime was responsible for three
chemical attacks, some in the international community
had hoped this finding would deter Al-Assad from
continuing to carry out such horrible attacks. But,
sadly, they were wrong.

On 4 April, at 6:30 a.m., the Al-Assad regime
bombarded the people of Khan Shaykhun, a small town
in the Hama area, with air strikes including sarin gas.
As a first responder recalled:

"I saw something I had never seen in my life
children trying to breathe a gasp of air, with saliva
and foam coming out of their mouths and nostrils".

With approximately 100 people killed and hundreds
more wounded that morning, the attack on Khan
Shaykhun is the latest example of the repeated abuses
committed against innocent Syrians since 2013. The
Al-Assad regime's systematic use of chemical weapons
must be stopped.

Resolution 1540 (2004) prohibits the proliferation
of WMD and their means of delivery. The development
and testing of ballistic missiles increases the risk
of proliferation of this means of delivery. Having
developed and fired ballistic missiles consistently since
the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015), Iran has done its
part to increase this global threat.

On 18 and 19 June, Iran fired six Zulfiqar surface-to-
surface missiles and one Qiam medium-range missile at
the Deir ez-Zor area in Syria, claiming to have been
targeting Da'esh. Following these launches, Sheikh
Hussein al-Islam, an adviser to Iran's Foreign Minister,
made Iran's true intention clear. He stated:

"Israel is the main enemy of Iran. I think [Israel]
understood the message. It now has to worry."

The international community must understand this
message. It cannot ignore such a direct threat by one
Member State against another.

Today I shall use this forum to present new
information outlining yet another unacceptable, blatant
threat by Iran against Israel. This information has only
recently come to light. Last December, Iran conducted
a launch test of the Qiam, a Missile Technology Control
Regime (MTCR) category 1 missile that can carry a
nuclear warhead. The missile landed very close to the
target: a bullseye shaped like a Star of David. This use
of the Star of David, the symbol of the Jewish people,
for target practice is hateful and unacceptable.

In the light of Iran's missile launches, support
for terror and bolstering of Al-Assad's murderous
regime, the Security Council must guarantee Iran's full
compliance with the relevant resolutions, especially
on the eve of the Security Council's briefing on
non-proliferation.

Over the years, Israel has taken extensive steps
to implement resolution 1540 (2004). Israel has
joined the Group of Friends of resolution 1540 and
supports the statement delivered by the representative
of Spain on behalf of the Group today. The Israeli
Government has instituted intelligence-gathering
and intelligence-sharing improvements in border
control and the development of advanced detection
and identification devices. Israel has also enhanced
facility and relevant dual-use material security as well
as the strengthening of export controls. We believe
that this multipronged strategy is key to the successful
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

Finally, the international community must take
clear action to counter State-sponsored proliferation
and the proliferation of WMD to terrorists. Israel is
fully committed to serving as an active partner in this
international effort.

