Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun and Assistant
Secretary-General Simonovie for the briefings that we
have just heard and for the detailed and thorough work
being undertaken by the United Nations human rights
monitoring mission in Ukraine.

Let me start with the positive. The United Kingdom
strongly supports the peace plan set out by President
Poroshenko on 20 June. That plan builds on earlier steps
taken by the Government of Ukraine to implement the
Geneva statement of 17 April. They include holding
three rounds of national dialogue and submitting a
draft law on amnesty for those who hand over illegal
arms and who vacate illegally occupied buildings. The
Government of Ukraine has also initiated constitutional
reform and decentralization and has guaranteed
protection and a special status for the Russian language.
The peace plan constitutes a genuine and far-reaching
set of proposals, which now create a major opportunity
for de-escalation. Now is the moment for others to
reciprocate.

We welcome the fact that President Poroshenko's
peace plan has received at least a measure of support
from Russia. President Putin has described the
declaration of a ceasefire as without question an
important step towards reaching a settlement and has
said that Russia will certainly support those plans. We
also note reports from Moscow that President Putin
has asked the Russian Parliament to revoke the right
of military intervention in Ukraine. Although we
emphatically reject any suggestion that the decision by
the Russian Parliament would confer any legitimacy on
Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea, it would send a
positive signal that needs to be reinforced by positive
actions.

Russia must now back up those statements with
actions to tackle instability in southern and eastern
Ukraine. Those actions must include the following: first,
adopting effective measures to prevent the continued
flow of illegal fighters, arms and equipment from
Russia into Ukraine; secondly, applying its influence
over separatist groups to ensure that they renounce
violence, lay down their arms and commit themselves
to addressing their grievances through the peaceful and
democratic mechanisms that are available to them; and,
thirdly, continuing the withdrawal of troops from near
the Ukrainian border.

Russia has created facts on the ground through its
direct support for armed separatist groups. It must now
reverse the dynamics it has created, by preventing the
flow of arms and fighters into Ukraine and using its
influence over armed separatist groups so that they
stop their illegal activities. If that does not happen,
the countries of the European Union, including at
the Foreign Affairs Council meeting yesterday, have
reiterated their readiness to take further measures
against Russia.

I now come to the latest human rights monitoring
report. The Ukrainian Government has engaged
constructively with the mission, highlighting its
commitment to transparency and to upholding the
human rights of its citizens. It is disappointing
that, once again, Russian Government sources have
criticized the report and impugned the professionalism
and integrity of the monitors and of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights as a whole. We encourage the Government of
Ukraine to address concerns raised in the mission's
report of a lack of cooperation among the six different
investigations into the tragic events of2 May in Odessa,
what Mr. Simonovie called "grave inaction" just now.
We also urge the Government to ensure the security of
all diplomatic missions. We condemn unreservedly the
attack against the Russian Embassy in Kyiv on 14 June.
Establishing confidence in the rule of law in Ukraine
is essential. The United Kingdom, together with our
partners, is ready to support the Ukrainian Government
as they tackle reforms in those areas.

The mission's latest report highlights the role
played by illegal armed groups in Donetsk and Luhansk
in preventing many voters in those regions from
participating in the presidential elections of25 May. The
separatist tactics of threatening, beating and abducting
staff of the Electoral Commission, destroying voter
lists and ballot boxes and seizing control of polling
stations demonstrate a contempt for democracy and a
determination to prevent the people of those regions
from having a voice in the future of Ukraine.

As the latest report underlines, the actions ofillegal
armed groups have led to a deterioration in the human
rights situation in Donetsk and Luhansk. Having
Violently seized control, those groups are failing
to provide public services and are damaging vital
infrastructure. We are deeply disturbed by the mission's
findings of abductions, detentions, ill treatment,
torture, looting and killings being carried out by those
groups against the broader civilian population.

The monitoring mission has reported 222 cases
of abductions and detentions by illegal armed groups.
They have also recorded numerous allegations of ill
treatment and torture, starvation of prisoners, beatings,
electric shocks and even amputation, which are all
reportedly being used by pro-Russian groups. It is
no surprise that the mission's report concludes that
areas under separatist control are characterized by an
atmosphere of fear and intimidation.

The monitoring mission's report cites compelling
evidence of the use of propaganda and misinformation
to generate a climate of fear and instability in Ukraine.
That includes the use by the Russian media of doctored
photographs and re-purposed film footage. The report
notes, for example, the footage used to substantiate
claims that Ukraine was using United Nations marked
helicopters, a claim also made in the Chamber by the
Russian Federation, was in fact filmed in other countries
at an earlier date. For example, a photograph of such
a helicopter presented by Russia as evidence to the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) was in fact taken in 2011 in Cote d'Ivoire.
There are numerous other examples of misinformation,
including footage claiming to show incendiary weapons
being used by the Ukrainian military, which was in fact
filmed in November 2004 in Iraq. On one occasion
recently, the Russian Permanent Representative urged
us all to follow the Russian media for an accurate
picture of what is going on in Ukraine. On the evidence
of this report, I think that most ofus would beg to differ
with that.

The mission's latest report also confirms that
in Crimea the introduction of Russian legislation is
undermining Ukrainian citizens' enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms. Pro-Ukrainians
are being targeted and intimidated with increasing
discrimination, especially in the areas of education and
employment. We underline that the United Kingdom
will not recognize or accept Russia's illegal annexation
of Crimea.

Over a succession of Council meetings, we have
seen a deterioration of the security situation in parts of
Ukraine caused by illegal armed separatist groups. We
have seen growing evidence of human rights abuses,
in large part because of the actions of those armed
groups, and we have witnessed a growing humanitarian
challenge. The peace plan put forward by President
Poroshenko provides an opportunity to break out of that
downward spiral. Yesterday's OSCE-brokered talks in
Donetsk seem to have given positive momentum to that.
The United Kingdom urges the Council to give strong
and united support to that plan. It urges the Ukrainian
Government to press forward purposefully with its
implementation, and it urges the Russian Federation to
follow up on its positive statements with positive actions
that will cut off political and practical support to armed
separatist groups and allow a process of dialogue and
democratic engagement to take root.

