Mr. Jorda (spoke in French): Mr. President,
allow me first to express my gratitude for the honour
you have bestowed on me by providing me with the
opportunity to address the Council. I say this not just
on my own behalf but also on behalf of all of the
judges of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia (ICTY), who appointed me to my
post in November 1999. This is yet another indication
of the Council's unflagging interest in our work.

Quite recently the Council received and heard the
Prosecutor, Mrs. Del Ponte. She spoke of her concerns
and of her criminal policy. Of course, her statement
related mainly to her work. The Council will not be
surprised, therefore, that shortly thereafter, the
President of the ICTY has come here to speak in his
capacity as a judge to share with the Council the
judges' concerns about the functioning of the Tribunal.
I will be presenting these concerns on the basis of a
report we prepared, which I had the honour of filing
with the Secretary-General on 12 May last. This is
what I wish to brief the Council on.

Why are we seeking to improve, or even to
reform, the ICTY? In the document presented in
support of our proposals which was circulated to the
Council, several answers to this question can be found.
I will therefore limit my comments to emphasizing
some of the most outstanding points.

What we are saying is that the time has come to
put forward proposals designed to make our Tribunal
more effective. In this respect, we are taking up the
objectives of the Expert Group mandated by the
Secretary-General to evaluate the effectiveness of the
Tribunal's activities, pursuant to the General
Assembly's resolution of 18 December 1998. As the
Council is aware, that Group studied every aspect of
the Tribunal's functioning for more than six months.
The very significant and productive work of this Group
gave rise to 46 particularly relevant recommendations,
which have been of great benefit to the Tribunal. I can
answer questions in this respect if the Council deems it
advisable. Indeed, many of these recommendations
have already been implemented, or will soon be.

The Council may wonder why a further report is
necessary or why new proposals are needed. It is
because the perspective here is different, even
complementary.

The analytical and reflective work done by the
judges is primarily judicial and consists of the judges'
views of their own activities. More than that, however,
this is their first attempt to project themselves into the
future using as a starting point a critical evaluation of
their strictly judicial activity. Our report does not
supplant that of the Expert Group but is, in some
respects, a forward-looking extension of it.

The conclusion we have reached is that, on some
points at least, the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia must be reformed. Reform is
needed because the Tribunal is about to succeed in its
mission or, to be more precise, the missions entrusted
to it in 1993 by the Security Council.

Behind this apparent paradox are several facts
that must be taken into account in order to assess the
need for this historic instrument of international justice
to move once and for all out of the age of official
recognition to that of universal credibility, the only one
that is truly of importance to anyone seeking real
progress in the field of human rights.

More than six years after its establishment, has
the Tribunal met these expectations? Has it achieved
the missions entrusted to it?

If one attempts to move away from the scepticism
that surrounded this institution's first steps, recalling
that the Tribunal was set up at a time when the conflict
was still raging and when the leaders, the main players
in the conflict, were - and to some extent are still -
the heads of their Governments, one can objectively
conclude that the Tribunal has fulfilled many of the
hopes placed in it.

But it is impossible to gloss over the difficulties
encountered, which, in several respects, prevent me
from feeling any kind of self-satisfaction. The opposite
is true, I think. An unflinching review must be the
starting point for suggesting ways to initiate reforms
designed to transform a tentative success into a
decisive and irreversible step in the progress of
international humanitarian law.

Let me return to the responsibilities of the
Tribunal. To judge those responsible for "ethnic
cleansing", to render justice to the Victims, to prevent
recidivism and to work on ensuring that history is not
rewritten by blind revisionism was, and is, the
immense task entrusted in November 1993 to the 11
judges from the five continents who were elected by
the General Assembly.

Let us be clear: the establishment of the Tribunal
has not prevented recidivism. The fall of the Srebrenica
enclave and, later, the hundreds of thousands of
Albanians expelled from Kosovo are seared into the
hearts of those who believe in the exemplary virtue of
justice. Perhaps this weapon was not in and of itself
sufficient, or perhaps it was too tentative, to succeed in
driving away the deadly fumes of nationalism by threat
alone.

Establishing the truth behind events and
preventing all forms of revisionism have always been
the underlying objectives of all international criminal
justice systems, and in particular the system practised
in The Hague. Much has been accomplished on that
score. The atrocities committed and the plans that were
their inspiration are no longer merely the subject of
media accounts or of the descriptions of commissions
of experts, which are always vulnerable to polemic.
These events have entered into the realm of
incontrovertible judicial evidence. Vukovar, Sarajevo,
Srebrenica and so many other places where acts of
cruelty took place have also become legal sites through
the trials of the main persons accused who played the
principal roles in what happened.

But prosecuting and trying those responsible is
nevertheless the raison d'etre of any criminal court.
When it comes to an extraordinary type ofjustice, such
as that rendered in The Hague, and because the most
serious crimes committed against humanity are
involved, that justice must also be especially
exemplary. I think we would all agree on this. That
justice must also conform to the highest standards of
humanitarian international law in respect of both the
victims and the accused. In short, it must move that law
forward, a law that is constantly being reborn.

As regards the strictly judicial record, and in View
of the background on which this institution was
created, I believe one would need to be a partial or very
partisan observer - and it is true that there are still
many of those today - not to credit the Tribunal with
a certain amount of progress. I would like to recall here
that - beginning with absolutely nothing, neither a
body of judicial or procedural rules, no logistical
capacities, no budget, facilities or accused persons -
in six years the Tribunal has adopted a number of rules
and directives, including the Rules of Procedure and
Evidence, to which we shall return, the Detention
Rules, and the directive on the assignment of defence
counsel. It has set up its Detention Unit along with its
Victims and Witnesses Section. The Tribunal has
indicted 96 individuals - 36 of whom are currently in
detention - rendered 16 judgements on the merits of
cases and issued several hundred interlocutory
decisions and orders of various sorts, including some
on very important matters for which there was no
international precedent. Above all, however, I believe
it has demonstrated what is most essential: the fact that
an international judicial institution is both feasible and
operational.

Nonetheless, the time seems ripe to ask questions
as to the Tribunal's future and to attempt to anticipate
many of the difficulties that I have spoken about, and
to which I shall return, which if not got under control
and resolved may put at risk the accomplishment of its
mission and compromise its very raison d'etre. We feel
that the time is now right. The Tribunal has reached a
turning point in its history. Its very success, like many
internal or peripheral factors, has led us to propose a
number of measures to those who have the political
responsibility for deciding what is to become of the
Tribunal in the future, namely, the Security Council.

First, there are the evident and significant
political changes in the Balkan region, changes that
may even be said to be accelerating and whose impact
must be measured. These are followed by other factors
that must be considered, such as the increasingly
assertive support of the international community; in
response to our constant calls, it has ensured that we
have ever-more active cooperation with regard to
arrests, which are now increasing regularly. The
Tribunal is, as a result, confronted with the matter of
"quantitative" management, even though it cannot
yield as regards the exemplary and "qualitative"
character of its proceedings. But no matter how
exemplary our trials seek to be, they have nevertheless
become increasingly complex as judges deal with
questions and problems for which no ready-made
solutions exist in international criminal law.

The perspective of the Office of the Prosecutor
should also be included. I would like to repeat that this
body is completely independent of the judges, as it
should be. Here I am referring to criminal policy,
which we do not make, and which will be followed
much more regularly in the months and years to come.
Several dozen investigations are ongoing, which, when
added to those already conducted and completed, will
bring almost 200 accused persons to The Hague. Ms.
Del Ponte confirmed this figure to the Council two
weeks ago.

Is it conceivable that high-level political and
military officials - whether they have surrendered or
have been arrested - would spend long months in
detention awaiting trials? Pre-trial detention has
already become lengthy, which has given rise to
disputes over requests for provisional release. As the
Council knows, and I shall not go into detail, some of
those requests have been granted by judges. It is
paradoxical that such a situation should arise at a time
when the Tribunal is pressing for the arrest of all those
it has indicted.

Lastly, and not least important for both us and the
Council, the place the Tribunal now occupies within
the mechanism of international humanitarian law,
especially in View of the establishment and
implementation of the International Criminal Court,
places a degree of responsibility on the Council and on
us. In this regard, there is no question that much of
what is being done in The Hague will serve, at best, as
an example of what should be done and, at worst, as an
example of what should not be done. By demonstrating
that universal criminal justice is possible and feasible
the Tribunal has in some respects assisted in the putting
in place of a more permanent judicial organ. Still, this
demonstration must continue until the end. A failure of
the Tribunal for whatever reason would deal an
extremely heavy blow to the future Court at the very
moment that many States are on the verge of ratifying
the treaty that established it.

It must be noted that the Tribunal's prospects are
worrisome and that it is now necessary to anticipate
what may happen. The workload of the Tribunal is
currently so heavy that, if no remedy is found
immediately, the institution's very credibility will be
called into question. We owe the accused a trial that is
of course fair, but also one that is expeditious. We owe
expeditious trials to the victims and also to the
international community, which has placed its faith in
us. It is true that although the need for expeditiousness
is an excruciating problem for all advanced legal
systems, the need in an international criminal justice
system is even more critical, because crimes recede
into the past and are increasingly removed from the
commission of the criminal acts themselves. The
collection of evidence is often in the hands of the
States involved in the conflict or, as the Council is
aware, even in the hands of other States involved in the
interposition or peacekeeping forces. The diplomatic
and political component inherent in an unprecedented
judicial institution creates the major problems facing
the Tribunal. These are all factors that do not
contribute expeditiousness. They also explain why the
procedural system, despite the many changes designed
to accelerate matters, still leaves trials too much in the
hands of the parties.

We must be clear. The prospective study that the
Tribunal has just conducted shows that if nothing
changes - either with regard to criminal policy, the
rules of procedure or the Tribunal's format and
organization - and that if, conversely, all the
elements, especially the political ones, are moving
towards an unavoidable increase in cases, then there is
no doubt that the Tribunal's original 1993 four-year
mandate, which was renewed in 1997 for an equal
duration, will need to be extended not once, not twice,
but at least three or four times. But from my point of
View, this situation would penalize both the accused
and the victims. International justice would not be any
grander as a result.

What should be done then? What should be
proposed? I did not come before the Council to offer
only a diagnosis. Far from wanting to paint an overly
dramatic picture, I believe that things should instead be
properly considered. By that I mean that we must be
aware that problems exist that are related to the very
Vitality of the institution and not to any type of possible
debility. We are faced with a "growing pain" that we
must control rather than letting it control us.

After having considered the entire range of
possible solutions - at least those falling within their
province, the non-political solutions - and after
having analysed all the advantages and disadvantages,
the judges unanimously supported a flexible, pragmatic
solution that combines internal procedural, practical
and organizational reforms and, of course, reforms that
would reinforce the Chambers' trial capacity. I would
like to generally describe what is proposed.

The idea is simple: the practice of an initially
highly adversarial procedure has shown us that more
initiative and manoeuvrability should be left to the
judges, who in the final analysis are the sole custodians
of the universal values that underpin the missions
assigned to them. This trend, which began in 1998,
relates first and foremost to the pre-trial phase, that
phase between the initial appearance of the accused
following his arrest and the beginning of the
proceedings themselves. This phase was put under the
control of a pre-trial judge, a Tribunal judge working in
this capacity. In the plan presented to the Council, this
phase, known as pre-trial case preparation, would be
handled in part by professional legal experts, who
themselves would be acting under the authority and
control of the judges. I emphasize this point because I
know it can raise some questions on the control and
authority ofjudges.

This phase would make it possible to have an
ongoing, fruitful dialogue with the parties, in order to
give us a trial pruned of all its useless branches and
focused on the real factual and legal issues. This pre-
trial phase of the case would be - and this is not the
least of its advantages - dealt with on a priority basis
by the judges right after the accused's initial
appearance. The accused would then see his case being
dealt with immediately following his arrest, which is
not always the case today because of the large
workload of judges, whose time is almost completely
taken up by hearings. The pre-trial phase would thus be
conducted on an uninterrupted basis, free of the
chronic bottlenecks in the Chambers.

However, the fluidity gained at the pre-trial phase
is meaningful only if the many trials - that is, the
many hearings - can be held as soon as they ready.
This is the second aspect of the proposed reform,
which, naturally, complements the first. In order to deal
with the significant number of trials awaiting them -
61, I think - and without formally rejecting the
creation of additional trial chambers along the lines of
what was adopted at our request in 1997, the judges
then also opted for a flexible model adaptable to the
necessarily changing situations that the Tribunal has
been facing and will continue to face.

The creation of a pool of Judges who would be
called on as soon as a case was trial-ready, and only for
that one trial, seemed to us a solution with merit in
several respects. It would be best suited to the irregular
pace of the indictments, arrests or even important
incidents that may affect the pre-trial phase. Since the
ad litem judges would be called to The Hague for a
specific case only, many more judges, and
consequently many more States, would participate in
the work of international justice.

The document that has been prepared shows the
high level of productivity that can be expected from the
proposed combined solution. In practical terms, the
period of the mandate assigned to the Tribunal - at
least insofar as the first-instance trials are concerned,
and I will return to this later - could be shortened to
terminate at the end of 2007, instead of 2016, a gain of
9 years; that is, half the time. We can therefore hope
that at the time the International Criminal Court is set
up, our International Criminal Tribunal will have
completed its task at least in terms of first-instance
trials. Of course, appeals would remain. That alone
presents particular complex problems because it is
attached to the appeals proceedings in the Rwanda
Tribunal, judges from The Hague will take up the
Rwanda appeals. In that regard, we support the idea of
reinforcing the Appeals Chamber with two additional
ad hoc judges, as recommended by the Expert Group.
Let me add that the solution of resorting to ad litem
Judges will be valid for the Appeals Chamber because
by 2007 first-instance trials will have been concluded. I
believe there are 14 Tribunal judges who could
complete the cases under appeal.

The judges are aware that these proposals will not
resolve all the questions. We also know that their
implementation raises many questions. However, while
the judges have exceeded their role to a certain extent,
they have also presented their reflections on a set of
outstanding questions, on which the judges are
sometimes divided.

The statutory implications were also considered.
In this respect, the plan appears to be overly focused on
the Tribunal's productivity. It is true that that remains
our highest priority. However, other aspects relating to
the Tribunal's operation have not escaped our attention.
Through two permanent working groups - the rules
committee, presided over by the British Judge Richard
May, and the judicial practices working group, presided
over by the Portuguese Judge Almiro Rodrigues - the
judges are constantly striving to improve the way they
themselves operate, I can assure the Council.

I would, moreover, like to state that the proposed
changes would require an amendment to the statute. I
appreciate how difficult this would be, but an
amendment was already made in 1997. I believe it is
legitimate for an institution in existence for almost
seven years to make adjustments requiring a legal
basis, which amendments to the Rules of Procedure
alone would not provide. Changes dealing with the
establishment of ad litem judges could also be used to
introduce into the statute several other modifications
dealing, for example, with additional judges for the
Appeals Chamber, as recommended by the Expert
Group of which I spoke a moment ago; or with the
important matter of compensation for persons unjustly
detained or prosecuted; or with the suggestions made
here by Ms. Del Ponte two weeks ago relating to
compensation for victims funded by the seizure of the
revenues of the convicted. Subject to the opinion of my
colleagues, I fully support those suggestions.

Lastly, I would like to add that the document
presented to is not a budgetary document. That is true.
Such an analysis does not fall within the jurisdiction of
the judges. Nonetheless, mindful of the financial
burden represented by the Tribunal - $95.8 million
per year - the Judges, I can assure the Council, have
made their own proposals, always bearing in mind this
important aspect of the proposed reform. In this
respect, recourse to ad litem judges seems to be the
least costly solution, when compared to the creation of
additional Chambers with permanent judges.

Above all, however, given that our demonstration
may not have been entirely conclusive, it appeared
especially clear that this solution would make it
possible, I recall, to set a reasonable expiration date for
our work - at least in the first instance - and that, in
budgetary terms, the time differential - permitting
savings of almost 10 years of mandate time - when
compared to any other solution and, a fortiori, when
compared to the status quo - needed to be considered.

Concretely speaking, I would ask the Council to
review all the problems linked to the operation of our
Tribunal, which is also the Council's own. Not
everything must be done immediately, but I believe
that, at first, and after some time for reflection, perhaps
in the framework of a working group- to which I
would wish to participate on behalf of the Tribunal in
whatever capacity would be most useful and timely -
the Statute could be amended in order to introduce at
least the principle of appointing ad litem judges, if not
a number of such judges themselves. The mechanisms
for selecting and assigning judges to cases present very
important problems which the judges themselves have
discussed. Recourse to these judges would, of course,
remain subordinated to the needs of the Tribunal.

I would conclude my rather lengthy briefing by
saying that the judges are not unaware of the difficult
and complex effort again being asked of the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular. They feel that everything which has been
accomplished to date argues in their favour, so that the
confidence placed in this unprecedented institution will
be maintained. We can, of course, continue to make
progress amongst ourselves and will continue to do so.
However, one must not believe that justice, as rendered
in The Hague - which, since 1993, has been bearing,
together with Arusha, many of our hopes for the
implementation of more permanent and universal
justice- can be created and, especially, developed
without a sustained effort on the part of one and all. I
would quote the most recent observations of our
institution, those of the Organization itself- as
represented by the Expert Group, mandated in 1998
and reporting in November, just six months ago.

"To the extent that there may have been
expectations that the Tribunals could spring to
life and, without going through seemingly slow
and costly developmental stages, emulate the
functioning of mature experienced prosecutorial
and judicial organs in national jurisdictions in
adhering to a high standard of due process, such
expectations were chimerical." (S/2000/597, para. 264)

By establishing the Tribunal in 1993, the Security
Council took an historic decision, one of the greatest
challenges since Nuremberg, stating that crimes against
humanity or genocide, conceived and committed by
man in the name of racist and xenophobic theses,
would not go unpunished. It redounds to the Council's
honour that it said and did this.

By taking up this challenge, the judges at The
Hague feel that, in their courtrooms, they have been
able and are able, with impartiality- yes,
impartiality- tenacity and conviction, to hear the
cries of the victims and contribute in this way to
ensuring that, in history's memory, the tragic events
which occurred in this region are neither forgotten nor,
what is more serious, distorted into a kind of
revisionism which, as we know, represents a danger to
democracies. On behalf of my colleagues, I ask the
Council to allow us to continue and to complete this
exalting task.

