Mr. Tachie-Menson (Ghana): I would like to
thank this month's Vietnamese presidency of the
Security Council for organizing this debate. Allow me
also to express my delegation's appreciation to the
Chairperson of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict for the annual report on
the activities of the Working Group. Ghana remains
convinced that the Working Group has a key
responsibility in moving forward the children and
armed conflict agenda by proposing stronger and more
effective recommendations for the Council's
consideration. We note with satisfaction that the
sustained activity of the Council's Working Group has
resulted in definitive conclusions and
recommendations. We regret, however, the recent
inertia in the Working Group's discussions, as that
development may hinder progress. We hope that the
desire to make positive differences in the lives of
children affected by armed conflict will continue to be
the guiding principle in the Group's deliberations. We
express our support for the Chairman's
recommendation calling for increased Secretariat
support for the Working Group's effective and efficient
functioning.

While acknowledging that the engagement of the
Security Council has yielded some tangible results, the
overall situation of children affected by armed conflict
remains worrisome. The recruitment and use of
children by armed forces and groups continue to be a
cause of concern. Numerous children have been killed
and injured as a result of conflict, sexual violence
against children and attacks on schools are on the
increase in conflict situations, humanitarian access is
restricted and aid to those unfortunate Victims cannot
be assured in many conflict areas. Obviously, more
remains to be done to ensure the practical
implementation of resolution 1612 (2005). The
effective closing of the gaps in the implementation of
resolution 1612 (2005) will require concerted action by
all stakeholders, including affected States, parties to
conflict, United Nations entities, peacekeeping and
support units and the international community as a
whole.

There should be no impunity for those who target
children during armed conflict. The Secretary-
General's report in document S/2007/757 strongly
emphasizes national action to bring to justice
individuals responsible for grave violations against
children and to end impunity for such Violations. The
prime responsibility for investigating and prosecuting
the perpetrators of such acts falls upon State
authorities. Clearly, there is a need to build the
capacity of national security and legal actors, including
by increasing the provision of human and financial
resources to the concerned authorities to strengthen
their capacity to investigate and prosecute crimes
against children. However, it is apparent that, where
State authorities lack the ability to carry out those
functions, the international community should play its
role without fail.

Ghana continues to place emphasis on the
effective implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes.
In order to enhance the protection of children on a
long-term basis, resources should be mobilized for
programmes aimed at the sustainable reintegration of
child survivors of conflict into their societies. It is also
critical for DDR programmes to include primary health
care, counselling and social support to address the
special needs of girls in the context of armed conflict
and the specific problem of sexual violence. Also, a
sustained investment in development, especially in
education and skills training, will secure the successful
reintegration of children into their communities and
prevent recruitment. Such programmes should include
employment support and income-generating projects
for former combatants. There is also an urgent need for
the rehabilitation of school buildings and the provision
of school materials to support continued schooling and
the provision of life and vocational skills for children
who have left school.

In addition, increased attention must be paid to
sexual and gender-based Violence, since the sexual
exploitation of children in conflict situations has
become widespread. It is significant to recall the
Council's adoption of resolution 1820 (2008) on sexual
violence during and after armed conflict. Under that
resolution, we have an important opportunity to create
a more systematic approach to protecting women and
girls from sexual violence during conflict, as well as to
providing timely and sustainable intervention. Our
delegation's expectation is that the implementation of
the resolution will take cognizance of the relevant
thematic issues on the Council's agenda, including
children in conflict situations.

We wish to applaud the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, The
positive nature of the contacts and discussions of the
Special Representative with respective Governments
during her country visits have had the necessary impact
by ensuring better collaboration on the protection of
children.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that children
affected by armed conflict, like all other children of the
world, should have the right to live and to dream of a
better future.

