The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Georgia, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Aptsiaari
(Georgia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, document S/1996/284.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the interim
report of the Secretary-General concerning the
situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, of 15 April 1996
(S/1996/284). It has also read with appreciation the
letter of the Government of Georgia (S/ 1996/ 165) and
the proposals on the political status of Abkhazia
contained therein.

"The Security Council notes with deep concern
the continued failure of the parties to achieve a
comprehensive political settlement. It also notes the
 

adverse impact that this failure has on the
humanitarian situation and economic development in
the region. It calls upon the parties, in particular the
Abkhaz side, to achieve substantive progress without
further delay.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full support
for the efforts of the Secretary-General, his Special
Envoy and of the Russian Federation as facilitator
aimed at achieving a comprehensive political
settlement of the conflict, including on the political
status of Abkhazia, respecting the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Georgia. The Council stresses
that the primary responsibility for achieving a
comprehensive political settlement rests upon the
parties themselves.

"The Security Council welcomes the efforts
undertaken by the members of the Commonwealth
of Independent States (CIS) as set out in S/ 1996/74,
annex IV, in support of such a comprehensive
political settlement.

"The Security Council remains deeply
concerned at the continued obstruction of the return
of the refugees and displaced persons by the Abkhaz
authorities, which is totally unacceptable.

"The Security Council expresses its support for
the Secretary-General's efforts to find ways of
improving the observance of human rights in the
region, as an integral part of the work towards a
comprehensive political settlement.

"The Security Council notes the important
contribution made by the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) and the CIS
Collective Peace-keeping Forces to the stabilization
of the situation in the zone of conflict. The Council
recalls its encouragement to Member States to make
contributions, in cash or kind, to the voluntary fund
in support of the implementation of the Agreement
on a Cease-fire and Separation of Forces and/or
humanitarian aspects including demining. It
welcomes the contributions mentioned in the report
of the Secretary-General.

"The Security Council is, however, deeply
concerned at the deterioration in security conditions
in the Gali region, which has a negative effect on
the ability of UNOMIG to meet its mandated tasks.
The Council condemns mine laying in the Gali
 

region, which has resulted in loss of life, including of
a UNOMlG military observer. Such mine-laying
should cease. The Council calls on the parties to take
all measures in their power to prevent it. The Council
stresses that the international community's ability to
assist depends on the full cooperation of the parties.
especially the fulfilment of their obligations regarding
the safety and freedom of movement of intemational
personnel.

"The Security Council invites the Secretary-
General to continue to keep it informed of the
situation,"

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1996/20.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.30 pm.

