Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Frankly speaking, I think all of us have seen
everything for ourselves. Unfortunately, the failure to
adopt draft resolution S/2018/322 really is a litmus test
says a great deal and leaves us extremely apprehensive.
We proposed a very innocuous draft resolution,
which is moreover virtually a complete repeat of
Sweden's draft text from yesterday. I find it difficult to
understand which might be the parts where Mrs. Haley
read between the lines to discover our scheming and
our trickery. Perhaps the Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom answered that when she said that
they could not adopt the Russian draft resolution i let
us say it out loud - because it was a Russian draft
resolution. Then everything was clear.

The United States representative said that we
are very good at playing games. I am not sure about
that. What I am sure of is that she is very good at
making threats, and the threats that the United States
is making with regard to Syria should make us all
extremely alarmed, because we may be standing on
the threshold of some very sad and terrible events. I
would once again like to ask the United States to refrain
from executing the plans that it may be incubating for
Syria. Unfortunately, the refusal of the United States
to adopt the draft resolution speaks to the fact that our
American partners and colleagues do not need any real
investigation, which is something that we discussed
earlier. We regret the fact that the draft resolution was
not adopted, although it is true that the Fact-finding
Mission will, I hope, reach Syria soon and be able to get
to work on its principal mandate, which is establishing
the facts about what really happened in Douma.

To repeat what I have said once again, in all
innocence, the Russian military and the Syrian
Government will provide support to the mission in
terms of ensuring its security. Ihope that does not raise
questions for anyone, because it is simply what must be
done. We hope that the Mission will be able to make the
trip effectively and without delay.

