Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
At the outset, my delegation welcomes Mr. Hoshyar
Zebari, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, and thanks
him for his assessment of recent developments in the
situation in his country. We also thank Ambassador
Khalilzad, who has just briefed us on behalf of the
Multinational Force. Finally, our thanks to go
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari and Mr. Warren Sach for their
very informative briefings.

The information we have just heard confirms that
significant progress has been made in the area of
national reconciliation in Iraq, all of which has made a
significant contribution to a reduction in tension and to
opening up new political and economic prospects for
the country. The situation is especially encouraging as
we are also witnessing some easing of the security
situation, in particular following the recent operations
carried out by Iraqi security forces against armed
groups. But many challenges remain in this sphere if
the entire territory of Iraq is to be made secure.
My delegation remains deeply concerned at the
humanitarian situation in Iraq; unfortunately, the
number of refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs) is still very high. We are particularly concerned
at the living conditions for women and children and by
the violations of human rights that have taken place.
We therefore call upon all parties to strictly respect
humanitarian law and human rights.

On the political front, the adoption of the Justice
and Accountability Law, the Law on Governorates not
Organized into a Region, the General Amnesty Law
and the 2008 budget warrant a degree of optimism,
especially if, as we hope, the elections planned for
October go forward satisfactorily. We have the same
optimism in the economic area: increasingly, the
Government of Iraq is mastering the implementation of
the national budget, despite the debt burden it bears,
and is making an enormous effort to make progress on
national development and reconstruction. In that
regard, my delegation is pleased to note the initiative
to enhance the transparency of the Development Fund
for Iraq by strengthening partnerships with the
international community. The role of the Fund, as the
Controller has pointed out, is clearly of great
importance for recovery and for building the country's
economy. Another element in the significant progress
we have seen in Iraq is the complementarity among the
actions of the Iraqi Government, the Multinational
Force and the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI).

Nonetheless, challenges still abound. That is why,
in the light of the stabilization process and the ongoing
bilateral negotiations with the Governments of the
United States and other countries, in particular in the
security area, my delegation agrees that Multinational
Force should be maintained, in conformity with the
relevant provisions of resolution 1790 (2007).

Finally, my delegation would like to reiterate its
support for UNAMI, recognizing the important
assistance it provides to the Iraqi people on all fronts,
including the security, political, diplomatic, economic
and humanitarian fronts, so that they can take charge of
their destiny and strengthen their dialogue with their
neighbours. The Security Council must continue to
encourage and give its full support to the Mission.
In the same way, the international community
must continue to stand by the people of Iraq and
express its full solidarity with them. After all, it is the

destiny of the Iraqi people that we are speaking about.
That support will be invaluable to them and will
reinvigorate their efforts to move towards national
reconciliation and reconstruction.

