Mrs. Khoudaverdian (Armenia): I thank you,
Madam President, for organizing this essential debate.
At the outset, we would like to join previous speakers
in thanking the Secretary-General for his briefing and
in commending Under-Secretary-General John Holmes
for his tireless and noble efforts and his exceptional
contribution in systematically addressing this important
issue in this Chamber. We wish him all the best in his
future endeavours.

Armenia aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of the European Union. However, we
would like to make some remarks in our national
capacity.

The frequency with which the Security Council
addresses this issue underscores the urgency of the
matter and the need for the international community to
fulfil its commitments to protecting civilians through
the implementation of the provisions of international
humanitarian law. Therefore, we share the views
expressed by the Council's members and other
speakers, which call for more systematic attention to
protection, and we believe that it should be frequently
reflected in the deliberations of the Security Council.
We also trust that increased efforts to fight impunity at
the national and international levels are essential.
Armenia therefore welcomes this opportunity to recap
and reflect on the Council's past 10 years of experience
in dealing with the issue of the protection of civilians
and to highlight priority aspects for united practical
actions.

In a lessons-learned process, this debate should
also enable the Council to more effectively address
specific concerns related to the protection of civilian
populations. The Council has to send a clear message
to all parties to armed conflicts, reminding them of
their obligations and condemning violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law.

It is unfortunate that, despite the existence of
international legal instruments and normative
mechanisms, innocent civilians - including women,
children and elderly persons - as well as international
humanitarian personnel, continue to suffer in conflict
situations. We are convinced that, in order to address
the situation, we must abandon selective approaches to
violations of international humanitarian law. There
must also be strict adherence to human rights
standards. Armenia believes that the international
community must effectively seek the thorough
compliance of all parties with the norms of
international humanitarian law.

The peaceful resolution of any conflict is not an
easy enterprise and requires strong political will and
painful compromises from both sides. We believe,
however, that the time has come to replace the
unchanged rhetoric of hollow allegations with
constructive steps aimed at making the environment
more conducive to peaceful settlement. Armenia
remains committed to the peaceful resolution of
conflicts and strongly believes that the fundamental
solution of the problem can be achieved only by
peaceful means based on the principles of international
law.

We believe that the Security Council should
further contribute to the strengthening of the rule of
law and upholding the international law also by
supporting criminal justice mechanisms. Undoubtedly,
the prosecution of those responsible for these crimes
continues to be an urgent matter. We strongly condemn
deliberate attacks on and killings of civilians through
the indiscriminate or disproportionate use of force,
which is a gross violation of international humanitarian
law in any conflict, in any part of the world.

