Mr. Brattskar (Norway): Norway welcomes this
opportunity to address the Security Council regarding
the situation between Eritrea and Ethiopia. The
Norwegian Government strongly supports Council
resolution 1312 (2000), which authorized the
establishment of a United Nations peacekeeping
mission in the two countries. The United Nations
operation will be a crucial element in the international
community's efforts to create a stable security
environment in the Horn of Africa. For the operation to
succeed, it is important that all Members of the United
Nations take responsibility in that regard. While
recognizing that the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and regional actors have taken the leading role,
we too want to play our part in these common efforts.
We are therefore prepared to contribute military
observers to the operation.

Norway very much welcomes the Agreement on
Cessation of Hostilities signed by the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the State of
Eritrea, and we believe that it constitutes an important
step towards a comprehensive and lasting peace
agreement. The Organization of African Unity deserves
credit for the great efforts it has made to facilitate a
solution to the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea.
We are also grateful to the former Chairman of that
organization, Algeria, for its willingness to continue its
role in further enhancing the peace process. My
Government has for many years been a strong
supporter of the work of the OAU and continues to
provide financial support to that organization. We
especially appreciate the OAU's emphasis on conflict
prevention.

Norway has also contributed $1 million to the
United Nations special fund for assistance in the
delimitation and demarcation of the border between
Ethiopia and Eritrea. I am pleased also to be able to
mention that Norway last week decided to provide
$225,000 to the United Nations Mine Action Service
mine action programme in Ethiopia and Eritrea.
Furthermore, Norway has allocated humanitarian
assistance worth about $30 million to the Horn of
Africa so far this year.

It is, however, imperative that both Ethiopia and
Eritrea fully respect the ceasefire agreement and
honour their commitments so that the agreement may
lead to a comprehensive peace settlement in the region.
For this to materialize, both countries must refrain
from any actions that could be interpreted as
provocations or as violations of the ceasefire. We
would like to stress the need for continued talks
between the two countries on all unresolved issues.
Effective implementation of the ceasefire agreement,
with the assistance of the good offices of the OAU and
of the United Nations, should give us hope for the
restoration of normal relations between the two
countries as soon as possible, to the benefit of the
peoples concerned and of the region as a whole.

