Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
his substantive briefing on his recent trip. We listened
closely to the statement by the Permanent
Representative of Myanmar.

In our View, the Secretary-General's visit was
timely and necessary. The programme of work was
extremely full: the Secretary-General met twice with
the head of State, and met also with the Prime Minister,
representatives of political parties, including the
opposition National League for Democracy (NLD), and
armed ethnic-minority groups. The Secretary-General
personally visited areas that were affected by last
year's destructive natural disaster. We note the
constructive spirit displayed by the Myanmar
authorities in permitting the Secretary-General to speak
before the broader Myanmar public and the press.

He had hoped to meet with Daw Aung San Suu
Kyi, representing the NLD. We would observe that that
should not be the sole criterion on which his visit is
judged. He openly and directly recalled to the
authorities and the country's highest leaders the
importance of democracy in Myanmar and reaffirmed
the readiness of the international community to provide
comprehensive assistance to help overcome urgent
problems. We welcome the multidimensional nature of
the Secretary-General's efforts, which encompass the
socio-economic and humanitarian aspects of
cooperation with Myanmar.

The good offices mission is a process. It is clear
that many of the questions set out by the Secretary-
General at Nay Pyi Taw during his trip cannot be
resolved immediately. Time and patience are needed.
We are counting on the constructive efforts of
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General on Myanmar.

Myanmar is now preparing for general
parliamentary elections, to be held in 2010; this is the
most recent stage in the road map of the democratic
transition. The country's highest leadership reassured
the Secretary-General that the upcoming elections
would be free and fair and that all political parties,
including the National League for Democracy, would
be able to participate. We expect those reassurances to
be backed up by concrete measures. We welcome the
readiness expressed by the Permanent Representative
of Myanmar to cooperate with the United Nations and
the international community in the organization of the
elections and in a number of other spheres.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
active personal role in carrying out his mission of good
offices. That mission has provided an important and
effective channel of communication between the
Security Council, the United Nations and Myanmar.
The Russian Federation will continue to provide that
mission with needed assistance.

