Mr. Kerry (United States of America): I want to
thank my colleague from New Zealand in particular for
convening this very important meeting on the crisis in
Syria. I believe that it is appropriate that we are gathering
here a couple of rooms over from where yesterday so
many Heads of State came together in what I thought
was a remarkably moving and eloquent statement of the
consequence of the war in Syria. I listened particularly
to King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein talk about the
impact on his country and the millions of people who
are distorting its economy, putting huge pressures on
the social structure of the country, living under the
worst circumstances and, in some areas, presenting
a threat because of the ability of Da'esh/ the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham or the Al-Nusra Front to slip
people in, posing a security threat to the country.

We listened to the young Olympian tell us about
her dreams and how she was able to compete this year
because ofa refugee Olympic team. We saw the images
in a Video beautifully narrated by Bono that really
made us think about the consequences of that. I hope
that everybody will come here today really focused on
those consequences and not engage in word games that

duck responsibility or avoid the choices that this great
institution has in front of it with respect to war and
peace and life and death.

I listened to my colleague from Russia, and I felt
as though I were in a parallel universe here. He said
that nobody should have any preconditions to come
to the table. Well, we twice met in Vienna. We met
here in New York and embraced a Security Council
resolution. We met again in Munich. And in each place,
the International Syria Support Group and the Security
Council embraced a ceasefire applicable to all parties.
That is not a precondition. That is an international
agreement - arrived at four times. Countries have
said that they will do this, and four times it has been
shredded by independent actors and spoilers who do not
want a ceasefire. That is therefore not a precondition.

How can people go sit at a table with a regime that
bombs hospitals, drops chlorine gas - again and again
and again and again and again and again - and acts
with impunity? Are you supposed to sit there and have
happy talk in Geneva under such circumstances, when
you have signed to a ceasefire and do not adhere to
it? What kind of credibility do you have with any of
your people? It is not a precondition. It is something
upon which we all agreed in the United Nations and the
International Syria Support Group.

I have to say with regard to the documents that we
are prepared release - as we told people and announced
yesterday at the International Syria Support Group, and
people in the Support Group have the documents - you
do not need to read them to understand that it is against
international law to bomb hospitals. You do not need
the documents to understand that you do not drop
barrel bombs on children. Those are flagrant violations
of international law.

Therefore, I do not want to obfuscate this process. I
did not come here this morning to do that. Supposedly,
we all want the same goal - I have heard that again
and again. Russia, Iran, the United States, Qatar,
Turkey, Saudi Arabia - everybody sits here and says
that they want a united Syria: secular and respectful of
the rights of all people, and where the people of Syria
can choose their leadership. However, we are proving
woefully inadequate in our ability to get to the table, to
have that conversation, to make it happen. Everybody
in this Chamber understands that there are proxies at
this table and proxies outside of the Chamber - and we
know who they are - who have the ability to have an
impact on the players in this conflict that has provided
the greatest humanitarian catastrophe since the Second
World War.

Let us review the sequence of events. I was
privileged to serve in the United States Senate with
a fellow who spent a lot of time here: he was the
Ambassador of the United States to the United Nations,
Daniel Patrick Moynihan. He would famously remind
us that everyone is entitled to their own opinion, but
they are not entitled to their own facts. As President
John Adams once said, "facts are stubborn things". If
we are going to deal with this situation, I do not think
that we can let anybody here have their own set of facts
about Syria.
Everybody here understands the depth of the
human tragedy. One wonders why people in various
parts of the world are so angry about governance: it is
because all they hear are words. We know how many
times we have demanded action, which then does not
take place. Therefore, I want to share some facts with
you this morning. Last night we received reports of
air strikes that hit a medical facility near Aleppo and
four aid workers were killed, despite the fact there was
supposed to be a cessation of hostilities. There are only
two countries that have aeroplanes that are capable of
flying during the night - or flying at all - in that
particular area: Russia and Syria.

As Minister Lavrov said, let us examine the facts
and see what happened. On Monday, 20 aid workers
were killed in an outrageous sustained two-hour attack
directed at a fully authorized humanitarian mission
near Aleppo. All of the permits had been given, and
everybody was on notice. That attack has dealt a very
heavy blow to our efforts to bring peace to Syria, and
it raises a profound doubt about whether Russia and the
Al-Assad regime can or will live up to the obligations
that they agreed to in Geneva.

Questions are also raised - not by that attack but
by other events 4 about some of the opposition. Those
are facts. The simple reality is that we cannot resolve
this crisis if the major parties who come to the table
and agree to do something are unwilling to do what is
necessary to avoid escalation. We do not get anywhere
by ignoring the facts and by denying common sense. The
United States-led coalition did hit people on Saturday;

it was a terrible accident, and within moments of it
happening we acknowledged it. We did not cast out a
series of obfuscating facts, instead we said that it was
a terrible thing and that it happened. The United States
Department of Defence apologized, and we tried to find
out how it happened.

But people with guns running around on the
ground, seen from the air, is a very different thing from
trucks in a convoy with big United Nations markings
all over them. I want to lay out those facts because they
underscore why, at this moment, we just cannot do business
as usual. We cannot walk out of this Chamber and say that
we are going to try to continue to have a ceasefire, when
everybody knows it cannot work. The facts require countries
to restore credibility to this process. That is what is critical.
Let us think about what happened in the last couple of days.

First, President Putin's Press Secretary, Dmitry Peskov,
claimed that the attack on the humanitarian convoy was
somehow a necessary response to an alleged offensive by
al-Nusra elsewhere in the country: that was the first claim.
Then a Russian ambassador said that Russian and Syrian
forces were not bombing the area, but that they were targeting
the village of Khan Tuman. Then we heard a completely
different story: the Ministry of Defence of the Russian
Federation said that the aid convoy had been accompanied
by militants in a pick-up truck with a mortar, of which we
have, however, seen no evidence. In any case, that would not
justify a violation of the cessations of hostilities. In addition,
that mortar could never have inflicted the damage caused to
those trucks.

Then the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation
switched completely and denied Russia's involvement.
According to Ministry spokesman Igor Konashenkov,
"neither Russia nor Syria conducted air strikes on the
United Nations humanitarian convoy in the southwestern
outskirts of Aleppo". Then Konashenkov went firrther and
said that the damage to the convoy was the direct result of
the cargo catching fire, that the trucks and the food and the
medicine just spontaneously combusted. Does anybody here
believe that? This is not a joke we are involved in. We are
in serious business here. If we can stand up and say that we
did accidentally have a strike, then we should have some
responsibility. Maybe it is an attempt to distract attention or
somehow deflect the issue, but I think what it underscores is
that we have a responsibility here to find a way forward.

Everything I just quoted from Russian sources is
contradicted by public information, by conclusions
already reached by the International Committee of the
Red Cross, the International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies, the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent, independent journalists and aid workers on
the ground, by eyewitnesses. The eyewitnesses will
tell you what happened. One of them said that he was
standing on the ground, and all of a sudden the place
became hell and the fighter jets were in the sky. That
is an eyewitness report; the place turned into hell, and
fighter jets were in the sky.

There is a lot more that I am not going to go into
because I really want the key here to be an acceptance
of responsibility, so that we can change this equation,
responsibility on the part of everybody here. The
primary question is no longer what do we know; the
primary question is, collectively, what are we going to
do about it?

In other words, this is a moment of truth. It is a
moment of truth for President Putin and Russia, it is
also a moment of truth for the opposition. It is a moment
of truth for the people who support the opposition. For
too long some elements of the opposition have relied
on an unholy alliance with Al-Nusra. Al-Nusra is
Al-Qaida - Al-Qaida's branch in Syria. We cannot
look the other way if some groups are on the ground
fighting alongside Al-Nusra, an organization that
overtly rejects a political solution to this crisis and is an
enemy of all of us in this Chamber.

It is a moment of truth for the international
community, too. If we allow spoilers to choose the path
for us, we will encounter a path of escalation. If we
decide not to do what it takes to make this cessation of
hostilities work, then make no mistake, my friends, the
next time we convene here we are going to be facing a
Middle East with even more refugees, more dead, more
displaced, more extremists and more suffering on an
even greater scale. That is a certainty.

There is only one choice, and that is to get to that
table with Staffan de Mistura, to get to a negotiation
and get a ceasefire so that we can stop the flow of
refugees, stop the suffering, and provide the people
of Syria with a chance to breathe, a chance to live.
When the ceasefire first began, a few weeks ago, guess
what: it worked. Months ago, people were actually out
in the streets; they went to cafes again. Some people
even demonstrated, felt they had political rights. Other
people were able to walk from one place to another with
a sense of safety. All of that has dissipated.
I want to emphasize this, and I emphasize to Russia
that the United States continues to believe that there is
a way forward, which, although rocky and difficult and
uncertain, can provide the most viable path out of the
carnage. Our shared task here is to find a way to use the
tools of diplomacy to make that happen. That is exactly
what we have been trying to accomplish.

For weeks over the summer, experts from my
Government worked with our counterparts from Russia
in good efforts to develop a plan that would take into
account the lessons learned from the original cessation
of hostilities. The key elements of that plan, launched
in Geneva two weeks ago, include the renewal of the
cessation of hostilities, excluding only Da'esh and
Al-Nusra. Importantly, it included arrangements for
the unfettered delivery - unfettered delivery - of
humanitarian aid to people in Aleppo and elsewhere in
the country. It also envisioned the possibility - provided
that the delivery of humanitarian assistance was
unimpeded and sustained and provided that there were
at least seven days of consecutive adherence to the
cessation of hostilities - that the United States and
Russia would begin to coordinate their efforts against
Da'esh and Al-Nusra.

I wish to make one thing clear. Under President
Obama's orders, all preparations were being made
in order to achieve that cooperation, involving our
military and intelligence community in the work we
would do. We are committed to that. It was also a very
importantly part of the plan that, when those efforts of
cooperation commenced, Syrian warplanes would be
prohibited from flying over areas where the legitimate
opposition and Al-Nusra were present in order to give
us an opportunity to work at separating the two.

I have said to Russia many times: it is very hard
to separate people when they are being bombed
indiscriminately. While Al-Assad has the right to
determine whom he is going to bomb, because he
can "go after Al-Nusra" and in the process go after
the opposition at the same time because he wants to,
confusion is created that is impossible to separate out,
and the ceasefire cannot be preserved. That is why we
need to get to the prohibition on flying, my friends.
That would prevent Syria from doing what it has done
so often in the past, which is to attack civilian targets
with the excuse that it is just going after Al-Nusra.

Our purpose in the negotiation was to put an end
to the kind of horrific and indiscriminate attacks
that have been the primary cause of fear, suffering
and displacement. Under our plan, all of this could
be quickly accompanied by serious negotiations
between the parties aimed at a political transition and
a conclusion to the conflict. So I wish my colleagues
to know that the United States remains convinced that
the objectives outlined in the Geneva agreement are the
right objectives. As for the tools, many of them are the
right tools, but they may not be complete.

Our hope was that the renewal of the cessation
of hostilities and the resumption of aid deliveries, the
isolation of Al-Nusra and Da'esh, and the beginning
of the Syrian-led negotiation process would provide
a pathway out of the conflict and make possible the
restoration of a peaceful Syria. Now, clearly there are
some people, including Al-Assad and his allies, as well
as Al-Nusra and Da'esh on the other side, who fear that
very outcome. Al-Assad is a spoiler; he does not believe
in a ceasefire. Al Nusra and Da'esh are spoilers. They
do not want a ceasefire; they want to keep fighting
Al-Assad.

Therefore, the question for us here today is whether
we bend to their will or continue to pursue our agenda,
as best we can and in every way that we can, to find a
diplomatic solution to the conflict. Those who believe
that the crisis in Syria cannot become even worse are
dead wrong, as are those who believe that a military
victory is possible. This could be like Carthage and the
Romans, if one can call that a victory.

The plan announced in Geneva is far from perfect,
but I have yet to hear an alternative that is remotely
realistic and would lead to a better outcome. If we could
get monitoring on the ground, that would be ideal. We
would love to have monitoring on the ground. But most
of the countries one talks to and asks if they would go
in to monitor are very quick to say, "not on my life".

As my colleagues from the International Syria
Support Group will attest, yesterday we had a meeting.
There was near unanimity in that room that this process,
the ceasefire, as troubled as it is, gives us the best
chance available to bring relief to the people of Syria.
Now, here is the nub of it. We have said for days that
it will take significant and immediate steps now to try
to get things back on track. How do we get things back
on track? How do we restore the concept ofa ceasefire?
How do we give people, who have again and again seen
this process fall apart, some sense of confidence in
the process? Believe me, there are a lot of people who
believe that it cannot happen. There are some people
who believe that the major parties do not want it done.

So, I believe that in order to restore credibility to the
process, we must move forward to try to immediately
ground all aircraft flying in those key areas in order
to de-escalate the situation and give a chance for
humanitarian assistance to flow unimpeded. If that
happens, there is a chance to give credibility back to
this process. In Geneva, Russia related that Al-Assad
was prepared to live by the cessation of hostilities and
would accept the idea of not flying over agreed-upon
areas. But because of what has happened in the past
few days, my friends, we have no choice but to try to
do that sooner, not later, to move immediately to restore
confidence and demonstrate the readiness to implement
a genuine ceasefire now.

The future of Syria is hanging by a thread. I urge
the Council not to give up, but instead to support
the steps outlined by the United States and Russia in
Geneva. I call on every party in Syria and those who
support them. I call on all members of the opposition to
cooperate and revive this plan. I call on every country
to cease providing support of any kind to any party that
is trying to sabotage this plan. I call on the international
community to support United Nations efforts to begin
a real negotiation in Geneva on a political transition
that can provide the only durable route to peace. I urge
the entire international community to get behind the
best chance that we have had yet to reduce the Violence,
to provide humanitarian assistance and to open up the
space for negotiations.

