Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I thank the Permanent Mission of Poland for
convening this open debate. As we celebrate the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1882 (2009),
we reaffirm the importance of monitoring prevention
efforts, particularly in relation to the implementation of
resolution 2427 (2018).

The situation of children is becoming increasingly
worrisome. The number and severity of violations in
countries in conflict, a situation that is evidenced in
the reports submitted, demonstrate a reality in which
children are victims of State and non-State actors,
without a collective, comprehensive response to
protect them.

Ecuador expresses its concern about the persistent
recruitment and use of children throughout the world. As
we know, approximately 420 million children - almost
one fifth of the world's children - live in conflict
zones. As such, today it is more important than ever
that we step up efforts to strengthen the protection of
the rights of children in armed conflicts. Ecuador's
Constitution recognizes children as a group requiring
priority attention. It also recognizes State responsibility
for providing support and protecting against all types
of violence, abuse, sexual exploitation and exploitation
of any other kind, as well as for the eradication of all
forms of violence to which children could be subject.
Therefore, as we celebrate the thirtieth anniversary
of the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, and 19 years since the signing of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on
the involvement of children in armed conflict, we call
for universal ratification of the Protocol and encourage
States that have not yet done so to do so without delay.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/509)
also highlights how schools are used for military
purposes and the destruction of educational
infrastructure. Ecuador expresses its full support for
the need to protect students, teachers and educational
infrastructure in times of armed conflict.

Finally, we call for strengthening the Office of
Ms. Gamba, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, so that it
receives adequate political support and appropriate
funding. We welcome the initiatives that have been
carried out, such as the promotional campaign to better
protect children, known as ACT to Protect Children
Affected by Conflict.

