Mr. Castaneda (El Salvador) (interpretation from Spanish): Allow me first to congratulate you, Sir, on the
outstanding manner in which you have discharged your
duties as President of the Security Council for the month
of April. Your skills as an experienced diplomat have
once again become evident in the important work
accomplished by this supreme body responsible for
international security. It is a particular honour for my
delegation to see you, Sir, presiding over this meeting of
the Security Council as it prepares to adopt a resolution
on the mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission
in El Salvador (ONUSAL).

On 30 April 1995 ONUSAL's mandate will come to
an end, in accordance with resolution 961 (1994) of
23 November 1994. Therefore, we find it appropriate to
make a statement as the Council prepares to consider the
report (S/ 1995/220) of the Secretary-General dated
24 March 1995 and the report (S/1995/281, annex)
submitted by the Director of the Human Rights Division
of ONUSAL, dated 18 April 1995, which surely will be
the last reports that this Council will consider with respect
to ONUSAL.

 

The United Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador
(ONUSAL) constitutes a successful management operation
by the United Nations and a historic landmark for
El Salvador and the United Nations. This experience in a
founding State Member of our Organization enriches it and
provides an example of the peaceful settlement of an
internal and internationalized armed conflict.

In 1990 the Salvadoran war was at a crucial point. All
realistic data indicated that history no longer had any place
for the conflict. But the task of searching for a way to
reach the necessary political solution was arduous and
complicated. Two concurrent realities made it possible to
find the best path: the will of both parties to forge
decisively ahead towards peace and the effective, active
mediation of the United Nations.

In any kind of process, especially one so complicated
and delicate as the Salvadoran process, the guarantee that
it will be lasting and well-aimed depends ultimately on the
internal strength of the society where the process unfolds.
In the case of El Salvador, the war would not have turned
out as it did if circumstances within the society had not
been propitious - however much international pressure had
been brought to bear- and, similarly, it would be a
mistake to think that an effort like the Salvadoran one could
be sustained without El Salvador's own great resolve and
capacity for action, however keen international vigilance
might be.

The United Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador
(ONUSAL) was saved by the growing credibility it enjoyed
with the various sectors of Salvadoran society. The initial
perception that the United Nations or some of its
representatives were leaning towards one side or the other
was dispelled to a great extent, both because the focus was
on the problems of Salvadoran society itself and because
the old negotiating parties, in their capacity as such, have
been fading away. The same reality placed ONUSAL in a
real and perceived position of impartiality, unbound by
interests or sympathies. This is its greatest capital, and it
must not be wasted, for it still has to be invested in the
process. We therefore commend the Secretary-General's
effort and initiative to maintain a truly significant high-level
presence in El Salvador, a presence capable of generating
the support that circumstances call for. The success of
ONUSAL and of the peace process in El Salvador is so
exemplary that it deserves to be cared for as much as can
possibly and responsibly be done.

On the eve of the termination of ONUSAL's mandate,
even though a small, high-level verification office will
remain, there is a natural concern in El Salvador, shared
by various sectors, that once ONUSAL has left
El Salvador it will be up to the Salvadoran institutions to
take charge not only of the work of verifying compliance
with the agreements, but also of looking out for the
overall health of the process.

The former negotiating parties are inclined to
concentrate their attention on the agreements. In a way,
this leads them away from the role they played in the
initial stage of the process, when it had barely taken
shape. Today the concept of parties belongs to the past.
The Government is no longer a party, but, rather, a
manager responsible for everything; and the FMLN is, of
course, no longer what it was. Neruda's famous line, "We
of that time are the same ones no more", can be rightly
applied here. No one in El Salvador is the same as he or
she was during the war, and those intent on staying the
same are fading from view, left behind.

A new timetable has been set for implementation of
the few aspects of the Peace Accords still pending. What
is sometimes not analysed clearly enough is that at this
point, in many instances, implementation is closely linked
to the efforts for institutional development that the
process requires in order to continue moving ahead, as is
the case with judicial and electoral reforms, which are
well under way. These issues must not be seen in the
narrow framework of the implementation of specific
points, for this could become reductionist and risk falling
into formalism. From now on, it is a matter of bringing
to a proper conclusion, through the Peace Accords, the
specific issues still pending - such as the granting of
land to ex-combatants and landholders - and of fulfilling
with a lesser sense of urgency the timetable that has been
set for the more institutional aspects. One point that we
always consider worth stressing is that the process is
continuing to unfold and that speculation on whether or
not it is reversible is a Byzantine exercise. There may
well be obstacles and times of tension, but to imagine that
El Salvador will return to the past is nothing more than a
fantasy.

The lessons of these years have been invaluable, for
both El Salvador and the world Organization. It has been
shown that frank and fruitful cooperation between a small
country and the most important international Organization
in the world is possible. Beyond that reality, the
Salvadoran peace process is an extraordinary model in an
era of profound international change.

 

The list of those for whom thanks are in order would
be endless. I shall mention only Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar
and Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, Secretaries-General of the
Organization; their outstanding colleagues Mr. Alvaro de
Soto and Mr. Marrack Goulding; the Secretary-General's
Representatives and heads of the ONUSAL mission, Mr.
Iqbal Riza, Mr. Augusto Ramirez Ocampo and - the
current head - Mr. Enrique ter Horst; the Security
Council, of course, and especially the Ambassadors of the
friendly countries that have most closely supported the
peace process in El Salvador - Colombia, Spain, Mexico,
Venezuela and the United States of America - as well as
all the other countries that have made important
contributions.

One chapter is coming to a close, but on turning the
page a new chapter of hope begins, the chapter of the
definitive institutionalization of peace in El Salvador. We
are sure that in this new chapter we can continue to count
on the support and understanding of the United Nations.

