Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Ukraine aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of
the European Union. I would like to add the following
remarks in my national capacity.

We would like to express our appreciation, Sir, for
your initiative to hold today's open debate on a topic that
is highly fitting, both for taking stock of the Security
Council's performance in its task of maintaining
international peace and security, on one hand, and,
on the other, for presenting forward-looking ideas
about how to make the Council's work more efficient
and relevant in a rapidly changing international
environment. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for presenting his views and ideas.

Let me start with some positive remarks. Despite
all the criticism and negative assessment of the
United Nations in general and the Council's work in
particular, which, regretfully, on a number of occasions
is justified, there is no alternative to the United Nations
and the Security Council in terms of a global entity to
safeguard international peace and security. Moreover,
in recent years, the Council has achieved some positive
results in its line of work. For example, the Council
should be - and I am sure is proud - of its contribution
to the cause of peace in Columbia, where it continues
to play an important role in ensuring a comprehensive
implementation of the Final Peace Agreement between
the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia. We believe that the
United Nations should carefully study the lessons
learned in that regard and apply best practices in other
parts of the world.

In some instances the Council has demonstrated
its openness and readiness to readjust its work when
considering conflict situations in Africa, in the light
of the emergence of new challenges and threats to
international peace and security. On the heels ofits visit
to the Lake Chad basin region, it adopted resolution
2349 (2017), which highlighted the underlying causes
of the complex crisis in the region to be extreme
poverty, inter-ethnic and intercommunal tensions and
climate change.

The peaceful resolution of the constitutional crisis
in the Gambia, which was achieved first and foremost
thanks to the actions of the Economic Community of
West African States and the unified position of other
regional partners in West Africa, can also be put on the
positive side of the ledger of the Council's work. Over
the past two years sanctions against C6te d'Ivoire and
Liberia were lifted. The United Nations Blue Helmets left
C6te d'Ivoire, as their presence was no longer required,
although they remain in Liberia, in significantly
reduced numbers, for contingency purposes.

The Council has been particularly active in
addressing the threat of terrorism. Numerous
discussions were held and landmark decisions were
taken on countering the efforts by terrorists to spread
their ideology, recruit followers, raise funds and
procure weapons and plan and perpetrate attacks.
Ukraine contributed to the Council's endeavour by
raising the issue of protecting critical infrastructure
from terrorist attacks.

We are proud that, after the adoption of resolution
2341 (2017), several States Members of the United
Nations have taken concrete steps to implement it at
the national level. The agenda of the Council has
expanded considerably, owing to the close interlinkage
between threats to international peace and security
and such challenges as human rights, development and
climate change, to name just a few. We welcome that
positive shift, since threats to international peace and
security cannot be addressed effectively in isolation.
Today's debate is another confirmation of the growing
understanding of that nexus. We hope that the Council
will continue to explore this topic and discuss the ways
to address the root causes and multipliers of conflict in
a comprehensive manner.

I must mention the progressive changes made in
the process of selecting the new Secretary-General.
Notwithstanding the glaring shortcomings and outdated
practices that remain, in particular with regard to so-
called non-disclosure or so-called confidential results of
indicative votes on candidates, great strides have been
made to ensure a level playing field for all candidates
and to increase the overall transparency of the process.
Another aspect that is probably not as Visible
from outside the Council, but is nevertheless just as
important, is the improvement in the working methods
of the Council. That is an area that never fails to attract
harsh criticism from the wider membership of the
United Nations, which has strong opinions on how the
Council should or should not discharge its duties. In
that regard, I would like to commend the dedication and
hard work of the Japanese delegation, which provided
impetus and leadership in the negotiations on updating
presidential note S/20lO/507 and the Handbook on
the Working Methods of the Security Council and
drafting presidential note S/2016/619, with regard to the
selection of Chairs of the Council's subsidiary bodies.
We are pleased that those documents reflect several of
Ukraine's priorities, including making the Council's
field visits more transparent.

Alongside those positive examples in the Council's
work, there is a much longer list of issues where the
Council could have put its vast potential to better
use. Such shortcomings, or even outright failures, are
seen not only in cases when cross-cutting, thematic or
new subjects are concerned - such as environmental
degradation, links between human rights and security,
the protection of civilians, the role of women and so
on - but also in clear-cut cases of difficult security
issues, which are the traditional purview ofthe Council.

For instance, the multifaceted challenges in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remain largely
unresolved, despite the fact that the country hosts the
largest United Nations peacekeeping operation. In
current hotspots in the Middle East, including in Syria
and Yemen, an array of tragic events are unfolding before
our eyes. Even the Council's most intense efforts on
such issues garner results with only marginal influence
on the overall situation. Even blatant Violations of the
Chemical Weapons Convention are yet to be dealt with
in a decisive manner. Thus far, impunity appears to rule
the day. The Middle East peace process remains in a
perpetual deadlock. The composition of the Council
changes but the messages and signals heard around this
table for decades are by and large the same, with no
progress on the ground. The ongoing development of
nuclear and missile programmes by the North Korean
regime remains a standing threat to international peace
and security, despite the introduction of the Council's
most robust sanctions regime to date. That list is by no
means exhaustive, as there are many other cases where
the Council's intervention was less than successful.

In our opinion, it is important to bear in mind
that perspective of the Council's work when we
consider issues such as the Council's ability to address
contemporary challenges to international peace and
security. We believe that the Council should be able to
do much more, but we also recognize the fact that it
can do only so much. At the same time, debates are
held, consultations are regularly conducted, numerous
resolutions are adopted and press statements are
produced - in an almost mechanized manner.

That is not to say that all of this is not important;
it is merely to underline the limited impact of the
Council's work. The Council is not as effective as the
international community and many people around the
world hope and expect it to be - and not because it
deliberately ignores some issues or does not work
hard enough. On the contrary, the Council's agenda
is growing and, with every passing year, its members
spend more and more hours deliberating in the Chamber
or in the neighbouring Consultations room. That state of
affairs is a result of the way the Council was conceived
and constructed to function.

First, the veto right of the permanent members of the
Council means that substantive action is possible only
when the interests of the five permanent members do
not conflict, ifnot coincide. In other cases, the Council
is left paralysed. Moreover, the lack of a mechanism to
overturn a veto means that there are no incentives for a
veto-wielding member to try to work out a solution on
a contentious issue.

Secondly, the scope of implementation of resolutions
has always been limited by the level of readiness of
countries to comply. Examples of non-implementation
and outright violations of resolutions abound
throughout the Security Council's history, and the list
of offenders is quite extensive. This selective approach
to implementation does not bode well for the Council's
ability to make a real difference in various situations
on the ground.

Finally, the premise of an effective and efficient
Security Council must be based on the assumed and
expected respect for the Charter of the United Nations
and the norms and principles of international law by all
Member States. I would like to specifically underline
the importance of the latter point. To our deepest regret,
the world is currently living in an era of the erosion
of the rule of law, in which the arbitrary application
and selective or arbitrary interpretation of norms and
principles of international law, with the respective
obligations and commitments deriving therefrom, are
becoming a routine occurrence. The most obvious
manifestation of that is the aggressive policy of the
Russian Federation towards its neighbours. In 2008,
it occupied a part of Georgian territory; in 2014, it
illegally occupied and attempted to annex Crimea and
then expanded the armed conflict to the Donbas region
of Ukraine. Has the Council been able to provide a
fitting response? We are all well aware of the answer
to that question.

In anticipation of Russia's usual tirades concerning
a so-called referendum in Crimea and a civil war in
the Donbas, I will just remind those who may have
forgotten that it all started with the deployment of
Russian troops without insignia in Crimea; with the
sending of Russian-trained armed groups and Russian
special operations forces into eastern Ukraine; with
rocket salvos launched from Russian territory into
Ukrainian territory; and with Russian regular army
troops crossing into Ukraine. And it continues, with the
constant sending of arms and ammunition to sustain the
war and a de facto occupation of certain areas of the
Donetsk and Luhansk regions.

The Russian delegation may also claim, as it usually
does, that our remarks have no relation to the subject of
today's discussion. Our answer is very simple. Russia's
actions undermined and continue to undermine the
international rules-based system, and they constitute a
direct threat to international peace and security, which
is the subject that the Council has to concern itselfwith.

In conclusion, Ukraine is convinced that without
a radical reform and complete overhaul of the Security
Council as it stands, we can expect only more of the
same - long discussions, sometimes even interesting
ones, but which have a limited impact where real
and concerted action is needed. Having said that, the
Council is not beyond redemption. In fact, not much
is needed - just a responsible attitude on the part of
permanent members to fulfil their duties for the good of
the world. So far, that aspect of the Council's work has
been found wanting.

