Mr. Prosor (Israel): Next week, Jewish people
around the world will celebrate Passover, which
commemorates the exodus story. In recent years, another
exodus story has unfolded, but this one is driven by a
plague of persecution aimed at the Christians, Kurds,
Yazidis, Baha'is and, of course, the Jews.

For more than 2,500 years, 1 million Jews lived
peacefully in Arab lands. In 1947, the situation changed
dramatically. Following the United Nations vote to
establish a Jewish State (General Assembly resolution 181 (II)), Arab Governments turned on their Jewish
citizens. From Baghdad to Sana'a to Tripoli, thousands
of Jews were murdered in Violent riots and hundreds
of thousands more were forced to run for their lives.
Radical Islamists have a saying: "First the Saturday
people, then the Sunday people". Having succeeded
in driving the vast majority of Jews out of Arab lands,
extremists have turned on the Christians. At the turn of
the twentieth century, Christians comprised 26 per cent
of the Middle East's population. Today, that figure is
less than 10 per cent.

The Nineveh plains in Iraq had been home to
Christians since the first century. The Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIS) tore through the region,
desecrating churches and destroying artefacts.
Christians were given the grim choice of converting
to Islam or facing death by beheading, stoning or
crucifixion. Fearing for their lives, tens of thousands of
Christians have fled to northern Iraq and taken refuge
in Kurdistan. Kurdish forces are fighting valiantly
to defend their homes and push back the extremist
threat. In December, Kurdish fighters broke the ISIS
siege of Mount Sinjar, freeing thousands of Yazidis
and Christians. The Kurds are the leading force in
the fight against ISIS. They have shown tremendous
courage and fortitude. The Kurds need the support of
the international community and they deserve political
independence.

The persecution of minorities is not taking place
just at the hands of extremist groups. Last year, Islamist
police in Saudi Arabia stormed a Christian prayer
meeting and arrested its entire congregation, including
women and children. Arresting someone for praying
is like arresting someone for having lunch - one is
feeding his hunger and the other is feeding his faith.
In 2013, three Iranian Christians caught selling Bibles
were found guilty of "crimes against State security" and
sentenced to 10 years in prison. Also in 2013, Ayatollah
Khamenei issued a fatwa in which he branded the
Baha'is as deviants. At his direction, Iranian Baha'is
are regularly arrested, tortured and denied their most
basic rights, including the right to study at university.

There is only one place in the Middle East where
minorities have the freedom to practice their faith,
change faiths or practice no faith at all - and that is
Israel. Israel is home to the Baha'i World Centre. It is
the only place in the Middle East where Druze have
reached the highest echelons of society. It is the only
place where the Christian population is growing.
Since Israel's establishment in 1948, its Christian
communities have expanded more than 1,000 per cent.
Israeli Christians have served in our Parliament and on
our Supreme Court.

The same cannot be said for Christians living
under the Palestinian leadership. Since Hamas took
over Gaza in 2007, half the Christian community
has fled Gaza. After the Palestinian Authority took
control of Bethlehem in 1995, Palestinian gunmen
seized Christian homes and looted the Church of the
Nativity. Owing to this persecution, the city's Christian
population has fallen by nearly 70 per cent.

It does not matter where you come from, what faith
you belong to, or what politics you preach. No decent
human being can ignore the calamity facing minorities
in the Middle East. Millions of people around the world
put their faith in the United Nations. It is time for the
Security Council to break its silence and give them a
reason to believe.

