Mr. Diakite (spoke in French): Let me begin,
Mr. President, by expressing to you and your colleagues
in the Security Council my sincere gratitude for giving
me this opportunity to speak to the Council today.

I am here not only in my capacity as President of
the West Africa Action Network on Small Arms in Cote
d'Ivoire and as a representative of our global network,
the International Action Network on Small Arms, but
mostly and especially as the voice of the millions of
innocent victims of the illicit transfer, accumulation,
diversion and misuse of small arms around the world,
especially in Africa. My country, Cote d'Ivoire, and its
people have suffered particularly because of this during
the last decade.

I remember like it was yesterday, when this
nightmare began. I was peacefully sleeping in my room
at the University of Bouake, where I was in my first
year of law school, when I was abruptly awakened by
weapon fire from all sides. Some frustrated individuals
who had been denied Ivorian citizenship had decided
to take up arms - too readily available - to make
their claim. We were terrorized for days, hunted like
animals, without water, without food, without receiving
help, constantly living in the fear of being killed. And
we were not the only ones. The rest of the inhabitants
suffered as well, regardless of age, sex or status. We all
paid the price, but for what? And why? When I returned
to the neighbourhood, one of my neighbors was forced,
in order to feed her family, to yield to the intimidation
and threats of armed individuals. I will never forget the
tears on her face depicting her pain and the shame of
having been a victim of forced prostitution and rape.

We were all victims of those armed men, who
would set up multiple barricades so that they could
plunder passengers and traders of their property, and
often of their lives. And we ask the question: Where do
these weapons and their ammunition come from, these
weapons that enable all this violence, all this suffering?

Following the post-elections armed conflict in
2010 and 2011, I personally witnessed multiple abuses,
the lifeless bodies lying in the middle of the roadway,
the destroyed and burned buildings and the streams
of haggard and displaced refugees fleeing Abidjan by
the thousands for an unknown destination, leaving
behind the entire fruit of a life-time of hard work. I
also experienced the consequences of the collapse of
Government control, where power fell to groups of
young, lawless offenders who had no difficulty getting
hold of arms and ammunition and who, without any
reason, would not hesitate to take life or to indulge in all
forms of abuses on a terrorized population, particularly
women and girls. All public infrastructure was
destroyed, the population deprived of water, electricity
and food. Families were separated, and hospitals were
overwhelmed and unable to cope with the flood of the
wounded. Many owed their salvation to the courage of
some women who, at great risk to their lives, ventured
out to bring a handful of cassava semolina, called
attieke, to feed the families.

Electoral dispute in my country led to a strong
anarchic distribution of weapons and ammunition
by some political leaders and district leaders.
Those weapons and their ammunition had entered
the country, in violation of a United Nations arms
embargo, from neighbouring countries as well as
trafficking networks. The cost in human life was well
over 3,000; the total cost to the country is beyond any
estimation. Obviously, the ease of access to weapons
and ammunition acquired by illicit means, by leakages
from legal stockpiles, from military and police stock,
and even by local manufacturing, were the main
factors in this tragic toll. Similarly, illegal weapons
and ammunition coming from the abandoned arsenals
after the fall of Al-Qadhafi in Libya started to pour
into the region - and presently continue to flood our
region and fuel terrorist movements in Mali, the Niger,
Nigeria, Chad and Cameroon.

As a consequence, democratic institutions are
severely destabilized and organized crime is spreading
rapidly. It is therefore urgent, if we are to avoid the entire
region being engulfed in protracted and unresolvable
conflicts and overwhelmed by horrific crime, that
the international community mobilize to counter this
problem and act quickly to curb the proliferation of
such weapons in Africa and the world.

It is an undeniable fact that the illicit transfer,
accumulation, diversion and misuse of small arms
and their ammunition are key factors in the human
costs resulting from destruction and destabilization.
Every United Nations Member State must do all it can
to ensure that it is meeting all relevant international
obligations and commitments related to controlling the
movement and misuse of small arms and light weapons
and stemming the flow of arms into conflict zones.

It is more vital than ever that States be encouraged
to implement the United Nations Programme of
Action and the Arms Trade Treaty in order to slow
if not eliminate the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons. They must do more to enhance and
strengthen international cooperation and assistance.
That assistance can and should take many forms,
from helping to ensure that stockpiles - whether in
the largest national armoury or the smallest village
police station - are secured, to assisting the victims
and survivors of armed violence, whether conflict- or
crime-related. Member States should also ensure that
preventing and combating small arms and ammunition
proliferation and misuse are fundamental elements of
the mandates of all peacekeeping operations, and they
should support the work of civil society in its efforts to
combat the harmful consequences of small arms and
ammunition proliferation. Civil society played a pivotal
role in resolving the conflict in Cote d'Ivoire and can
do so elsewhere as well.

In that regard, I would like to make the following
three recommendations to the Security Council. First,
all United Nations Member States should fully honour all
their commitments under the Programme of Action and
ensure that they follow up on its Biennial Meetings and
Review Conferences on progress achieved, including
the International Tracing Instrument. Secondly, all
Member States should ratify the Arms Trade Treaty
and implement it robustly in order to ensure the
establishment of strict new international standards.
Similarly, all States should ratify the Firearms Protocol.
Thirdly, all States should actively promote and support a
full role for women as participants and decision-makers
in addressing the proliferation and misuse of small
arms and ammunition, including in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes and
in conflict prevention, conflict resolution and peace
processes at all levels.

I and the many innocent victims in my community
and all over the world have suffered from the terrible
yet preventable reality of the misuse and proliferation
of small arms and light weapons. It is up to the members
of the Security Council to work with the international
community to prevent others from being subjected to
such horrible suffering. On behalf of all the victims, I
urge every member of the Security Council to adopt a
resolution on small arms and light weapons, because
we perish or survive at their will.

