Mr. Drame (Mali) (spoke in French): First of all, on behalf of the President of the Republic of Mali, I would like to very warmly congratulate Viet Nam on assuming the presidency of the Security Council. I would like to warmly congratulate the delegation of the United States of America, led by Ambassador Kelly Craft, for the remarkable work done at the helm of the Council last month. On behalf of the delegation of Mali, I take this opportunity to congratulate the new members of the Council - Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam. In the same vein, I commend the important contribution made by the outgoing members - Cete d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait, Peru and Poland - to international peace and security. I would also like to thank all members of the Security Council, the countries that contribute troops and personnel to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the African Union, the European Union, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and Algeria, in its capacity as President of the Agreement Monitoring Committee, for their invaluable support to Mali at this most complex and difficult time in its history. I cannot end my thanks without reiterating the profound debt of gratitude the President of the Republic of Mali and the Government and the people of Mali owe to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his steadfast commitment to peace, security and development in Mali and the Sahel, which he demonstrated by attending the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)-France summit in Pau, less than 48 hours ago. First, the Government of Mali takes note of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/983). I thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, for his briefing. Secondly, we also take note of the comments and high expectations of Council members. On behalf of the Government of Mali, I would like to make a few remarks and to highlight, in particular, the most recent developments in Mali since the publication of the Secretary-General's report. Let me begin by reassuring the Council that today, more than ever before, the Government of the Republic of Mali remains very committed to the diligent implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation. Admittedly, the work of the Agreement Monitoring Committee has been suspended for some time, but I can inform the Council that the Committee will meet in Bamako on 19 January. In addition, during that period, the movements that signed the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and the Government of Mali continued to talk during a productive inter-Malian dialogue and to consult each other. It is not an exaggeration to say that, at the end of that period, the Malian parties once again reached agreement on the key issues pertaining to the implementation of the Agreement. It is that inter-Malian dialogue that has enabled the significant steps forward that are on the agenda of the next meeting of the Agreement's monitoring committee, to be held at the end of this week. That productive inter-Malian dialogue also enabled the participation of the Coordination des mouvements de 'Azawad and Platform coalition of armed groups in the inclusive national dialogue. Their participation has been the key to the success of the dialogue, which has been welcomed in Mali, by our immediate neighbours in Africa and by the world. The participation of the Coordination des mouvements de l'Azawad, which had suspended its contribution to the preparatory work, is the result of contact being maintained, despite the suspension, throughout the period from August onward. I can assure you that today, all the Malian parties are committed to taking the last important steps towards the implementation of the Agreement. From Sunday onward, we will enter a period of accelerated implementation of the Agreement, thanks to the inter-Malian dialogue, which benefited from the contribution of the entire international community, and to MINUSMA. I welcome the good offices of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and his staff in helping to bring the Malian parties together outside the Agreement's monitoring committee. The national dialogue was a complete success, with the participation of trade unions and employers'organizations and of youth and women's associations, and its outcomes were adopted on 22 December 2019. Among the recommendations and outcomes, it was decided to place particular emphasis on four, which, it should be recalled, are intended to speed up the implementation of the Agreement. The first resolution concerns the holding of parliamentary elections on the basis of the current electoral constituencies. Needless to say, there is a strong commitment on the part of the country's stakeholders to launch a process of territorial reorganization and to draw new administrative and electoral boundaries with a view to further the representation in parliament of all the country's components. The second resolution concerns the holding of a referendum and the review of the Constitution of 25 February 1992 involving all stakeholders. The organization of legislative elections and the holding of a constitutional referendum will create the conditions for speeding up the political and institutional reforms needed to establish a National Assembly that is representative of Mali's national diversity. The third resolution concerns the immediate, countrywide deployment of the reconstituted defence and security forces and the adoption of legislation in the course of 2020 on the role of traditional leaders and powers and of religious authorities in conflict prevention and management. The fourth resolution concerns the review of certain provisions of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali that emerged from the process, in accordance with the mechanisms provided for in article 65 of the Agreement. Although concerns had been raised about the manner in which the Agreement would be discussed, the fact that the inclusive national dialogue had discussed it did not sabotage the process. On the contrary, it gave new legitimacy to the Agreement and to the commitment of the Malian parties - hence the recommendation to review certain mechanisms to facilitate its implementation. All those issues had already been discussed during the inter-Malian exchanges that preceded the national dialogue. As I have said, the national dialogue was an important moment in the life of the nation, when a genuine national consensus was forged through active solidarity. By enabling all national stakeholders, including the Coordination des mouvements de VAzawad and the Platform, to actively participate in open discussions on the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and the means of enriching that precious instrument for the restoration of peace in Mali, the national dialogue has changed the Agreement from a bilateral instrument between the Mouvements and the Government to a popular national issue. For his part, the President of the Republic of Mali undertook to do everything in his power to ensure that the resolutions and recommendations stemming from the national dialogue are implemented in keeping with the laws in force. A follow-up mechanism will be set up shortly. On the question of the redeployment of defence and security forces, I am pleased to inform the Council of the tangible progress that has been made. A technical committee on security met at the end of November and drew up a plan for the deployment of several battalions in the northern regions of the country. In other words, the signatory parties - the Government parties and the military leaders - with the encouragement of the international community, especially MINUSMA, have reached agreement on a deployment plan that will be endorsed next Sunday at the meeting of the Agreement's monitoring committee. From that moment on, the way will be paved for the deployment of at least 1,330 former combatants from the signatory armed groups, through the mechanism known as Operational Coordination Mechanism, in the four northern regions. The plan is to deploy a company to Menaka and a battalion each to Timbuktu, Gao and Kidal. Similarly, confirming the Government's determination to honour the commitments contained in the Agreement, the President signed a decree on 12 December 2019 to appoint, on an exceptional basis, approximately 100 former combatants from the signatory armed groups to various officer ranks in the Malian army. That is not an effective return to the forces of so-called former FAMAs, or those who at one point in the country's history left the national army, but they have come back and are today working in the same uniforms, under the same flag as their brothers-in-arms. I believe that there are significant advances taking place on the ground in Mali today and that it was my duty to bring them to the attention of your august Council. Security sector reform is under way and isbeing strengthened with the adoption of an action plan by the National Council for Security Sector Reform, which is attached to the Prime Minister and Head of Government. With regard to the tensions among signatory parties to the Agreement in the region and around the town of Menaka, I am pleased to announce that a positive outcome among them was reached. Turning to the development issues in the northern regions of Mali, I am also pleased to note the very significant progress made in the promulgation of all the texts constituting the legal and institutional framework of the northern development zone in Mali and the establishment of the Sustainable Development Fund, which is the financial instrument responsible for implementing the development strategy for the northern regions, to which the Government contributed $72 million in 2019. For the fiscal year 2020, $44 million has been earmarked. These financial efforts of the State further illustrate the Government's willingness to expedite the implementation of the Agreement. At the joint initiative of the Government and the signatories, a pilot project will soon be launched in the northern regions of the country. In terms of national reconciliation, I can assure Council members that an important step has also been taken. The Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission has to date registered 16,000 depositions from victims through its regional offices, and public hearings began on 8 December 2019. The mandate of the Commission has been extended until 31 December 2021 and now covers all incidents that occurred in Mali from 1960 to 2019. The law of national understanding, promulgated in July 2019 exonerates persons who committed or were accomplices to crimes in the context of the painful events that occurred in Mali from January 2012, in accordance with the recommendations of the Conference of National Understanding. However, the law does not constitute a guarantee of impunity. On the contrary, the law of national understanding specifically excludes war crimes, crimes against humanity, rape and crimes not subject to a statute of limitations. Notwithstanding real progress on the implementation of the Agreement, the Malian parties must again redouble their commitments and efforts so as to enable the Malian people to fully enjoy the dividends of peace. The remarks made by Council members today have been heard. Their concerns and observations will drive us to step up our determination to make progress in the implementation of the Agreement. Myriad immense challenges persist, in particular the deterioration of the security environment, especially in central Mali, intercommunal tensions and the lack of financial resources, namely, pledges made by partners. The situation in the regions of central Mali remains a source of major concern for the Government. The tragic events of the night of 30 September to 1 October 2019 in Mondoro and Boulekessi and the terrorist attack of 18 November 2019 in Indelimane, in the Menaka region, remind us that our adversaries - terrorist groups, drug traffickers and other types of traffickers - are determined to destabilize Mali, its neighbouring countries and the region as a whole. Worse still, in addition to sowing terror in our shared space on a daily basis, these forces of evil are exploiting our populations, pitting one group against another. The factions created and manipulated by these criminal groups stoke intercommunal violence, which has unfortunately so afflicted our country, as well as our neighbours. The Government is fully aware of the complexity of the situation in central Mali, which is why it has opted for a comprehensive approach by adopting an integrated security plan for the central regions and developing a consultation framework to politically manage the political issues of Centre. The Head of State recently appointed a high representative for this purpose. Multifaceted efforts are under way today to attenuate tensions ina perceptible way in the region. The arrangement provides for political measures, including dialogue among communities, the strengthening of the security apparatus to protect people and their property, and providing peace dividends for the people. In addition to devising an integrated security plan for the Centre region, the Prime Minister has made a number of visits to Centre, and the results are very encouraging. This week, the High Islamic Council of Mali is organizing an important forum on issues relating to religion in the centre of the country. The ulemas of Mali will have the opportunity to discuss their views on the practices of Islam and the abuses that have caused such pain in the centre of our country. With regard to the human rights situation, I would like to emphasize the Malian Government's resolve to respect and ensure respect for human rights and to fight impunity. The four cases of human rightsviolations mentioned in the Secretary-General's report and attributed to the Malian defence and security forces will be investigated and subject to administrative and disciplinary measures when responsibility is assigned. Similarly, the Government is aware of its primary responsibility to protect civilians, which is why it will continue to deploy the efforts needed to ensure the security of people and their property throughout the territory. It is also the reason why, following the violence that Centre experienced during the first half of last year, several alleged perpetrators of violent acts were arrested and are now in the hands of the courts to answer for their actions. It is true, however, that the security situation, the lack of competent public services in some towns and expertise deficiencies in certain fields do not favour the rapid conclusion of any open procedures. Shouldering its full responsibility for managing the humanitarian crisis, the Government of Mali is working tirelessly and in good faith to ensure the diligent and inclusive implementation of the relevant provisions of the Agreement, which provide for, inter alia, a framework for the return of refugees and displaced persons to their places of origin. The Government is also continuing its actions and programmes aimed at providing those affected with an improved quality of life, notably through the provision of basic social services, in accordance with the national humanitarian action policy and our action plan for the period 2016- 2020. The difficulties that the population is currently facing are unfortunately being used by those acting in bad faith, which sparked the protests that led to the pillaging of the MINUSMA camp on 12 October 2019 in Sevare. Similarly, a few days ago, in Bandiagara, there were demonstrations against the presence of United Nations forces. Every time such incidents have occurred, the Government has unambiguously and fully assumed all of its responsibilities, not only by condemning them but also by inviting Malian public opinion not to confuse our friends with our enemies, or confuse the international forces that are in our country at our request and with our approval - at our insistence - with those who are calling for their departure in order to bring about the ruin of our country and institutions. There is no ambiguity in the position of the Malian Government is this regard every time there is an incident. We will continue to raise awareness among our people on the ground so that the abuses that arise from time to time remain exceptions to the rule. Furthermore, when looking at the way that people in Bamako and elsewhere act with regard to those who are calling for protest against international forces, we realize that the majority of the Malian people are grateful for the efforts of the international community and the international forces that have come to help us at our request. Such acknowledgement is something that the Government of Mali would like to reiterate to members of the Council today. We express our deep gratitude for the efforts that the international community undertaken from the outbreak of the Malian crisis until today. That is why we have increased our contact with those in charge of MINUSMA at all levels so as to reassure the MINUSMA forces, personnel and leadership of our solidarity with them at all times and of our gratitude and that of the Malian people. What some call an anti-international force sentiment is not widespread in Mali. It is only from a minority. The Malian people, in general, continue to acknowledge and appreciate the support of international forces and their efforts on behalf of their Malian brothers in arms. We say that to the Malian people every day. I had the opportunity to say it only a few days ago to MINUSMA when, following demonstrations on the Dogon Plateau in Bandiagara, I went to the MINUSMA premises to say that MINUSMA is us. MINUSMA is made up of people from Togo, Burkina Faso, Senegal and the Niger and our friends from outside Africa who decided to send their children to us because we are in difficulty. I ask the Council to believe that this message of resolve and reason from the Government of the Republic of Mali is well understood by the Malian people and by Malian public opinion. That enables the President of the Republic to say and reiterate to the diplomatic corps, particularly when they present their credentials, and to traditional authorities and civil society that Mali will be eternally grateful to the international community. The regional dimension of the Malian crisis represents another, and not insignificant, challenge to the implementation of the Agreement. That is at the heart of the commitment of the States members of the G-5 Sahel to stabilizing the region. As I was saying earlier, the increase in terrorist attacks in recent weeks in the Sahel region, particularly in the tri-border regionof Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger, highlights the urgent need for the international community to step up its efforts at our side in order to ensure that the G-5 Sahel Joint Force has the necessary human, material and financial resources to implement its mandate. As Council members can imagine, Mali welcomes the conclusions of the Pau summit, held between the Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel and the President of the French Republic, in particular the common commitment to combating active terrorist groups operating in the area by immediately focusing military efforts in the tri-border region under the joint command of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force and Operation Barkhane, targeting, as a priority, Islamic State in Greater Sahara, a branch of Da'esh, or Islamic State; the training of national armies, with particular emphasis on sharing intelligence with foreign forces; the restoration of State authority throughout the Sahel countries, particularly in the Kidal region; and working in partnership for the development of the Sahel. I welcome the decision of the Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS, our subregional organization, to strengthen support for the fight against terrorism in the region. In conclusion, I wish to commend the remarkable work being done on the ground by the women and men of MINUSMA under the able leadership of Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, whose good offices, constantly provided to us, have enabled Mali to make progress towards national consensus. The good offices of Ambassador Annadif made it possible to engage in a political dialogue that led to what is known as the political agreement on governance, signed on 2 May 2019. That resulted in the formation of an inclusive Government, making it possible to significantly ease political and social tensions in the country in a meaningful and verifiable manner. We hope that the Head of MINUSMA, Mr. Annadif, continues to provide his good offices so that Mali and the Malian people can regain the consensus without which it will not be possible to achieve the national unity to enable our country to overcome the challenges and ward off threats. I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to all the victims of the Malian crisis, civilian and military, foreign and Malian alike, all of whom fell for the freedom of Mali. I reiterate the gratitude of the President of the Republic, the Government and the entire people to the French Barkhane force, to the
