Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): My delegation is delighted
that today we are able to consider the text of a draft
resolution which the Friends of Haiti have put together on
the situation in that country, the substance of which
derives from the content of the Secretary-General's report
of 17 January 1995. Nigeria is especially pleased that,
thanks to the successful intervention of the Multinational
Force (MNF), the situation in Haiti can now be described
as secure and stable and, in the words of the Secretary-
General,

"people can move freely throughout the country; the
constitutional Government exercises its authority
over the whole country; and the Provisional
Electoral Council is making preparations for
legislative and local elections." (S/1995/46, para. 78)

Specially welcome is the observation that no serious
danger to the existence of the Government can now be
identified in Haiti.

In spite of these positive developments, experience
in Haiti shows that there is a need for constant vigilance
on the part of both the newly installed Government and
the international community so that the gains so far
achieved may not be jeopardized. Vigilance is all the
more necessary in View of the fact that, as the
Secretary-General himself underlines in his report, the
crime rate in Haiti is still unacceptably high and breaches
of security occurring in various parts of the country
negatively affect the social situation.

 

The current draft resolution before the Security
Council is timely and, in our opinion, balanced and
constructive. My delegation will therefore support it, and
for at least three reasons.

First, the draft resolution, in authorizing the current
phase of United Nations operations in Haiti, has secured the
consent of the Government of Haiti, which is a vital
prerequisite for all Chapter VI United Nations peace-
keeping operations. It is our understanding that the up to
6,000 troops to be deployed in Haiti will use force only in
exercise of the right of self-defence and in fulfilment of
other objectives defined in the mandate.

Secondly, my delegation is in agreement with the six-
month mandate period provided for the United Nations
operation in the first instance, which accords with the
Secretary-General's recommendation. However, as the
draft resolution underlines in its penultimate preambular
paragraph, it is important that the force level of UNMIH be
kept under constant review. My delegation is, in fact, in
favour of establishing a uniform standard for all
peace-keeping operations authorized by the Security
Council and, hence, would support the insertion of the
substance of the language of the present text in all future
resolutions which deal with mandate extensions and reviews
of force levels of United Nations peace-keeping operations.

Finally, my delegation welcomes the import of
operative paragraph 10 of the current draft resolution,
concerning the international community's commitment to
assisting and supporting the economic, social and
constitutional development in Haiti in recognition of their
importance for sustaining a secure and stable environment.
This provision accords with what should be the
international community's commitment to assisting all
States in post-conflict peace-building situations. In our
View, what is good for Haiti should be good for all other
States newly emerging from years of conflict. I am talking
in particular about Mozambique, Somalia, Rwanda and,
hopefully, Liberia.

In conclusion, the transition of the international peace-
keeping operation in Haiti from the Multinational Force to
the United Nations, as proposed in the present draft
resolution, marks a very important phase in our collective
efforts to help establish peace and security in Haiti. We
commend the efforts of the States that have participated in
the Multinational Force. We also commend the
Organization of American States, as well as the
International Civilian Mission in Haiti, for the work they
have done in Haiti. We commend also the
Secretary-General for his tireless efforts to secure peace
in Haiti. We trust that the transfer of responsibility from
the Multinational Force to UNMIH will be hitch-free and
that the remaining complex tasks of national rehabilitation
and national reconstruction in Haiti will be carried out
with equal vigour and equal commitment so that peace,
stability and development may prosper and be sustained
in that country.

