The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mukongo
Ngay (Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a
seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 5/2004/327, which contains the text of a
letter dated 26 April 2004 from the representative of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its serious
concern regarding recent reports of an incursion
into the Democratic Republic of the Congo by
elements of the Rwandan army.

"The Security Council further expresses its
concern at the reports of increased military
activities of the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of
incursions made by them on the territory of
Rwanda.

"The Security Council condemns in this
context any impediments to the freedom of
movement of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), reaffirms its full support for
MONUC's efforts to stabilize the situation in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and encourages MONUC to continue to
report to it on the military situation in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
accordance with its mandate.

"The Security Council attaches great
importance to respect for the national sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Democratic
Republic of Congo, of which it condemns any
violation, as well as any violation of its relevant
resolutions.

"The Security Council also attaches great
importance to respect for the national sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Rwanda and condemns
any incursions of armed groups into this country.

"The Security Council demands that the
Government of Rwanda takes measures to
prevent the presence of any of its troops on the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

"The Security Council calls on the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda to investigate jointly, with the
assistance of MONUC, the substance of recent
reports on armed incursions across their mutual
border.

"The Security Council further calls on both
Governments to establish border security
mechanisms to prevent the recurrence of such
incidents.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the commitments made by the Governments
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda in Pretoria, on 27 November 2003, and
urges both Governments to implement
expeditiously the provisions contained in the
communique issued on that date.

"The Security Council further underlines
that the disarmament and demobilization of all
armed groups, including in particular the ex-
Forces armees rwandaises (ex-FAR) and

Interahamwe combatants, are essential to the
settlement of the conflict in the Democratic

Republic of the Congo, and calls on

Governments of Rwanda and the Democratic
the

Republic of the Congo to take all necessary
measures to facilitate the swift and voluntary
repatriation of Rwandan combatants from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

"The Security Council encourages the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda to continue to take steps to
normalize their relations. It commends, in this
context, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for the efforts that led to
the arrest of Mr. Yusufu Munyakazi, indicted,
inter alia, on charges of genocide, and his
subsequent transfer to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, and it calls on all Member
States to intensify efforts to arrest and transfer
suspects sought by the Tribunal.

"The Security Council urges all Governments in
the region to encourage the re-establishment of
confidence between neighbouring countries, in
accordance with the Declaration of Principles on
Good-Neighbourly Relations and Cooperation
between the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and of Burundi, Rwanda
and Uganda, adopted in New York, by leaders of
the region, on 25 September 2003, with a View to
achieving the normalization of their relations."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2004/15.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at I p.m.

