Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, allow me to thank Mr. Kamalesh
Sharma, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in Timor-Leste and head of mission, for
introducing the report under consideration and for the
useful information he has given us.

My delegation, in agreeing to the establishment
of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), had clearly pointed out that developments
in the situation and experience in the field would be
highly instructive for us regarding possible additional
action by the international community. Consideration
of the special report of the Secretary-General of 10
March allowed us to voice our concern regarding the
difficulties and threats which continue to block
security, stability and the development of Timor-Leste.

The adoption of resolution 1473 (2003) and the
submission of the report under consideration thus are
results of the Council's concern and willingness to take
specific measures to avoid jeopardizing gains that have
been achieved barely one year after independence.

In considering the report before us, my delegation
is still concerned about the difficulties linked to the
strengthening of political, administrative, security and
judicial institutions. However, we appreciate the efforts
made by the authorities to ensure a broad diversity of
views in political debate, as well as in the promotion of
administration and justice in the service of all.

We are gratified by positive developments in the
relationship between Timor-Leste and its neighbours,
in particular Indonesia, and urge them to give pride of
place to dialogue and cooperation for peace, security
and the stability of the region. We encourage the
authorities of Timor-Leste to pursue their initiatives at
integration in international, regional and subregional
organizations and institutions. Moreover, we hail the
commendable contribution of the United Nations to
carrying out the objectives set down in the plan for the
implementation of UNMISET's mandate, and we
appreciate consultations that have taken place with the
Government, the population of Timor-Leste and the
donors to work for the implementation of these goals.

We are encouraged by the fact that the strategic
plan described in paragraph 16 of the report is being
elaborated; we hope that it will make it possible
effectively to facilitate the progressive replacement of
civil advisers with nationals.
My delegation notes that implementation of
Programme I, on stability, democracy and justice,
continues to be hampered by several factors the
resolution of which requires bilateral and multilateral
assistance. We support the creation of the Office of the
Provedor for Human Rights and Justice and proposals
aimed at strengthening justice.

In addition, we believe that Programme II, on
internal security and law enforcement, requires more
thorough training of the National Police of Timor-Leste
(PNTL) to enable it better to shoulder the various
responsibilities assigned to it. We welcome the actions
undertaken by the Government in cooperation with the
United Nations and the donor community to strengthen
the institutional capacity of the PNTL.

My delegation welcomes the support that the
military component of UNMISET is continuing to
provide for the strengthening of the external security
and the territorial integrity of Timor-Leste, under
Programme III, on external security and border control.
We share the observations and recommendations of the
Secretary-General on this issue, in particular his
assessment that international military capability will be
essential in the coming months to promote security in
the area of the Tactical Coordination Line and to
provide a short-term response to the threats posed by
armed groups.

With respect to the role of the United Nations, my
delegation deplores the slow pace of economic activity,
which has been hindered mainly by the continued
reduction of the international presence and by the still
relatively unpredictable security situation. We
encourage the continuation of actions by UNMISET,
the agencies, funds and programmes of the United
Nations, the World Bank and Member States, in
cooperation with civil society and the private sector, to
strengthen economic activity.

In order to meet the numerous challenges
intrinsic to laying the foundations of a viable State in
Timor-Leste, the commitment of the international
community is completely indispensable in
complementing the efforts made by the people of
Timor-Leste themselves. We especially call on donors
to support the fundamental sectors, including those of
defence, police, administration and justice. That will
undoubtedly contribute to the establishment of peace,
security and stability, which are fundamental to a
country's sustainable development.

My delegation hopes that the General Assembly
will consider positively the revised draft budget of
UNMISET for the period 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004,
which will be submitted to the Assembly during its
fifty-eighth session.

My delegation supports the observations and
recommendations made by the Secretary-General and
the proposal to renew UNMISET's mandate for an
additional year ending 20 May 2004 so that actions
begun can be successfully completed.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to renew
its full support for the efforts made by UNMISET,
under the dynamic leadership of Ambassador Kamalesh
Sharma, for the strengthening of internal stability and
the development of Timor-Leste.

