Mrs. Mesquita Borges (Timor-Leste): At the outset,
let me thank you, Madam President, for presiding over
this meeting and on assumping the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I thank Mr. Trovoada,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Guinea-Bissau, for his briefing to the Council and his
efforts to resolve the crisis.

I am honoured to address the Council on behalf
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP), whose members include Angola, Brazil,
Cape Verde, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tome' and Principe and my
own country, Timor-Leste. We welcome the statements
issued by the Council on the situation in Guinea-Bissau,
as well as the Secretary-General's reports (S/2015/619 and S/2015/626), whose recommendations we fully
endorse.

Since the peaceful, free and fair elections of 2014,
in which the people of Guinea-Bissau clearly expressed
their desire for stability and their commitment to
democratic rule, much progress has been made in
Guinea-Bissau, not only in the provision of services to
the population, or the payment of arrears, but also in
the important steps made concerning the much-needed
reforms and on consolidation of the rule of law. It is
vital for Guinea-Bissau and its people that the gains
made are notjeopardized, and that the reforms continue
to be implemented.

The CPLP member States regret the recent political
developments and remain deeply concerned at the
current situation in Guinea-Bissau. We call on all
stakeholders, namely, the organs of sovereignty, the
political parties represented in Parliament, civil society
and others, to engage in constructive political dialogue.
Statesmanship is required to defuse the current political
crisis, with full respect of the Constitution and the rule
of law, as well as the spirit of inclusion.

While the authorities in Guinea-Bissau are solely
responsible for resolving the political crisis, it is
crucial that the process fully respect the Constitution.
It is equally paramount to the continued stability of the
country that the reforms initiated be pursued, especially
the reforms of the security and justice sectors and the
fight against impunity. We welcome the fact that the
armed forces of Guinea-Bissau are complying with
their constitutional role and the law by avoiding any
interference in the present political crisis.

The national Strategic and Operational Plan,
entitled "Terra Ranka", reflects the aspirations
of Bissau-Guineans for greater political stability
and socioeconomic development, as well as for the
consolidation of the rule of law and the protection
and promotion of civil, political, economic, social
and cultural rights. The document, presented by the
President and the Prime Minister at the donor round
table in Brussels in March, garnered the support of the
international partners. The current political crisis could
undermine the progress already made in that regard,
and compromise continued economic progress.

We call on the international community to
continue to support Guinea-Bissau and its people
in the implementation of the State reforms and
development plans. At the same time, we stress that the
key responsibility for achieving the necessary stable
environment of political and institutional cooperation
rests on the national stakeholders.

In conclusion, we would like to recognize the
concerted efforts of the international community to
assist Guinea-Bissau in the crisis. In that regard, we
appreciate and commend the efforts of the Peacebuilding
Commission, in particular those of Ambassador
Patriota, Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration,
who convened an opportune meeting on 17 August
to evaluate the situation. The meeting resulted in a
statement that the CPLP fully endorses.
We also welcome the efforts made by regional
leaders and by regional organizations, such as the
African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS). In particular, we
thank ECOWAS for its mediation efforts and for the
ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau's important role in
maintaining peace and security.

The CPLP stands ready, together with the rest of
the international community, to continue its support
to Guinea-Bissau, while fully respecting national
ownership. I take this opportunity to inform Council
members that, at its meeting ofthe Council of Ministers
held in Dili in July, the CPLP decided to deploy to
Guinea-Bissau in the near future a joint mission of the
President of the CPLP Council of Ministers and the
Executive Secretary.

