The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the

understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the

Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council congratulates the
Palestinian people on an electoral process that
was free, fair and secure. It commends all the
parties for the preparation and conduct of the
elections, particularly the Central Elections
Commission and the Palestinian Authority
security forces, for their professionalism.

"The Security Council expresses its
expectation that a new Government will remain
committed to realizing the aspirations of the
Palestinian people for peace and statehood. The
Security Council welcomes President Abbas'
affirmation that the Palestinian Authority remains
committed to the road map, previous agreements
and obligations between the parties, and a
negotiated two-State solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. The Security Council
expresses its view that all members of a future
Palestinian Government must be committed to the
aforementioned instruments and principles.

"Cognizant of the humanitarian needs of the
Palestinian people, the Security Council reaffirms
its continuing interest in the fiscal stability of the
caretaker Government, consistent with clear
reform and austerity benchmarks. The Security
Council notes that major donors have indicated
they will review future assistance to a new
Palestinian Authority Government against that
Government's commitment to the principles of
non-violence, recognition of Israel, and
acceptance of previous agreements and
obligations, including the road map.

"The Security Council reminds both parties
of their obligation under the road map and on
existing agreements, including on movement and
access. It calls on both parties to avoid unilateral
actions which prejudice final status issues. The
Security Council underlines the need for the
Palestinian Authority to prevent terrorist attacks
and dismantle the infrastructure of terror. It
reiterates its view that settlement expansion must
stop and its concern regarding the route of the
barrier.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
profound attachment to the vision of two
democratic States, Israel and Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security. The Security
Council reiterates the importance of and the need
to achieve a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the Middle East, based on all its relevant
resolutions, including its resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), the
Madrid terms of reference and the principle of
land for peace."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2006/6.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.
06-233 10
