Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his comprehensive
briefing.

A year has passed since the adoption of resolution
1860 (2009), which called for a cessation of Israel's
aggression against the Gaza Strip. Yet Israel continues
to tighten the noose around Gaza. More than a year
after the adoption of resolution 1860 (2009), Israel
continues to subject the inhabitants of Gaza to
collective punishment. Indeed, Israel has neither
opened the crossing points nor authorized
reconstruction activities. In addition, it is limiting
movement in and out of Gaza, thus depriving the
inhabitants of their right to a decent life, work, water,
food and medicine.

Israel's policy is a flagrant violation of not only
the provisions of resolution 1860 (2009), but also of
the principles and provisions of international law and
international humanitarian law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention and The Hague regime. Israel has
turned Gaza into one big prison and continues, through
its illegitimate ambitions, to suppress the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people to just and lasting
peace and security in the region. These aspirations
have been reflected in a great many Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions.

There are countless examples of this, and at a
time when my Government is striving to implement all
of the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006), Israel
continues to violate Lebanon's sovereignty on an
almost daily basis, by ground, air and sea. It continues
to occupy the north part of the village of Ghajar, the
Kfar Shouba hills and the Shaba'a farms. It also
refuses to provide maps of the mines and cluster bombs
that it has laid in my country. Israel continues to refuse
to implement resolution 497 (1981) and to fully
withdraw from the Syrian Golan to the lines of 4 June
1967. It also continues to seek to change the legal and
physical status of the Golan by establishing and
expanding its settlements there.

What is taking place in Palestine is even worse.
Israel is trying to delude the world into believing that it
wants to return to peace negotiations without any
preconditions. At the same time, it is attempting to
distract the international community by announcing
what it calls a freeze on settlement activities for 10
months, to conceal its continued settlement policy in
the West Bank, in particular in and around occupied
East Jerusalem.

The Israeli Prime Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu,
claims that he is ready to resume negotiations without
preconditions. At the same time, he prejudges their
outcome by sticking to what he considers to be
constants, thus undermining the very basis of
negotiations as such. On the future of the West Bank
settlements, he declared on 24 January: "Our message
is clear: we are planting here, we will stay here, we
will build here. This place will be an inseparable part
of the State of Israel forever".

With respect to the borders, he declared on
20 January that Israel will have to maintain a security
presence along the eastern side of any possible future
Palestinian State. This is in addition to his previous
statements rejecting the right of return of Palestinian
refugees to their land, his commitment to the concept
of Jerusalem as the sole capital of Israel, and his
insistent demands that Palestinians and Arabs in
general recognize the Jewish nature of the State of
Israel, with all that these demands imply for the right
of return of the refugees and the threat that they
represent to the future of Arabs in that State.

By his reasoning, these are not prerequisites or
preconditions, even though he refers to preconditions
when Palestinians demand a comprehensive end to the
settlement policy. During negotiations on the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, he justifies his
settlement policy by what he calls natural growth.

The figures here will enable us to understand
Netanyahu's position. Since 1991, the start of what we
today call the peace process, the number of settlers in
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, has increased
from 200,000 to close to 500,000. Under the cover of
the peace process, the number of settlers has doubled
because Israel refuses to abide by calls for an end to
settlement activity.

Even worse is what is happening in East
Jerusalem, which Netanyahu would like to keep off the
table so as to enable Israel to continue the policy it has
adopted since its occupation of East Jerusalem in 1967.
This is a policy aimed at dismembering the city,
confiscating land and property, establishing
settlements, destroying houses and imposing
restrictions on the inhabitants of the city in order to
smother its Arab identity. Israel is clearly escalating its
policy aimed at stifling East Jerusalem and changing
its demographic composition and its historic and
cultural character. For example, in November 2009 the
Israeli Government launched the construction of 900
new housing units in the settlement of Gilo and
approved during the last week of December 2009 the
building of 700 new housing units in the Har Homa
settlement, which was built on Mount Abu Ghneim.

Israel is continuing its settlement projects in
occupied East Jerusalem. In addition to the stepping up
of its settlement activity, Israel has also heightened its
restrictive policies against the inhabitants of East
Jerusalem through the continued destruction of houses
in Sheikh Jarrah, Silwan and al-Bustan, limitations on
building permits for Palestinians and the confiscation
of residency permits from around 5,000 of the city's
inhabitants. It continues to impose restrictions on
Palestinians' freedom of faith and belief through the
restrictions imposed on Muslims during Friday prayers
in the Al-Aqsa mosque. The same is true of the
restrictions imposed on Christians in Jerusalem at
Christmas, which deprive them of the joy of
celebrating Christmas in their church. Is it acceptable
to prevent worshippers from entering the holy sites
without an Israeli permit? This is in addition to Israeli
excavations under the Al-Aqsa mosque, which threaten
its foundations.

The very least that can be said about these
practices is that they are a blatant challenge to
international law, international humanitarian law, the
United Nations Charter and dozens of resolutions
adopted by the Security Council and the General
Assembly. All those resolutions state that occupied
East Jerusalem is an integral part of the occupied
Palestinian territory. All of these Israeli practices and
changes to the nature of the city are null and void and
are without legitimacy or legality. Furthermore, these
acts carried out in East Jerusalem threaten the
prospects of achieving a final settlement of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, since without East Jerusalem there
is no viable, contiguous Palestinian State, and no
historic, religious, cultural meaning or importance for
the Palestinian people or Arabs in general. Jerusalem
is, as we say and sing, the flower of all cities.
Jerusalem is not just a monument of stone or a group of
hills. Jerusalem is a spiritual map. It is the path of
those who have risen to heaven. It is the very symbol of
international law. What the occupation accomplishes is
to violate that law. It is a violation of the multiple
dimensions of the city and the narrative of tolerance
that it contains. That is the reason behind Lebanese
President Sleiman's 12 November 2008 address to the
General Assembly, speaking of dialogue among
cultures, when he said that

"... Jerusalem, the city of peace, where believers
in the monotheistic religions come together,
would not realize its historic mission unless the
injustice imposed on its sons and on the
Palestinian people as a whole is redressed and the
occupation is ended." (A/63/PV.46, p. 16)

The path towards peace is well known. It has
been charted by Security Council resolutions. All we
ask is that the Council fully assume its responsibilities
and work to implement those resolutions.

