Mr. Eler (Turkey): I would like to thank Special
Representative Kubis and Executive Director Fedotov
for their briefings. I also thank Ambassador Tanin for
his remarks.

Afghanistan today stands at a crucial crossroads,
with key political, security and economic transformation
processes under way. Turkey believes that Afghanistan's
future should be based on a conscious strategy that
draws strength from local ownership and leadership
and seeks to pull together various strands of efforts
into a meaningful whole. The success of those efforts is
vital for a peaceful, secure and stable Afghanistan that
can effectively serve the needs of its people.

The most important step in this direction has been
taken with the conduct of the presidential and provincial
elections. The enthusiastic voter participation amidst
grave security risks demonstrated the will of the
Afghan people to assume the ownership of their
own country. Turkey believes that despite the fragile
political and security atmosphere, the Afghan electoral
institutions - particularly the Independent Election
Commission and the Independent Electoral Complaints
Commission - have the necessary capacity to handle
any impasse or obstacle that might arise in the election
process, and trust that a successful political transition
will take place. We also believe that all stakeholders
will act responsibly and exercise self-restraint. At this
vital juncture, the international community should
keep investing in positive scenarios for the future of
the country.

The successful continuation of Afghan-led peace
and reconciliation efforts will constitute another
important step towards security, stability and political
transition. Turkey has supported from the outset the
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process, with the
High Peace Council at the core. We are fully aware of
the difficulties and challenges of the process. In this
context, we strongly condemn the attack last week on
the head of the secretariat of the High Peace Council,
Mr. Stanekzai, and hope that those responsible will
be swiftly brought to justice. We would also like to
stress that the increasing trend of civilian casualties is
worrisome, and increased attention to this phenomenon
is needed.

We are glad to observe the increasing regional
awareness and ownership related to finding sustainable
solutions to the problems of Afghanistan. As
international forces withdraw, regional cooperation and
commitment become increasingly vital to transforming
the region into a zone ofpeace, stability and prosperity.
Based on this vision, the region must come together to
transform common problems into mutual interests. In
this context, we appreciate all bilateral and multilateral
dialogue and cooperation efforts, and welcome the
positive momentum that has been reached in the
Istanbul Process. We look forward to the next Istanbul
Process Ministerial Conference in China in August.

To conclude, I would like to voice our strong
support for the crucial and comprehensive role the
United Nations and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan will continue to play in
supporting Afghanistan during and after the transition.
Our commitment to the needs of the United Nations in
Afghanistan is insurance for protecting the achievements
of the past 13 years on the ground. Turkey will always
remain in solidarity with the Afghan people and
continue to contribute to a safe, secure and prosperous
Afghanistan, as we have done for many decades.

