We thank the Permanent Mission of Estonia for holding this open video- teleconference (VTC) and for inviting Member States to provide their written views on the implementation of presidential note S/2017/507. We expect the meeting to further our collective commitment to a more open, transparent and accountable Security Council. We commend the Security Council for its growing attention to the improvement of its working methods. In that regard, we congratulate Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on its active leadership of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions, building upon the recent steps taken by Japan and Kuwait, to name but the two most recent Chairs of that subsidiary body. We wish also to highlight the pivotal role played by elected members in bringing fresh perspectives and proposals to that field. Finally, we express our appreciation for the briefings by Ambassador Inga Rhonda King, as Chair of the Informal Working Group; by Karen Landgren, Executive Director of the Security Council Report; and by Edward Luck of Columbia University. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has posed new challenges to the way we work, demanding creative thinking and, above all, flexibility. Technical difficulties and procedural challenges must be overcome through innovative solutions in order to allow the main organs of the United Nations to continue operating even at this difficult juncture. The decision to adopt a written voting procedure and to use VTC to hold meetings are the two main examples of measures that have been implemented by the main United Nations organs in order to continue their activities. However, we still face challenges in ensuring the necessary levels of transparency, efficiency and effectiveness in the work of the Security Council. We would like to highlight one specific topic: publicity. Due attention must be given to the announcement and webcasting of meetings so as to ensure that all Member States know what is being discussed in the Security Council. It is of the utmost importance that the Security Council continue to communicate with the wider membership even if it cannot hold in-person meetings. This is indispensable to consolidating the progress made in the past 15 years in the area of inclusion and accountability. Open VTCs allow all Member States to follow the Council's deliberations. It is also paramount to allow non-members of the Council to participate in Council discussions whenever their interests are especially affected. We welcome the measures adopted to include on the Security Council's website information on the VTC meetings and adopted outcomes, as well as up-to- date information on the informal programme of work. By avoiding setbacks in the area of transparency, the Security Council will demonstrate its capacity to effectively adapt to new realities. The Council must always operate within the letter and the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations as it acts on behalf of the entire membership. In that regard, it must be stressed that transparency and accountability are inextricable elements of the responsibility Member States conferred upon the members of the Security Council to act on their behalf. Therefore, effectiveness cannot be ensured without transparency. Regarding presidential note 507, the following issues still require our particular attention. First, regular coordination, cooperation and interaction with the principal organs of the United Nations should be reinforced. The relationship between the Security Council and the General Assembly must be complementary, as provided for in the United Nations Charter. Better coordination will help avoid instances of Security Council encroachment on the authority and mandate of the General Assembly and their consequent erosion. We encourage the holding of more regular and substantive consultations with the General Assembly to review work plans or consult on specific issues of mutual concern. We also highlight the ongoing need for the submission of a more analytical and comprehensive annual report, as well as of special reports on substantive issues. Secondly, the Security Council should tap into the advice and experience of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). Unfortunately, the synergies between the PBC and the Security Council still fall short of ideal. As Chair of the PBC Guinea- Bissau configuration, Brazil firmly believes that Member States must work harder to improve coordination, coherence and cooperation between those two bodies. The PBC can play an advisory role in different areas, including preventive diplomacy. It can provide cross-regional perspectives and assist in the dialogue with regional and subregional organizations. It can also work together with the Security Council to marshal much-needed resources and attention to countries that are facing a risk of relapse into conflict. Thirdly, the Security Council should enhance consultations with troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs). The perspectives of TCCs/PCCs must have a bearing on the review and drawdown of peacekeeping operations and special political missions. The Security Council should continue to work towards more effective and substantive consultations with TCCs/PCCs in a regular and timely manner. Fourthly, the Security Council should prioritize the holding of public meetings. Wherever possible, the Council's meetings should be public. Private meetings and informal consultations should be seen as exceptions. Fifthly, the wider membership should have better access to the subsidiary bodies. The access of affected Member States to the Security Council's subsidiary bodies should also be ensured, as appropriate. Article 31 of the United Nations Charter clearly states that any Member of the United Nations that is not a member of the Security Council may participate in the discussion of any question whenever the Council considers that the interests of that member are specially affected. There is no reason not to apply that provision to the subsidiary bodies. Sixthly, the decision-making process within the Security Council should be improved, including through better distribution of penholderships. A fair and adequate distribution of penholderships, as well as co-penholderships, among both permanent and elected members will help foster greater levels of transparency and accountability in the Council. The Chairs of the subsidiary bodies should be invited to be co-penholders on issues pertaining to their activities. A better distribution of penholderships will ensure that elected members have the necessary opportunities to substantively contribute to the Council's activities. Brazil considers that, if brought together, that set of measures, which is not exhaustive, would contribute to enhancing the effectiveness of Council decisions. A more open and transparent Council would probably deliver more effective decisions as its legitimacy would be enhanced. An opaque body, on the other hand, tends to be less effective given that, in some instances, its decisions are not fully grasped by the wider membership and might not take into account their concrete needs and expectations. Finally, we underscore that improvements in the working methods cannot be seen as a substitute for a structural reform of the Security Council, with the creation of new permanent and non-permanent seats. As we have stated on different occasions, the Council's effectiveness goes beyond procedure: it also relates to structure and composition. A structural reform would lead to a broad-based revision of the Council's working methods, with positive results in the areas of transparency, accountability and representativeness, resulting in a more effective and legitimate body. As we approach the United Nations seventy-fifth anniversary, we encourage all Member States to redouble their efforts to reform the Security Council, bringing it up to date with our contemporary reality.
