Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): I would like to
express my delegation's appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this formal meeting to
address a rapidly growing issue: demining in the context
of United Nations peace-keeping. In this regard, some of
the approaches outlined in document S/1996/621 call for
our careful consideration.

Discussing this problem highlights the manner in
which conflicts are being transformed and how the United
Nations is responding to the challenges posed by
humanitarian needs versus military imperatives. Indonesia
participated in the international Meeting on Mine-
clearance in Geneva in July 1995, reflecting its keen
interest in the dilemma land-mines pose to countries
immersed in or emerging from conflicts. We therefore
welcome this debate and exchange of views, which will
hopefully permit a better grasp of the issues at stake and
enhance our knowledge of how Member States can
respond to the need for demining.

Demining involves both humanitarian and
disarmament aspects and in terms of the Charter remains
the purview of the General Assembly. It is to be recalled
that the General Assembly has deal with these aspects in
the past, and adopted resolutions on them. The
involvement of peace-keeping forces in mine-clearance
does not in itself warrant a shift of responsibility from the
General Assembly to the Security Council.

The gravity of the problems attendant upon land-
mines and related devices has long been self-evident.
With more than 20,000 people across the planet being
killed or maimed in 1995 by mines, and considering that
85 million to 100 million land-mines remain uncleared in
65 countries, it seems that humanitarian tragedies are just

 

waiting to happen, particularly given the fact that 20 times
as many mines have been laid as have been removed.
Indeed, the use of land-mines is not a static problem but a
problem that continues to grow. In 1995, if 100,000 land-
mines were removed another 2 million to 5 million were
newly laid.

The impact of land-mines is such that it affects all
facets of national life. It is a dilemma for countries which
are often already underdeveloped and where life cannot
return to normal because of these deadly devices.
Consequently, it has become a global dilemma. The loss of
lives and destitution which the civilian populations have
suffered during years of debilitating conflict is only
perpetuated through the continued risks they endure as they
try to return to their daily lives and rebuild their
communities and their countries. Mines threaten all aspects
of the socio-economic life of innocent people: arable land
infested with mines is rendered useless; electrical plants,
water sites and infrastructures are inaccessible; maimed
victims, in addition to their own suffering, become burdens
to their families and tax the often insufficient medical
services; children make up more than half of the victims of
land-mines; refugees cannot return to their homes and
villages; new groups of displaced persons are created and
humanitarian aid cannot reach the populations in need. The
obstruction to national reconstruction that mines create is a
long-term problem. Given the circumstances I have
described, my delegation welcomes the decisions of several
States to impose a moratorium or ban on the production,
export and operational use of these weapons. In this regard,
my delegation believes that the review process of the
Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of
Certain Conventional Weapons is essential because it offers
the appropriate modality for dealing with land-mines and
related devices.

Indeed, the process of demining is a long term,
dangerous and expensive process which may take decades.
According to International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) sources, it would cost $33 billion to rid the world
of land-mines at this stage.

The United Nations has legitimately called the world
community's attention to the need for mine-clearance. In
this regard, we are strongly supportive of the initiative to
create the Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in Mine-
clearance. The pledging of $22 million has rendered it
operational. Such a fund permits a rapid disbursement of
funds with a great deal of flexibility and efficiency to
projects of an urgent nature. We contributed to this fund
following the International Meeting on Mine-Clearance,
held in Geneva in July 1995, and welcome its positive
development. The Organization's basic approach to land-
mine-clearance has been the principle of capacity-building
which is sustainable once United Nations agencies and
peace-keeping forces have withdrawn from the region.
The issue of mine-clearance is indeed complex, involving
technical, financial, political and administrative facets. In
dealing with the disastrous impact of land-mines on
innocent civilians, my delegation considers the three
approaches which warrant our careful scrutiny:
international law, financial assistance and technical aid.

The link between peace-keeping operations and
humanitarian programmes is fundamental since they both
function within the framework of peacemaking and post-
conflict peace-building. Indonesia supports the inclusion
in peace-keeping operation mandates of provisions
relating to mine-clearance work. Such operations have in
the past coordinated their activities with other United
Nations departments and agencies. First and foremost, the
Department of Humanitarian Affairs (DHA) has been the
focal point for demining. An integrated approach to mine-
clearance permits numerous agencies to coordinate their
activities through the central office of DHA in order to
operate effectively in the field. Other United Nations
agencies, such as the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), and the World
Health Organization (WHO), also play fundamental roles
in demining activities, which Indonesia fully supports.

In the past year the United Nations has engaged in
the implementation of demining in nine countries. Mine
Action Centres were established in different countries by
DHA. The mine-clearance operations in Afghanistan and
Cambodia are among the most successful. Since setting
up the process for mine-clearance and training can be
lengthy, it is not surprising that the best results were
evident in the programmes of longest standing. In Angola,
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) has set up a demining school which will
become the core of the mine-clearance programme. In
other areas there has been resistance: in Abkhazia, in
Georgia, peace-keepers have encountered a great deal of
resistance from the Abkhaz authorities, which has
inhibited their ability to undertake mine-clearance and
also carry out their mandate. It remains important that
mine-clearance activities in the context of peace-keeping
operations are linked closely to humanitarian activities
from the very beginning in order to ensure a coordinated
approach to the land-mine problem and the continuance

 

of mine-related activities following the peace-keeping
mandate.

Demining efforts encounter many obstacles. The lack
of adequate mapping of the layout of minefields is a serious
handicap to demining teams. Time is needed to build
national capacities for demining, and often teams have to
use a case-by-case approach for the different countries in
which they operate, since geography and mine types can
vary drastically. The political will of the local authorities to
cooperate with demining programmes can also seriously
hinder or help in eliminating mines. Finally, the capacity to
train locals to establish sustainable demining capacities will
be the only way to reduce the long-term effects of mines.

The need for research in mine technology remains the
area where the greatest efforts must be placed. The
technology in use for mine detection and clearance is
clearly outdated. The international community can
undeniably contribute to the provision of properly trained
and experienced instructors, trained manpower needed to
carry out demining, training for local populations and
appropriate and modern equipment to locate and destroy
land-mines. We fully support all efforts in this context.

The disastrous effects of land-mines can be curbed
through technical and financial assistance to demining
activities and programmes. For this to materialize,
international consensus and concerted political will among
the States of the global community are imperative in order
to deal with the problem at its source.

