Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is holding monthly meetings on
the situation in Syria to reaffirm members' positions
vis-a-vis the unprecedented suffering of the Syrian
people. We reiterate our words of condemnation and
regret to the media and our peoples. We have grown
used to it; the Syrian people has grown used to it; it
has become a part of the traditional practice that has
started to affect our outlook and our real engagement
with an interactive dialogue that seeks a common
ground to build upon to support a serious effort towards
a settlement.

It is important to give ourselves the opportunity
to review what the Security Council has achieved in
the past few months so that we can objectively judge
the approach it has adopted. Let us recall that these
meetings and their outcomes over these months have
not contributed to supporting the ceasefire. They have
brought no real pressure to bear on the parties to engage
in direct and serious political negotiations. They did not
even prevent the two horrific incidents that took place
this month - the first in Khan Shaykhun on 4 April
and the second, a terrorist explosion in the Al-Rashidin
neighbourhood on 15 April - claiming the lives of
more innocent men, women and children, in addition
to the hundreds of thousands who have lost their lives
during the past six years.

Reviewing the Security Council's approach to the
situation in Syria and its impact on the reality on the
ground has become an urgent matter. We have warned,
time and again that the Council cannot become a media
outlet. The impact of its statements must go beyond
making newspaper headlines. It is evident that with the
heightened level of discord, the work of the Council
is moving steadily towards that fate. If in a crisis of
this magnitude, we cannot find a modicum of common
ground to confront it, what must happen before we
make the necessary effort to overcome the current state
of polarization and opposing narrow interests?

I would like to thank Mr. O'Brien for his focused
and clear briefing today. We reiterate our support for
the humanitarian efforts of the United Nations. We are
ready to support any effort to alleviate the suffering of
civilians in any Syrian town, be it by facilitating access
to humanitarian assistance or the evacuation of the sick
and injured. We urge the parties concerned to facilitate
the mission of the Organization and to work to remove
any impediment.

I would like to express our deep regret that the
briefing, as expected, reflected the continued human
suffering in Syria. It was no different than previous
briefings, except in some details, locations and numbers.
The practices have not changed; the impediments
remain. The factors that continue to fuel the crisis
have not changed and will not change if international,
regional and internal parties continue to seek any excuse
to prevaricate or if the Security Council continues to
reflect points of divergence rather than commonalities
or to focus on details without looking at the full picture.
I therefore call on all parties to support the efforts of
the Secretary-General through the United Nations
Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. De Mistura, to reach an
agreement on starting a transitional period that meets
the aspirations of the Syrian people by establishing
democracy and freedoms in a unified sovereign
country, in accordance with the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015).

I also reiterate our call on all parties to engage
in a serious manner to counter terrorism and the
spread of terrorist groups in Syria and to confront
the phenomenon of armed groups and militia that are
not governed by any reason or law and that continue
to receive covert support in the form of weapons and
funds without their sponsors being held accountable
for those practices. The funding and sponsoring of
terrorism in an organized and systematic way in Syria
and other countries in the region are not a figment of
our imagination; they are a fact. They pose a threat to
countries in the region and are being watched by the
countries of the region and throughout the wider world.
Those countries will continue to endure that threat if
some continue to bury their heads in the sand.

There is still some common ground among the
members of the Security Council that can be built upon
if there is a serious will to do so. We are committed
to a frank dialogue on the Syrian crisis that is free of
polarization. We remain mindful of the centrality and
importance of cooperation between the co-chairs of
the International Syria Support Group - the United
States and the Russian Federation - as it pertains to
Syria at the political level and on the ground. We also
believe that Council documents, the statements of the
Support Group and any previous consensus reached
could be a foundation that we can build upon to assist in
revitalizing the work of the International Syria Support
Group. We are fully prepared to support any efforts in
that regard.

The challenges of the crisis and its repercussions
on the region and the world loom large, and no country
can address them alone. The saboteurs of the political
process in Syria - Special Envoy Mr. De Mistura has
mentioned them time and again - will seek to exploit
the divisions in the Council and among international
parties, continue to fuel the situation on the ground,
defeat any attempt at a political settlement and ensure
that the proxy war continues.

