Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Stephen O'Brien and Ms. Elizabeth Hoff for their
briefings, which once again give cause for indignation.
I would like to pay tribute to the work that they and
their teams are carrying out. Their briefings depict a
relentless spiral of violence that makes it impossible
for humanitarian actors to carry out their work and
condemns hundreds of thousands of people to hunger
and death. I would like to underscore three points today.

First, simple words cannot describe the seriousness
of the humanitarian situation in Aleppo today. Eastern
Aleppo is the double victim of a barrage of fire and
a siege that is fitting of the Middle Ages. Both target
civilians and constitute war crimes. According to
the information available to us, hundreds of people,
including many children, have been killed since last
Tuesday as a result of bombings and uninterrupted
shelling, which means that rescue teams are unable to
intervene to rescue the wounded from the rubble. Those
conditions make it impossible for humanitarian workers
to carry out their work by delivering humanitarian
aid and carrying out medical evacuations. No convoy
has been able to reach eastern Aleppo since July. The
humanitarian aid reserves in warehouses in western
Aleppo have now been exhausted. Today, more than
275,000 civilians in eastern Aleppo are besieged as a
result of the incessant bombing of the regime and its
supporters. They have no food, medical equipment
or access to essential services. The Special Envoy
unequivocally stated that the fall of eastern Aleppo will
trigger an unprecedented humanitarian crisis and could
force more than 200,000 people to flee to Turkey.

Secondly, the people of Aleppo are not the only
population suffering in Syria. The regime is besieging
civilians across the country and is refusing to abide
by the necessary monthly humanitarian aid convoy
authorizations, as part of a deliberate obstructive
policy to force the population to flee and its opponents
to submit. In November, the United Nations submitted
18 requests to access 900,000 people in 25 besieged
or hard-to-reach areas. One third of those requests
were rejected without any valid justification citing
humanitarian aid principles. In Duma, as Mr. O'Brien
pointed out to us, a major convoy that was to deliver
humanitarian aid to 70,000 people has been held up at
the last check point maintained by the regime. Syrian
authorities have demanded convoys to unload their
cargo, despite the fact that they are affixed with the

necessary clearance. Medical and health supplies are
still deliberately removed from convoys, and 45,000
medical supplies were removed and destroyed in
October. Aid continues to be hindered and destroyed and
the population continues to go hungry and untreated;
and all the while the regime continues to impose its
demands on the United Nations and its partners. I recall
that the Syrian authorities are expressly bound to abide
by their obligations under international humanitarian
law, an obligation that includes ensuring swift, safe and
unhindered access to the entire population in Syria, in
line with Security Council resolutions.

Thirdly, the regime and its allies continue their
illegal deliberate attacks on hospitals and medical staff,
actions that constitute war crimes. Five hospitals were
attacked between 3 to 15 November, leading to at least
two deaths and 19 injuries, including six medical staff.
As the Secretary-General pointed out yesterday, there
is no longer a single hospital functioning in eastern
Aleppo today. The WHO has reported 126 attacks ofthat
nature in Syria since the beginning of the year. Daily
action of that kind in Syria cannot go unpunished, and
full light must be shed on all violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law that undermine the
claims of the regime that it is seeking to provide for the
Syrian people and the future of country.

Over the past two months, France has unceasingly
sought to hammer home a message that I repeat again
today. The regime and its supporters must immediately
and definitively cease their bombings of Aleppo and
allow humanitarian actors to swiftly deliver emergency
aid to the entire population that stands in need today.
That call is shared by a very large majority of members
of this Council.

France calls once again on those members of the
Council that are involved in the combat and have
influence on the regime to break the ongoing downward
course in that devasted land, which will only usher in
decades instability, violence and terrorism. Let us not
deceive ourselves. It is not just a total war-strategy
that has been triggered in Aleppo. It is not only a
humanitarian catastrophe, but also a strategic error.
That strategy will mechanically lead to the partition of
Syria. It will exacerbate the pace towards radicalization
and it will strengthen Da'esh and terrorism in general.
In Aleppo, horror and terror are two sides of the same
coin.

On behalf of France, I would like to underscore
once more the absolute urgency of immediately ending
the bombardments and the war, to seek together a
political solution. That is the only possible way out of
the tragedy, and it is the responsibility of the Security
Council, whose credibility is heavily involved.

