Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I am
very grateful to the President for his remarks earlier in
the meeting. I am also grateful to colleagues for their
expressions of sympathy over another ghastly atrocity.
I understand that there is a suggestion that a draft
resolution may be introduced on that subject. If that is
the case, perhaps I could invite the presidency to
consider whether some work by our coordinators or
some other representatives might facilitate the drafting
of such a resolution so that, if we are going to have
one, we vote on it quite quickly.

Like others who have spoken before me, we are
very grateful to the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2003/ 1099), as well as to those who have made their
opening statements. I of course associate myself fully
with the remarks of the European Union presidency.

The Great Lakes region has been ravaged by
conflict, atrocity and suffering. The people of the
region have been waiting too long for peace, stability
and the prospect for a better future. The good news is
that there has been significant progress in 2003 with
regard to the present conflicts - progress in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi and
Rwanda. I would like to join others in paying tribute to
the role being played by the countries of the region, by
the African Union and by special representatives.

There appears now to be a genuine beginning.
Our responsibility around this table, and that of the
people who are listening, is to ensure that this time,
unlike in the past, the international community plays its
part and supports developments that should have, and
are increasingly having, the full involvement and
ownership of the countries of the region. As in so many
other areas - hearteningly - at the moment in Africa,
we need to reinforce and support African-led
initiatives. My Prime Minister has underlined his
commitment that the United Kingdom - and, we hope,
the international community - should better address
the problems of Africa and support the real efforts
being made by Africans to find solutions to those
difficulties.

Real progress is being made to overcome
conflicts, and those efforts will continue. The proposed
conference is not a substitute for the existing peace
processes in the Congo or Burundi. But a Great Lakes
conference which we all support should focus on the
aftermath of conflicts, on building the foundations of
lasting peace through the reconstruction of war-
damaged societies. That is why we agree with the key
themes identified by Special Representative Fall in his
consultations in the region: peace and security,
economic cooperation, good governance, democracy
and human rights.

It is primarily for the States of the region to
develop those ideas further. We think that civil society
can also play a part in the preparatory process. We
agree also with the Special Representative's
recommendation that the conference itself should be
part of a process, establishing a framework for lasting
cooperation, and not be just a one-time summit. Ideally,
the outcome would be a set of principles and actions
which the parties would commit themselves to and then
implement. We hope that the conference will come up
with specific plans - and I very much agree with the
approach put forward by the French Ambassador -
plans on how to take forward the shared goals of the
countries of the region in areas such as trade and
economic development, demobilization of armed
groups and the safe return of refugees. Because it is
through cooperation in practical areas of common
interest that the tradition of working together will be
developed and the scope and prospect of inter-State
conflict much reduced. Developing regional trade and
investment through the creation of free-trade zones, or
even an internal market in goods and labour, can make
a real contribution to economic development.

Thus, a conference should begin a process, a
process between and within the countries of the region
and which covers all aspects relevant to post-conflict
reconstruction, justice, rule of law, economic
development, regional cooperation and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration - those practical
issues basic to taking States forward to the sort of
sustainable and continued development in enduring
peace that they are now entitled to expect.

In preparing for the conference, and deriving
from it, the United Kingdom hopes that the framework
of a coordinated and real contribution by the
international community will emerge. I think we should
be quite clear that if the conference is to bring real
value, if there is to be a difference on the ground, then
the international community will have to support and
harness resources in support of the Great Lakes, to
further peace and sustainable development and to
underpin solutions which are now being achieved
increasingly within Africa and by African institutions.
The people of the Great Lakes and our friends in Africa
demand and expect no less of us.

