Mr. Hyseni: Allow me to first express my deep
appreciation for the opportunity to brief the members
of the Council on the situation in Kosovo, namely on
the continued accomplishments and steady progress

that the Republic of Kosovo has been making in all
areas.

Since my most recent statement to the Council, in
June, significant progress has been made in the area of
state institution-building on the basis of our new
democratic Constitution and the provisions contained
in the comprehensive plan of Nobel Peace Prize winner
Marti Ahtisaari. Two more nations have recognized
Kosovo as an independent and sovereign State - the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the Dominican
Republic. We would like to extend our deepest
appreciation for the recognition of our statehood to the
peoples and Governments of Jordan and the Dominican
Republic.

On 29 June 2009, the Republic of Kosovo
formally signed the articles of agreement of
membership with the International Monetary Fund and
the World Bank. Membership in those two very
important financial institutions has further encouraged
the Government of the Republic of Kosovo to intensify
efforts to fight crime and corruption.

This has also conferred additional responsibilities
on the Government of the Republic of Kosovo and
reinforced the need to further strengthen the rule of law
and maintain macroeconomic stability through fiscal
and budgetary discipline. The Government of Kosovo
has continued to address and resolve many issues
relating to the economy, justice and security and safety
throughout Kosovo.

The well-being of minority communities and the
return of Kosovo refugees to their homes and
properties is a standing priority and the process of
returns is ongoing, with Government funds allocated
for the reconstruction of houses for returnees.
Improvement of conditions in the minority community
areas, in particular in the Serb majority areas, is an
issue the Government of the Republic of Kosovo is
paying close attention to, and progress is obvious.

There is, however, obstructive interference by the
Republic of Serbia in our efforts to improve the living
conditions of the Serb citizens of Kosovo. As Belgrade
has continued to support parallel structures in the
north, the Government of the Republic of Serbia has
been working actively to discourage and prevent the
members of the Serb community in Kosovo from
working and integrating with the rest of Kosovo's
population. Instead, the members of the Serb
community in Kosovo are under permanent pressure
from Belgrade, with clear instructions to boycott the
institutions of Kosovo and any cooperation with both
the central and local authorities. Unfortunately, it is the
members of the Serb community in Kosovo who suffer
most as a result of that approach and mentality.

While the institutions of Kosovo seek to protect
the rights and improve the lives of the members of the
Serb community, the Government in Belgrade has been
exploiting and confusing them with calls to reject
integration and cooperation with Kosovo's institutions.
At the same time, Belgrade has failed to offer any
assistance or solution to the problems and concerns of
the Serb community in Kosovo.

The situation in the North remains an issue of
concern. However, there has been clear improvement
in overall conditions with the deployment of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), in particular with its becoming fully
functional and operational. As EULEX has already
achieved full operational capability, I wish to underline
that the Government of the Republic of Kosovo
remains deeply committed to cooperating closely with
that Mission to combat crime and corruption, as well as
illicit and criminal cross-border activities.

Nevertheless, I am very happy to report to the
Council today that the overall security situation in the
Republic of Kosovo is very calm and stable. The
electoral campaign for municipal elections was
launched today. As the Council knows, the Government
of the Republic of Kosovo is now fully in charge of
organizing elections. New elections for Kosovo's
municipalities are due to take place on 15 November.
Those will be the first elections following Kosovo's
independence. Kosovo's Central Election Commission
is fully responsible for conducting electoral operations.
Comprehensive preparations have taken place to make
sure that the upcoming municipal elections are
successful and in full compliance with set standards.
With more than 70 political entities having been duly
certified to participate in the elections, we are
confident that this will be another democratic, free and
fair election in the Republic of Kosovo.

The institutions and the Government have been
working hard to create all the conditions for a
successful electoral process in the newly established
Serb majority municipalities as well. We look forward
to sizable and substantial participation by the Serb
community in the November elections, as we believe it

to be the most effective way to enable Kosovo Serbs to
duly participate in the conduct of public affairs. In
their outreach activities, both President of the Republic
Fatmir Sejdiu and Prime Minister Thaci have urged and
encouraged Kosovo Serbs to participate in the
elections. Regrettably, as we have heard today, there
are clear indications that the Government of the
Republic of Serbia has been doing quite the opposite,
calling on Kosovo Serbs to boycott the elections.

Cooperation and the further strengthening of
relations with neighbours, as well as regional
cooperation in general, have continued to be a priority
of the Government of Kosovo. I am very pleased to
report to the Council that the maps and the agreement
on the physical demarcation of the border line with the
Republic of Macedonia have now been initialled. The
signing ceremony for the agreement between the
Republic of Kosovo and the Republic of Macedonia
will take place very soon.

The participation of the Republic of Kosovo in
regional trade and cooperation is critical to fostering
and further strengthening bilateral and regional
relations and understanding in the Western Balkans.
Again, unfortunately, Belgrade has continued to
impede our cooperation with neighbours and the
international community by blocking our participation
in regional and wider international bodies. Belgrade is
also blocking Kosovo's exports to Serbia. Once again,
I emphasize that Kosovo's Government has refrained
from taking reciprocal measures, as we are confident
that they would only hurt both people and businesses
on both sides of the border.

The establishment of an atmosphere of
cooperation and understanding in our region is critical,
as all seven nations of the Western Balkans share the
same European future. The Republic of Kosovo is
firmly committed to pursuing the goal of European
Union (EU) membership steadily, and welcomes the
specific requirements and recommendations of the
European Commission to Kosovo contained in the
2009 progress report. The Government of Kosovo will
be working around the clock to deliver on all EU
requirements.
The Republic of Kosovo appreciates the
European Union's support for the economic and
political development of Kosovo through a clear
European perspective that is fully in line with the same
perspective of the rest of the Western Balkans region.

In achieving our short-term, mid-term and long-term
objectives, the Republic of Kosovo, its institutions and
the people of my country will continue to cooperate
closely with the EU, the United States, NATO and our
neighbours and region.

In conclusion, as always I wish to thank the
President and the members of the Council for the
opportunity to present Kosovo's views. We look
forward to working very closely with all the Members
of the United Nations and of the Council as we
promote shared goals of international peace and
security.

