Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
today's meeting and for the open debate format, which
enables us to engage in a broad exchange of opinions
on an issue as complicated as this one, the factors that
make it difficult to resolve conflicts today. Your choice
of subject is timely not only for the Security Council,
which, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, has the main responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, but also for the entire
United Nations system, its principal organs and all its
Member States.

When the Council discusses individual conflicts,
we deal with the entire spectrum of threats to peace.
That said, every country or regional situation has its
own unique set of circumstances that must be considered
when taking decisions. That context-specific approach
is always at the heart of our work. All too often,
unfortunately, in dealing with the most intractable
threats, we have to rely on Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations, which regulates those decisions.
However, in your concept note (S/2017/1016, annex),
Mr. President, you rightly point out that in individual
situations there may be other factors at work besides
the threat to peace - these so-called challenges, which
can influence the process of arriving at a settlement.
They may include all kinds of circumstances that
extend far beyond the framework of the list included in
the concept note for today's meeting. Unfortunately, the
most urgently topical challenges to stability are beyond
the reach of this list.

What we have in mind, first and foremost, is outside
interference in States' domestic processes, including
foreign support for such subversive processes as
unconstitutional regime change and seizures of power.
The representative of Ukraine deliberately omitted
to mention these important underlying causes of the
conflict in south-eastern Ukraine. What he said about
international law, and law in general, simply comes
across as blasphemy. How can the representative of a
country talk about compliance with the law when its
leadership came to power as a result of a coup against
the Government in Kyiv in February 2014? That was
when this tragedy began. We all know that the way to
resolve this conflict is through full implementation
by the Kyiv authorities of the Minsk agreements, as
endorsed by Security Council resolution 2202 (2015).

Getting back to the subject of the meeting, the
concept note also failed to take account of the unfair
distribution of access to natural resources and other
assets that has been the legacy for dozens of States in the
wake of colonial rule. It would also be helpful to take a
look at the problems caused by unilateral economically
coercive measures; the ongoing disparity in access
to modern technologies, including environmentally
friendly ones; the rapacious exploitation of natural
resources by transnational corporations; the unfair
distribution of positions in the global economic
governance institutions; the failure to uphold official
development assistance commitments; and the problem
of poverty and growing social inequality, which, as
many reports point out, is highly likely to provoke or
stoke existing conflicts. Of course, none of this rules
out the possibility of the negative influence on efforts
to reach a settlement of a conflict of factors that have
already been mentioned, such as climate change,
hunger, epidemics, transnational crime and so on.
However, it is important to keep in mind that none of
these challenges are universal; they are unique to each
specific situation.

Needless to say, the role of the United Nations is
to provide support to States, which bear the primary
responsibility for responding to security challenges on
their territories. In that context, we firmly believe that
as a general rule it is helpful for the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and the Security
Council to consider the interrelationships between
issues of peace, security, development and human
rights. However, it is vital to maintain the principle of
division of labour and each of these principal organs
should act within its own area of responsibility.

We proceed from the fact that the Charter of the
United Nations assigned to the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council a mandate to consider
socioeconomic and environmental issues, which include
combating climate change and ensuring sustainable
water use, health care and similar issues. It is the
General Assembly, with its universal membership, that
makes recommendations on such issues, all of which
have many different aspects. They are all considered in
the relevant specialized committees and in individual
forums such as the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change. Combining all these
elements together and preparing balanced decisions on
them demands a variety of expertise and time that the
Security Council does not possess. We believe that this
type of coordinated arrangement among Member States
in the principal organs of the United Nations can be a
reliable basis for the work of the Secretariat also after
the restructuring of its peace and security architecture
that has begun.

Today the General Assembly has considered the
issue of requesting Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
to submit detailed proposals on this topic. Given that,
we believe it is inappropriate to transfer to the agenda
of the Council general issues that come under the remit
of other principal organs within the United Nations
system with a much broader representation of Member
States. The Council should not usurp their voices.

