Mrs. Viotti: I thank the Security Council and
you, Sir, for the kind invitation to participate in this
debate in my capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.

I would like to express appreciation to the
Representative of the Secretary-General in Guinea-
Bissau, Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, for his comprehensive
briefing.
Since 8 April, when I last appeared before the
Council, a number of developments have affected
peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau, in particular the
assassinations of Mr. Baciro Dabo, a candidate in the
upcoming presidential election, and Mr. Helder Proenca, a
Member of Parliament and former Minister of Defence.
The Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission joined this Council and other international
organizations in strongly condemning such actions.

As is widely known, the assassinations took place
only three months after the brutal killings of President
Joao Bernardo Vieira and General Tagme Na Waie and
were preceded by episodes of political unrest and
physical attacks on public figures. The sequence of
events suggests the continuation of a pattern of using
violence for political aims and for settling old scores.
Aside from being utterly deplorable, such a pattern is
counterproductive, as the sad reality of the past
decades has shown. Only by upholding the rule of law
and the constitutional order will Bissau Guineans be
able to break the cycle of violence and advance
towards the consolidation of peace and development. A
full and credible investigation of the assassinations of
March and June is therefore necessary and must be
supported.

In spite of those tragic and worrisome events, it is
reassuring that the presidential elections will take place
on 28 June, as scheduled. Every effort must be made to
ensure that they are conducted in an atmosphere of
tranquillity, that the electoral process is free, fair and
transparent, and that the results are respected.

Holding elections in such a manner is crucial not
only to help to normalize political life by ensuring the
legitimacy of the country's political leadership, but
also to enable a process of national reconciliation to be
launched. The upcoming vote, if properly conducted,
may pave the way for a true dialogue among the main
political forces and lead to an environment conducive
to a peaceful and democratic resolution of disputes.
Such an endeavour, which is crucial for peacebuilding,
must be encouraged and supported by the international
community.

The mitigation of the serious socio-economic
problems of the country and the adoption of a long-
term strategy for its development are also critical to
peacebuilding. It is important that the international
community take an integrated approach to peacebuilding
09-37686
in Guinea-Bissau, as the political and economic sides of
the equation are mutually supportive.

The political instability in Guinea-Bissau since
March has shown the need for the country-specific
configuration to redouble its efforts. We have remained
engaged throughout that difficult period. On 17 April I
visited Guinea-Bissau for consultations with Government
authorities, including with interim President Raimundo
Pereira, Prime Minister Carlos Gomes Junior and
Minister for Defence Artur Silva. Our conversations
focused on Peacebuilding Commission support for the
presidential elections and on the heightened need to
vigorously pursue the reform of the security sector.

On 20 April, I participated in the round table on
security sector reform held in Praia, Cape Verde. The
meeting provided an opportunity for a presentation by
the Government of Guinea-Bissau of its plans and
proposals on security sector reform and for a thorough
discussion with international partners. Among other
considerations, the outcome of the meeting pointed to
the need to set up a pension fund for members of the
military who will go into retirement and to ensure
realistic and yet attractive conditions for the
reintegration of former combatants into civilian life. A
short-term plan of action is expected to be developed in
order to guide future actions.

The country-specific meeting will continue its
engagement with Guinea-Bissau by encouraging and
supporting a national dialogue on peacebuilding and
reconciliation after the elections. Soon afterwards, it
will be important for the meeting to re-engage with
national stakeholders in tackling the priorities outlined
09-37686

in the strategic framework for peacebuilding,
especially security sector reform, youth employment
and the fight against drug trafficking. I also intend to
launch a discussion within the country-specific
meeting about a possible recommendation on a second
tranche of Peacebuilding Fund resources and to
continue consultations regarding a possible donors'
conference later this year. The continued dialogue with
international financial institutions also remains
extremely important. We welcome the recent approval
of the interim strategy note of the World Bank, as well
as the approval of a new credit line to the country.

The success of peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau
requires a stronger and more coherent United Nations
presence on the ground. That is why the
recommendations contained in the report (S/2009/302)
of the Secretary-General concerning the transformation
of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau into an integrated office deserve our full
support. They are timely and well founded. Giving the
United Nations Office in Guinea-Bissau a robust
mandate, along with the corresponding resources, is the
most politically wise and financially cost-effective
decision that the Security Council and the General
Assembly can make today in support of the country.

