Mr. Wittig (Germany): Germany welcomes
today's Security Council decision to split the current
1267 and Al-Qaida/Taliban regime and to establish a
country-specific regime for Afghanistan.

Under the new regime, the Government of
Afghanistan has a distinct and visible role to play in
the listing and delisting process. With a new
mechanism for consultation and coordination prior to
either listing or delisting, the Council sends a strong
signal of trust and support regarding the peace and
11-37735
reconciliation efforts of the Government of
Afghanistan. In linking the delisting process to the
internationally endorsed criteria for reconciliation, the
Security Council is now well positioned to
constructively support political dialogue in
Afghanistan. This resolution is a major step forward,
especially in the run-up to the Afghanistan conference
that my country will be hosting in Bonn in December
this year.

The new mandate for the Al-Qaida regime
provides a solid basis for countering the global threat
of Al-Qaida and affiliated networks to peace and
international security. Germany reiterates that the
effectiveness of the counter-terrorism tool depends
primarily on the implementation of the measures by
Member States, and Member States will accept this
task only if they have trust in the fair and clear
procedures within the sanctions regime.

The Security Council has come a long way, with
the triennial review introduced in resolution 1822
(2008). But even more, with the establishment of the
Office of the Ombudsperson, the Council has
continuously taken important steps to enhance fair and
clear procedures. Today the Council decided to
underscore once more its commitment to this principle
through further enhancing the role of the
Ombudsperson. As of today, the Ombudsperson is
requested to provide not only observations, but also
recommendations on the delisting of petitioners,
thereby substantially strengthening her role within the
framework of fair and clear procedures. From now on,
the Committee needs consensus for keeping individuals
on the list if the Ombudsperson has recommended
otherwise. Germany welcomes that as a major
achievement.

