Mr. Chaudhry (Pakistan): We are grateful for the
opportunity to share our deep concern over the
prevailing chaos and gloom that afflict Lebanon and
Palestinian territories.

The Government of Pakistan strongly condemns
the Israeli aggression against Lebanon, which
continues to cause bloodshed, loss of innocent life and
damage to infrastructure and property. The President
and Prime Minister of Pakistan, and many other world
leaders, have called for an immediate ceasefire and a
cessation of hostilities by all parties to the conflict. The
loss of innocent life must stop. We believe it is a
fundamental responsibility of the Security Council, as
well as of major Powers and regional actors, to ensure
that violence is halted, hostilities cease and peace is
established.

We thank the Secretary-General for dispatching
his team to the region to bring the current mayhem to

an immediate end. We appreciate the briefing by the
Secretary-General's Special Adviser this morning,
which clearly brought out the magnitude of the
problem before us.

The current situation is alarming, as the number
of dead, injured and displaced persons is rising by the
hour. The Government of Lebanon, with which we
reiterate our solidarity, is facing a critical situation.
The present situation is a direct result of actions
against the principle, widely recognized in the Middle
East, that there is no military solution to the conflict.
The warring parties must therefore cease hostilities and
give diplomacy and peace a chance.

We call upon the Government of Israel and
Hizbollah to cease all military action forthwith. We
urge the Council to take an objective view of the
situation, to abide by its Charter responsibility to
maintain international peace and security and to
establish a ceasefire and ensure its scrupulous
monitoring and respect by all parties concerned.

The international community, including the
United Nations, should mobilize resources to provide
humanitarian relief to the hundreds of thousands of
displaced and traumatized people. Pakistan has already
sent medical and food assistance to Lebanon.

We must also work assiduously towards long-
term peace and stability in the region by ensuring that
the relevant Security Council resolutions and bilateral
and plurilateral agreements are implemented in both
letter and spirit. The Security Council, major Powers
and the Quartet must act immediately and resolutely to
stop the attacks and the violence and to ensure that the
peace process is put back on track.

We should not allow the current situation to push
the region back into a spiral of violence. The Security
Council's urgent intercession in that context is
imperative. It must live up to its Charter obligations.

