Allow me to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Mahamat Saleh Annadif for his informative briefing and express Estonia's continued support for the activities of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and for the work of the Special Representative. I would also like to welcome the participation of the Foreign Minister of Mali in today's meeting. While there have been some encouraging developments in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali since the Security Council's last discussion of the topic (see S/PV.8703), in January, we remain extremely concerned about the deteriorating security situation in the country. Moreover, the growing global pandemic of coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which has also reached Mali, threatens to impose further strain on the already fragile health-care, governance and security systems. Estonia wholeheartedly supports the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire with a view to combating the coronavirus disease pandemic and helping to save lives. Even though the fear of COVID-19 played its part in the relatively low voter turnout in the first round of the legislative elections on 29 March, it is the overall security situation that continues to affect the voters the most. The growing number of violent attacks against both civilians and military outposts in the centre and north of Mali continues to be of serious concern. Attacks, such as the attack on a military base in the northern town of Bamba on Monday, 6 April, which left at least 25 Malian soldiers dead, must be condemned in the strongest terms. Mali's effective State participation in and full ownership of counter-terrorist efforts is of key importance; that is also the case for the country's neighbouring States. Estonia fully supports the efforts of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and continues to contribute to Operation Barkhane and the Takuba task force. We are encouraged by the positive steps taken in the implementation of the Malian peace agreement, especially the redeployment of the reconstituted units of the Mali armed forces to the north of the country and the resumption of the meetings of the Agreement Monitoring Committee. However, further steps need to be taken in the political process, including concrete steps in favour of increasing the full, effective and meaningful participation of women and youth. We note positively that, on 22 and 23 January, the Government held a high-level workshop on the participation of women in the decision-making process. We encourage all participants to take steps to implement the recommendations made in the workshop. It is important to address the root causes of the conflict and engage the local communities through a comprehensive approach, an essential aspect of which is addressing the grave violations and abuses of human rights and holding all perpetrators of such crimes accountable, regardless of their status. Allowing the culture of impunity to thrive will only breed more violence.
