Mr. Mantovani (Italy): I thank Ms. Hoppe for
her briefing. While aligning ourselves with the
statement that Slovenia is going to make on behalf of
the European Union, we welcome the initiative by
South Africa to hold this debate on small arms and
light weapons. The report of the Secretary-General -
for which we are grateful - is proof that the decision
of the Security Council to put this issue back on its
agenda has been timely and appropriate.

The Secretary-General's report confirms that the
uncontrolled dissemination of small arms and light
weapons fuels armed conflicts and criminal violence,
claims a very heavy toll in human lives, contributes to
human rights violations and seriously hinders global
and regional stability as well as economic recovery in
post-conflict areas.

For this reason, Italy attaches traditional priority
to the fight against the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons in all its aspects, consistent with the
related 2005 European Union Strategy and the 2003
European Union Common Position on the control of
arms brokering.

The multifaceted nature of this threat requires a
holistic response aimed at enhancing synergies among
all relevant forums and initiatives. Italy welcomes the
direct involvement of the Security Council through its
arms embargoes and the related monitoring tasks
assigned to some peacekeeping missions.

We also support the implementation of the United
Nations Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of
and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and
Components and Ammunition, the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects and the Instrument to
Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and
Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light
Weapons. In that respect, I wish to recall that in
February 2008 the European Union adopted a joint
action that allocated €300,000 to promote compliance
with the latter.

Thus, Italy looks forward to a successful outcome
of the Third Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the Programme of Action and stands
by the efforts of the President-designate, Ambassador
Cekuolis, to focus deliberations on a few crucial areas
such as international cooperation, brokering, tracing
and stockpile management, with a View to identifying
outstanding implementation challenges.

Italy is convinced that further work should be
done to strengthen national, regional and global
regulations on small arms and light weapons brokering,
transfers controls and end-user certifications. Italy also
favours making the political commitments of the
Programme of Action and of the tracing instrument
legally binding.

We deem it important to increase cooperation
with international organizations that have developed
practices of interest relevant to the common goal of
eradicating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. Noteworthy initiatives also take place at the
regional level. For instance, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe's handbook of best
practices on small arms and light weapons offers
comprehensive terms of reference for national
legislation.

No solution to the destabilizing accumulation of
small arms and light weapons can be effective if it is
limited to the political and security aspects only. It is
imperative to consider the issue also from the
perspective of economic and social development.
Projects concerning small arms and light weapons must
be fully integrated in national development strategies
in post-conflict countries.

The Peacebuilding Commission can play a
decisive role in addressing this problem through the
integrated strategic frameworks for peacebuilding
elaborated with local authorities, which should
include- whenever appropriate - programmes
concerning the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants, as well as youth
unemployment.

In a broader perspective, it is necessary to foster
international cooperation to that end, bearing in mind
the need to devote attention to gender approaches,
women and children often being the actual victims of
small arms and light weapons. Finally, we took note
with interest of the initiative undertaken by the United
Nations Coordinating Action on Small Arms to draft
common standards applicable to multilateral and
national projects in the field of small arms and light
weapons.

Facing one of the main threats to global and
regional security, we all need to Show our common
purpose and steadfast resolve. The Security Council
and the international community can rely on Italy's
active support and contribution.

