Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to commend you, Mr. President,
for convening today's informative meeting. I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Somalia, Mr. Michael Keating, and the Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
Ambassador Tete Antonio, for their briefings. I also
welcome His Excellency President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud, who is honouring us with his presence.

I would like to underscore the agreement reached
between the Federal Government of Somalia and
Puntland, which paves the way for the electoral process
of 2016 and for the preparation of the universal elections
of 2020, which will take place in the framework of one
person, one vote. The agreement represents a positive
outcome of the National Leaders Forum, which was
held in Mogadishu between 9 and 12 April.
I believe it is important to emphasize the renewed
pledge by the Federal Government of Somalia that there
will be no extension of the limits of the established
constitutional mandate for the legislative and executive
branches and that elections for those branches will be
held in August 2016; that the constitutional reform will
be finalized; and that the Government will determine
the number and location of the federal states of Somalia
in 2016 in order to fulfil the goals of the federal
project. We also welcome the upcoming holding of the
National Leaders Forum, which will be followed by a
constitutional conference in Garowe in May. A peaceful
and transparent electoral process in 2016 will mark
a milestone for all Somalis and will be critical to the
continued progress of the country towards democracy
and stability.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
and the international community must work in an
increasingly close and coordinated manner with the
regional administrations and the federal Government
to prioritize capacity-building and the strengthening
of institutions at the regional level to help regional
administrations consolidate their authority and be
able to establish step by step the basic conditions for
governance, security and the provision of basic services
for local populations. My delegation is pleased that the
new legislative framework provides that 30 per cent of
the parliamentary seats are to be reserved for women
in each state member of the federation, and with the
emphasis on the importance of increasing participation
by women and young people in the political processes.

I cannot fail to mention Uruguay's concern about
the continuing threat posed by the terrorist group
Al-Shabaab, which continues to lurk in the shadows,
despite the progress made in fighting the extremists
and the alleged or theoretical loss of their firepower.
The fight against Al-Shabaab requires an integrated
and comprehensive approach. There must be continued
improvement of the interaction with all of civil society
in Somalia - including women, young people,
businesses and religious leaders - so as to ensure
that they form an integral part of the various political
processes under way. We underscore the peace and
reconciliation agreement that was reached at the end
of March among the leaders and representatives of
Jubaland and Marehan, which will strengthen the unity
in the fight against the extremists.

Security sector reform is vital, in particular the
rapid and effective development of the Somali National
Army, including a planned and coordinated integration
of current regional forces to help facilitate the more
effective participation of the Somali National Army
in joint operations with the African Union Mission
in Somalia so that the security forces of the Federal
Government of Somalia, including the police, can
assume a greater role in maintaining peace and security
and in protecting Somali citizens. In that regard, we
welcome the results of the consultative conference on
police reform in Somalia, which took place in Nairobi
from 21 to 24 March. Many of the outcomes of that
conference will be incorporated into a new 2017-2025
Heegan plan.

My delegation places particular emphasis on the
need to protect civilians, especially the most vulnerable
groups, namely, children, young people, women and
the elderly, and we call upon the Federal Government
of Somalia to choose the path of mediation and seek
out stability, especially in areas where access to
humanitarian assistance and supplies is crucial. At
the same time, we deplore the fact that foreign and
national forces operating in Somalia continue to carry
out abuses, attack civilians and Violate international
humanitarian law.

Finally, I wish to express Uruguay's support for
the process that the Federal Government of Somalia is
carrying out, which is recognized as the most inclusive
process in recent years.

