Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): The Security
Council travelled to Afghanistan from 21 to
28 November, guided by the agreed terms of reference
that were recently circulated as an official document of
2

the Council. I believe that the mission achieved its
main goal of developing a first-hand assessment of the
situation in the country at a critical juncture. I am
convinced that future Council deliberations on
Afghanistan will be better informed as a result of this
first-hand fact-finding mission.

I wish to thank all colleagues who participated in
the mission for their outstanding contributions to our
discussions in Afghanistan. I also wish to thank
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for his kindness in accompanying the
mission and his effectiveness in facilitating the
meetings with the Afghan authorities. Obviously, it
would have been impossible to undertake this visit
under challenging conditions without the flawless
organization carried out by the Secretariat and the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), as well as the highly professional logistical
and security support provided by the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF). I would also like to
thank Ambassador Haroon, Permanent Representative
of Pakistan; Ambassador Al-Jarman, Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Emirates;
Ambassador Al-Murad, Permanent Representative of
Kuwait; and Ambassador AI-Nasser, Permanent
Representative of Qatar. Through the efforts of their
countries' respective authorities, they provided us with
very valuable assistance in our travels.

In Kabul, the mission met with President Karzai
and a number of his ministers; the speakers of the
upper and lower houses of Parliament; chairmen of
parliamentary committees and other members of
parliament; the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission and the Independent Electoral
Commission; the Secretary-General of NATO, its
Senior Civilian Representative in Kabul and
representatives of ISAF; members of the diplomatic
community, including the European Union troika and
the head of the European Union Police Mission in
Afghanistan; civil society organizations; national and
international non-governmental organizations; UNAMA
senior staff and the United Nations country team. The
mission was followed attentively by the Afghan media
and public opinion.

We also visited Herat, where we met with the
regional office of UNAMA, the Provincial Governor,
other Afghan officials and the Provincial Reconstruction
Team (PRT). In Herat, the mission noted that the
activities of the Provincial Reconstruction Team were
08-63292
well received by provincial leaders and public opinion.
The Governor and members of the provincial council
underlined the importance of the quick-impact
assistance projects implemented by the Herat PRT.

While the mission report is being prepared, I
would like to anticipate a few findings on the basis of
the messages that we emphasized during our final press
conference. First, we should like to echo Foreign
Minister Spanta's statement that Afghanistan is facing
a difficult security situation, but not a security crisis.
That assessment is based on the acknowledgement that
the insurgency is concentrated in specific regions and
does not offer any alternative model of Government,
despite the illusion it creates that it is omnipresent.

At the same time, it is obvious that Afghanistan is
faced with daunting and multifaceted challenges. In
addressing those problems, it is important to avoid any
inclination towards frustration or, worse, any
inconclusive discussions between Afghanistan and its
friends within the international community. Rather, we
should redouble our joint efforts in a spirit of
partnership.

There are important areas of progress that invite a
sense of cautious optimism for the future: the
improvement in relations with Pakistan, which was
emphasized by President Karzai and Minister Spanta;
the recent cabinet appointments, which seem to have
created increased energy, for example, in the fight
against corruption; the significant reduction - 19 per
cent - in the area of opium cultivation, reported by
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; the
commitment to improve subnational governance,
including the launching of the Afghanistan Social
Outreach Programme; and the registration of nearly
2 million Afghans during the first two phases of the
voter registration project without any major security
incidents. Those gains must be built upon, especially in
the year to come.

The "Afghanization" of the security sector and
the operational improvement of the Afghan National
Security Forces are crucial components of the
stabilization process.

The international actors reiterated their
commitment to meeting Afghan requests to accelerate
this progress. Thanks to the increased capacity of the
Afghan National Army, ISAF-only operations are now
rather an exception. On police reform, the new
Minister of the Interior, Mr. Hanif Atmar, called for an
08-63292
increase in the number of mentors and trainers,
including at the district level. An enhanced
contribution is expected in particular from the
European Union Police Mission in Afghanistan.
Minister Atmar expressed his acknowledgement that
the Government needed to create a change in the public
perception of the police and improve its accountability.

The impact of the conflict on civilians is of
particular concern and was the subject of in-depth
discussions during the visit. The vast majority of
civilian casualties are caused by the insurgents, who
deliberately target civilians as part of their strategy. We
were reassured on this occasion by the close attention
ISAF pays to avoiding civilian casualties and by recent
steps to reduce casualties and provide redress when
they do occur.

Free, fair and inclusive elections in 2009 are
necessary to renew the legitimacy of the Afghan
authorities and to win back the full confidence of the
people. The Independent Electoral Commission
appeared fully committed to achieving this goal, in
accordance with the Afghan Constitution. President
Karzai stressed the importance of elections taking
place throughout the country.

On the subject of national reconciliation, we
noted an increasing consensus among Afghan
interlocutors on the concept that any dialogue with
anti-Government elements must be conducted by the
Afghan authorities from a position of strength and that
the renunciation of violence and respect for the Afghan
Constitution must constitute the red lines of any
negotiation. Negotiations are therefore a complement
to the fight against terrorism, not an alternative. The
process must lead to democratization and not to an
increased influence of Taliban obscurantism on Afghan
society.

While many Afghans, including President Karzai,
called for discussions to end the violence, none of the
mission's interlocutors wanted to see the Taliban return
to power. The significant improvement of
Afghanistan's relationship with its neighbours was
welcomed by the mission. The Security Council has
consistently supported an approach that helps to bring
security through a regional approach that also supports
regional economic development.

The mission also welcomed cooperation between
the Afghan Government and its neighbours on specific
issues that promote improved border control, such as
3
counter-narcotics and refugees. It is to be hoped that
current regional developments will not affect such
positive dynamics. Afghan interlocutors welcomed
planned international initiatives to foster cooperation
in the region.

In the area of development assistance, the
mission was informed of perceived inefficiencies in the
delivery of aid. The international community is
expected to show more transparency and to better
coordinate its efforts, in accordance with the Paris
Declaration.

On humanitarian assistance, the mission was
briefed on measures being adopted to ensure food
security during the winter season. At the same time,
concerns were expressed that funding was not in place
to provide food aid after March. Donors are therefore
encouraged to channel their contributions through the
Afghan Government or the World Food Programme.

Given recent trends of increasing intimidation of
human rights defenders and the recent reversals
relating to impunity and freedom of expression, we
encouraged the Afghan authorities to reinvigorate their
efforts to uphold human rights, in particular the rights
of women and children.
Finally, I would like to put special emphasis on
the expressions of strong support for UNAMA's
coordination role that we heard throughout our
meetings both with international actors and with the
Afghan authorities. President Karzai expressed
complete satisfaction with the cooperation of Special
Representative Kai Eide. The Special Representative of
the Secretary-General enjoys the full trust and respect
of his partners in Kabul. Consequently, many
interlocutors expressed the view that UNAMA should
be properly empowered to tap into its own potential.
United Nations Member States are therefore urged to
provide UNAMA with the financial and human
resources needed to live up to its enhanced mandate
defined by resolution 1806 (2008).

