Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation thanks Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock for his briefing and commends the
efforts of the Secretariat and relevant agencies to
improve the humanitarian situation in Syria.

At present, many Syrians are still in need of
humanitarian assistance. Years of conflict have taken
a heavy toll on the country's infrastructure and caused
many hardships, including a shortage of food, health
care and medicine. Military operations in north-
eastern Syria have exacerbated the fragility of the
humanitarian situation. The protracted conflict has also
caused negative impacts on the humanitarian situation.
As winter draws closer, the United Nations and all
humanitarian agencies should prepare to make a real
difference in the living conditions of the Syrian people.
Moreover, Syria's humanitarian situation is closely
related to political, security and counter-terrorism
conditions. To resolve the humanitarian problem, we
need a holistic and integrated approach.

First, it is essential to respect and safeguard
Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity and to resolve issues by political and diplomatic
means. A political settlement is the only realistic way
out of the Syrian conflict and the fundamental means
to improve the humanitarian situation in Syria. The
Syrian Constitutional Committee met for the first time
in Geneva in late October, followed by the meeting
of a core group of 45 members. The parties will start
the second round of discussions on 25 November.
China welcomes this development and supports the
United Nations, especially Special Envoy Pedersen in
continuing his good offices and efforts to respect the
principle of a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned process,
implementing resolution 2254 (2015) and reaching a
political solution that can accommodate the concerns
of all parties.

Secondly, it is necessary to intensify humanitarian
relief efforts, lift economic sanctions on Syria, move
ahead with the return of refugees and displaced
persons and support the Syrian Government in its
post-war reconstruction. The international community
should provide the United Nations with adequate
funding and resources to ensure the provision of
humanitarian supplies to people in need throughout
Syria. To fundamentally improve the living conditions
of the Syrian people, efforts must be made to improve
Syria's economic situation, assist with the safe and
voluntary return of Syrian refugees, support the Syrian
Government in repairing and rebuilding housing,
people's livelihoods, medical and education facilities
and clearing mines and other explosive remnants of
the war. China has provided Syria with food, medicine,
means of public transport, human resource training and
other assistance. A handover ceremony was held at the
port of Latakia in Syria on 24 October for the Chinese
Government's assistance in Syria in the form of customs
inspection equipment and emergency food aid.

Thirdly, to consolidate gains on the counter-
terrorism front, efforts must continue to unify standards
and combat all forms of terrorism, in accordance with
Security Council resolutions and international law.
Eliminating terrorist forces is a necessary security
guarantee for the Syrian people to resume a peaceful
and ordinary life. At present, terrorist forces still
occupy a large part of Idlib. Terrorists threaten
the safety of civilians, destroy infrastructure and
worsen the humanitarian situation. The international
community should be committed to finding a holistic
solution to both counter-terrorism and humanitarian
challenges. All parties should refrain from any actions
that might erode counter-terrorism gains and work
together to address risks associated with relocating
terrorists and prevent the resurgence of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. The Secretariat should pay
close attention to Syria's counter-terrorism situation
and the movement of terrorists, look in earnest into
the issue of bringing terrorists to justice and propose
practical suggestions. When it comes to cross-border
humanitarian operations in Syria, it is imperative to
fully respect Syria's sovereignty, take on board the
views of the Syrian Government, strictly follow the
requirements of Council resolutions and prevent abuse
of cross-border authorizations. Operations should
be conducted in compliance with the United Nations
guiding principles on humanitarian relief, the relevant
provisions of international law and the principles of
neutrality, impartiality and non-politicization. Cross-
border humanitarian relief is a special relief method,
under specific circumstances, and the Council should
consider it as such in the light of the latest security
situation. The operation should be subject to United
Nations monitoring and could benefit from greater
transparency. We should enhance coordination with the
Syrian Government to ensure that only humanitarian
supplies enter the country and effectively prevent aid
supplies from falling into the hands of terrorist groups
and illegal armed groups.

