Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Nasser Judeh, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriate
Affairs, for presiding over this morning's meeting,
thereby reaffirming Jordan's deep involvement in
the question of Palestine and other matters related to
the Middle East. I would like to thank the delegation
of Jordan for the efforts it has made during their
presidency of the Council. I also thank the Secretary-
GeneralBan Ki-moon for his briefing this morning, and
take this opportunity to welcome the appointment of
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov as Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process. I would also like to express
our appreciation for his predecessor, Mr. Robert Serry,
for his efforts during his term.

Events in the Middle East continue to change
even as they pick up momentum. However, what has
not changed is the fact that there is still no solution
to the Israeli-Arab conflict. In the absence of such a
solution, there is international broad-based support for
the two-State solution, the enjoyment by the Palestinian
people of their inalienable rights, the establishment of
the State of Palestine based on the pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and an end to Israel's
occupation of all occupied Arab lands. There is also
recognition of the need to end settlement activity and
to dismantle existing Israeli settlements in the occupied
lands, which are illegal. It is further necessary to put an
end to the unjust blockade of Gaza and to work on the
reconstruction of Gaza so that all residents can live in
dignity. These are all givens, and have been reflected in
many General Assembly resolutions.

There has also been a significant amount of
recognition of the State of Palestine. We refer in
particular to Palestine's joining the International
Criminal Court, and the recent Summit of the League
of Arab States in Sharm el-Sheikh, which affirmed the
Arab Peace Initiative and all its terms of reference.
However, it is unfortunate that Israel continues to take
action undermine those givens, as reflected in many
statements issued by Israeli officials. Today, we appeal
to Israel to shoulder its responsibility, take steps to
resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict and achieve peace in
the region on the basis of the two-State solution, and
adopt a resolution to end Israel's occupation of the Arab
and Palestinian lands since 1967 within a specified
time frame. We also call for the identification of
mechanisms that would make such a resolution binding
on the occupying Power. We call on the international
community to support the building of Palestinian
institutions and to assist the Palestinian Authority
and the Government of National Consenus, including
through efforts to rebuild Government institutions and
the civil service in the Gaza Strip. This would help the
Palestinian people and enhance national unity.

In March, we commemorated the fifth anniversary
of the Syrian crisis. Where does the international
community stand vis-a-vis that crisis, which has claimed
the lives of 250,000 Syrians, led to the displacement of
half the Syrian population and threatened international
peace and security? The Syrian people took to the
streets in peaceful demonstrations to demand their basic
rights. They were an unarmed and defenceless, yet they
were met brutal killing and even aerial bombardment.
That has led to the current situation in Syria, which
threatens that country's future and has led to the spread
of terrorism and extremism.

Most Syrians have been affected by the crisis;
however, the greatest impact has been on those living
in areas besieged by the regime and the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), and in remote areas. They
face death by starvation and the deprivation of medical
aid, in addition to explosive barrels. I refer to the report
of the Syrian American Medical Society Foundation,
entitled "Slow Death: Life and Death in Syrian
Communities under Siege", which not only documents
the tragedy of besieged areas, but the true scope of the
tragedy, which goes beyond the current estimates.

With regard to the situation in the Yarmouk refugee
camp, in his recent report (S/2015/264) the Secretary-
General indicates that the humanitarian situation
there has greatly deteriorated, with camp residents
now facing the injustice of ISIL and the regime. There
must be an end to the suffering of the residents of the
Yarmouk camp, and the Security Council needs to
use the available tools under the Charter of the United
Nations to guarantee the implementation of its own
relevant resolutions. Continued silence vis-a-vis the
crimes of preventing the delivery of food and medical
aid allows the perpetrators of such crimes to feel that
they enjoy impunity. It also gives the green light for
more crimes.

There are more than 4 million Syrian refugees, half

of whom are children. About 2 million Syrian children
are not in schools, resulting in a lost generation. Ifthose
children are unable to enjoy their right to education,
they will be used and recruited by extremist groups.
In that context, the State of Qatar, during the third
International Humanitarian Pledging Conference for
Syria, hosted by Kuwait last month, launched a fund
for education and vocational development for Syrian
refugees and internally displaced persons that aims
to combat extremist ideology. I commend Syria's
neighbouring countries for taking in such huge numbers
of refugees.

Given the adoption of resolution 2209 (2015) on the
use of chemicals and toxic material, it is exasperating
that such materials continue to be used. We call on the
Council to guarantee legal prosecution of those who
perpetrate those crimes and hold them accountable.

In conclusion, Qatar firmly believes that the
solution to the Syrian crisis should be based on a
political transition built on the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex), and that precludes any party
that has been involved in the bloodshed in Syria.
Such a solution should meet the aspirations of the
Syrian people, provide for accountability for the
crimes against humanity and war crimes committed in
Syria and guarantee the country's sovereignty, unity,
independence and territorial integrity, as we have
continued to call for over the past few years.

