Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): We welcome your
presence, Madam President, and the initiative of the
Philippines presidency in organizing this open debate.
We thank the Secretary-General for his presence this
morning and for his important statement. We also
acknowledge the presence of the President of the
Economic and Social Council and her valuable
contribution.

The non-paper circulated by Ambassador Baja
has helped guide the Council's thematic deliberations
today, which, we hope, will benefit all, the victims of
conflict in particular. We are also happy to see two
respected non-governmental organizations - CARE
International and the International Center for
Transitional Justice - participating in the discussion.
We appreciate their work, both in the field and in the
deliberative process.

The role and contribution of civil society in
United Nations processes have dramatically increased,
especially in the last two decades. This ever-evolving
relationship has been the subject of a number of
reviews, discussions and studies. We express our
appreciation to President Cardoso and other members
of the Panel of Eminent Persons on United Nations-
Civil Society Relations for their comprehensive report.
It is a well-intentioned effort that will contribute a
great deal in streamlining the engagement of civil
society with the United Nations processes. The
report - in particular, the proposals contained
therein- will be carefully studied. Hopefully, the
general membership will pronounce itself on the report
in due course. We look forward to detailed discussions
on it by the Member States. My delegation will remain
constructively engaged in the process.

Since the demise of the cold war era there has
been an upsurge in the number and the intensity of
conflicts all over the world. Triggered by one or a mix
of several factors - economic deprivation, social
disintegration, cultural discrimination and political
difference - those conflicts engender complex crises
in terms of human suffering, institutional instability
and pervasive underdevelopment. There is an ever-
increasing need for the international community to
evolve a comprehensive, integrated and coherent
response to those conflicts. In this context I wish to
recall that Pakistan has already proposed the
establishment of ad hoc composite committees of the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council to effectively address the
complex crises in their political, economic and social
dimensions.

Over the last decade, international peacekeeping
operations in post-conflict situations have vastly
expanded in character to include multidimensional
nation-building and establishing or reviving State
structures. This necessitates an interactive interface
among the relevant United Nations entities, led by the
Security Council and a host of local, national, regional
and international actors and stakeholders, all working
in synergy. The Security Council, through its debates
and resolutions, can guide the further development of a
peace-building doctrine. International civil society
organizations can help by sharing their field
experience, best practices and lessons learned in the
Council's deliberative process, such as the Arria
formula meetings, open debates, seminars and informal
interaction.

While structural causes of conflicts need to be
addressed by States, a reinvigorated civil society, the
bedrock of any State system, can make a valuable
contribution through fostering peace-building
relationships and consolidating the peace process. Civil
society can work in tandem with the United Nations
agencies on the ground, in particular with
peacekeeping missions operating under Security
Council mandate, to help with the safe return of
displaced populations, demobilization and reintegration
of former combatants, assistance for economic and
social progress and re-establishing the rule of law. A
truly credible civil society organization enjoying the
confidence of all actors can even facilitate the
stimulation of political dialogue and harness the energy
of the people in a constructive direction.

Efforts to strengthen civil society is a necessity
that can be facilitated by the international community
in a number of ways, such as by assisting local
communities and individuals in designing programmes,
by providing capacity-building services and access to
financing and by establishing legal entities such as
cooperatives. These local civil society organizations
can serve as an effective and efficient bridge between
local authorities and the international community,
including donor communities. They can even help in
identifying priority reconstruction and development
projects and in monitoring the judicial utilization of
resources.

Since each post-conflict situation presents a
unique set of circumstances, there cannot be a one-
size-fits-all model of governmental, intergovernmental
and civil society interaction. Therefore, the Council
may consider tailoring such activities on a case-by-case
basis, weaving them into each individual peacekeeping
mandate. Peace missions should expand their efforts to
build on existing local resources and utilize local
actors and civil society organizations. Proactive
involvement of international civil society organizations
beyond humanitarian assistance and, where applicable,
capacity-building of local civil society, could be
counter-productive.

The Council could consider enhancing the
effectiveness of the existing mechanisms by making
use of the contribution that civil society may be able to
offer. The Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General, the Security Council's missions and
peacekeeping operations could all be asked to consult
the local civil society in a structural way. They need to
ensure that the civil society organization is broad-
based, inclusive, participatory and, most importantly,
indigenous. In fact, the whole process should be
domestically owned rather than imposed from outside.

Finally, the fact that many conflict situations
arise from the politics of poverty and scarcity cannot
be ignored. Post-conflict peace-building will inevitably
have to be built upon the provision of hope for a better
tomorrow to destitute and desperate people. Thus
economic and social development must constitute an
integral part of the international community's
endeavours to promote peace and reconciliation on a
sustainable basis. The United Nations and its family of
organizations, as well as civil society, have a vital role
to play in generating equitable social economic
development in these countries and regions for
effective and sustainable peace-building.

