Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): The
international community has had to address itself to the
situation in the occupied Arab territories on three
occasions in recent months: the demolition of the Burj al
Laqlaq centre in August 1996, the opening of the Western
Wall tunnel in September, and now the announcement of
the plan to undertake the construction of new housing
units in the Hat Homa/Jahel Abu Ghneim area of East
Jerusalem. Of course, we have also witnessed many
encouraging developments over the same period, notably
the signature of the Hebron agreement. Nevertheless, it is
worrying that We have been forced to revisit this subject
so often since last summer, and in response to what
appear to be increasingly serious incidents

The issue of settlements has become central to the
whole Middle East peace process. For this reason, my
delegation feels it is important to reaffirm our positions of
principle on settlements, positions which are endorsed by
almost the entire international community. Two facts
stand out: first, as the British Foreign Secretary, Malcolm
Rifldnd, made clear during a visit to Hebron on 3
November last year, all Israeli settlements in occupied
territory are illegal under Article 49 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention. This includes settlements in East Jerusalem.
Secondly, settlement activities damage the peace process.
Not only do they violate the spirit of the Oslo accords
and theHebron agreement, they establish facts on the
ground which prejudge the final status negotiations. In
particular, we cannot condone actions which unashamedly
change the status of Jerusalem ahead of those
negotiations.

The United Kingdom, along with the vast majority
of the international community. warmly welcomed the
recent agreement reached between the two parties over
withdrawal from Hebron. We hoped and believed that it
represented a new impetus for peace. Now the Har Homa
decision risks destroying the positive atmosphere created
by the Hebron agreement. Whatever Israel's position on
Jerusalem, it is not in Israel's interests to set back the
Palestinian track in this way.

We are struck by the wide degree of consensus
across the whole international community following the
Israeli decision to approve constructions at Hat Homa.
The shared sense of dismay ought send a clear message
to the Israeli Government to rethink where its current
course is heading.

We have urged the Palestinian Authority to do what
it can to contain reactions among its people. The strength
Security Council 3745th meeting
Fifty~second year 5 March 1997

of Palestinian feeling on this issue is understandable, but
these feelings must be expressed peacefully and
responsibly. We commend them for the restraint they have
shown. Reciprocity, to which the Israeli Government
attaches such great importance, should argue for equal
restraint on their part in taking any action which will
inflame the situation. Further provocative actions at this
time, such as the closure of Palestinian institutions in the
absence of clear evidence that they are Palestinian
Authority institutions, cannot be sensible.

Israel must bear any consequences of a decision to
proceed with the construction of new settlements in East
Jerusalem. It is not reasonable to ask the Council to ignore
this dangerous turn of events, claiming that action by the
Council would only make matters worse. On the contrary,
it is the responsibility of the Council to make clear to the
Israeli Government that it must exercise caution and good
sense so that the situation can be restored to a more even
footing.

It is not too late for the Israeli Government to
suspend, or even rescind, its decision in principle to go
ahead with Har Homa. There is no reason for the actual
construction to start now. The previous Israeli
administration postponed similar plans to build in that area,
realising the danger such plans, if implemented, represented
for all communities. If the Israeli Government shows signs
that it is willing to change its hard-line stance, we would be
willing toconsider a delay to Council reaction. But if the
Israelis are determined to proceed, I believe this Council
will, and should, be compelled to respond.

We believe that the Israeli Government should honour
its word not to build new settlements, including settlements
in East Jerusalem. But this in itself is not sufficient. The
Israeli Government must also halt the practice of enlarging
settlement boundaries and confiscating Palestinian land.
Building bypass roads to settlements can, on its own, alter
the status of the occupied territories and thereby pre-empt
the final-status negotiations. These roads have the effect of
isolating Palestinian towns from one another. Road-building
should take full account of the sensitivity of territorial
issues in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the
possible effects on final-status talks.

The British Government has urged the Israeli
Government not to proceed with its plans for a new
settlement in East Jerusalem. This would only detract from
the positive atmosphere created by the Hebron agreement
and undermine the successful negotiation of final-status
issues. The United Kingdom remains committed to the
final-status negotiations as the means to a peaceful
settlement. These talks are already hedged around with
difficulties. Neither side should seek to complicate them
further.

