Mr. Ka (Senegal), Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People (interpretation from French): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate you, Sir, on the outstanding manner in
which you have handled all of the important matters
before the Security Council and on the excellent work
you have accomplished since the beginning of your term.
I should like also to congratulate your predecessor, my
brother and friend Mr. Mahugu, Permanent Representative
of Kenya, on his timely initiatives and on the significant
achievements he recorded during his presidency of the
Council last month.

The Security Council is meeting once again today to
consider the serious situation that has resulted from the
recent actions of the Israeli Government. In my capacity
as Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, I should like
to express the firm condemnation of our Committee of the
illegal decision taken by the occupying Power to extend
the borders of the municipality of Jerusalem, thereby
consecrating, through unacceptable administrative and
legal ploys, its authority over territories that do not belong
to it.

The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian people has consistently drawn
the attention of the General Assembly and the Security
Council not only to the massive and repeated violations
on the part of the occupying Power of the relevant
resolutions of the Assembly and the Council, but also to
the numerous obstacles that Israel has set up to impede
the peace process, which had given us all so much hope.

The question of Jerusalem is at the heart of the
Israeli-Arab conflict, and any unilateral attempt to alter
the status of the Holy City, its demographic composition
and its geographic and institutional structure represents a
grave violation and a threat to the security and stability of
the region.

 

The Government of the occupying Power, through the
policy of fait accompli, has set about modifying unilaterally
and in violation of international law the religious, cultural
and historical characteristics as well as the Arabic, Islamic
and Christian identity of Jerusalem. It will stop at nothing
to achieve its objective of Judaizing Jerusalem. It has
resorted to the destruction of houses; the confiscation of
land; the illegal extension of settlements, particularly in
East Jerusalem; the encircling and isolation of the Holy
City by armed settlers; and the confiscation and destruction
of the identity papers of Palestinians citizens, who have
been expelled from their own city.

Indeed, for more than 18 months, a silent deportation
of Palestinians from East Jerusalem has been taking place
before our eyes. Hundreds of people are being expelled
from their land with the precise objective of preserving a
permanent and uncontested majority of Jews in the city. Let
us not forget that these expelled Palestinians are not
immigrants. They were born in Jerusalem, and their houses
and families are in Jerusalem. Their fundamental rights can
never be disregarded.

Other provocations include the sealing off of
territories, torture, punitive expeditions, administrative
detention, and the violation of the civil, political, economic,
social and cultural rights of the Palestinians.

The recent adoption of a quota system as part of a
plan concerning Jerusalem aims to ensure that by the year
2020 Jews will constitute 70 per cent of the population of
Jerusalem and Arabs only 30 per cent. Such unilateral
decisions represent not only a provocation for the
Palestinian people but also major setbacks in the peace
process, which has been on hold for more than a year.

Our Committee strongly denounces that decision,
which is a clear violation of international law, of the Fourth
Geneva Convention and of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. That decision by the Israeli authorities also
violates the letter and spirit of the relevant General
Assembly resolutions, particularly those adopted during the
tenth emergency special session.

The United Nations and several intergovernmental
organizations have repeatedly reaffirmed the special status
of Jerusalem as well as their position that Israel's
occupation is illegal and its actions therefore null and void
under international law.

The recent Israeli decision concerning greater
Jerusalem represents, in our view, a fresh example of such

 

illegal measures. The establishment and expansion of
settlements, the isolation of East Jerusalem from the West
Bank, the measures taken against Palestinian residency
status, and the archaeological excavations are all ongoing
sources of concern to the international community.

Our Committee is deeply concerned at the non-
respect by the occupying Power of the Fourth Geneva
Convention and of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, including the 16 resolutions adopted by the
Council on the city of Jerusalem. The Committee
considers that the decisions taken by the occupying Power
regarding the Holy City of Jerusalem are null and void.
The Committee therefore joins its voice to those of the
States Members of the United Nations in inviting the
Israeli Government to reconsider its decision and to put
an end to the policy of fait accompli with respect to the
Holy City, whose future must be determined solely within
the framework of the final status negotiations.

The Committee launches an urgent appeal to the
authorities of the occupying Power to renounce the
measures already taken or envisaged to change the
geographic, demographic, religious and institutional
characteristics of the city of Jerusalem, as well as of the
other Arab territories occupied since 1967.

The Committee, through me, would lastly like to call
on the Israeli Government to commit itself to the
implementation of the agreements already concluded with
the Palestinian Authority in order to create the necessary
conditions for the resumption of the peace process and the
full and effective implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, particularly Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

It must be recalled that Jerusalem belongs to both
the Palestinians and the Israelis, to Muslims, to Christians
and to Jews. That city is a mosaic of all cultures, of all
religions and of all the peoples that have enriched
Jerusalem from time immemorial up to this day.
Jerusalem must remain the city of peace, made up of
present and future emotions, dreams and realities. It must
be the birthplace of love and coexistence between all
peoples and their beliefs.

Finally, allow me to express our deep gratitude to all
the members of the Council for having made the decision
to convene this open meeting on such an important and
delicate matter. In so doing, the Security Council remains
loyal to its calling and to the role entrusted to it by the
United Nations.

 

The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People hopes that at the
conclusion of this debate, the Security Council will
demonstrate to international public opinion its willingness
to contribute to making this sensitive region of the world a
zone of peace and cooperation. It hopes, lastly, that the
Council will take timely measures, with the support of the
sponsors of the peace process, to put an end to the
unilateral decisions concerning control over the Holy City
of Jerusalem, which, I reiterate, must remain the living
symbol of peaceful coexistence between religions and
peoples that are different yet complementary.
