Mr. Merimee (France) (interpretation from French):
The delegation of France would like to welcome you, Sir,
to the Security Council. It is delighted that this meeting
is taking place under your presidency.

My delegation would also like to associate itself
with all those who have expressed their sympathy with
the United States Government over the terrible bombing
that claimed so many inhabitants of Oklahoma City as its
victims.

 

My delegation welcomes our Council's adoption of the
resolution extending the suspension of sanctions against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro).
Like many other members of the Council, France was
called upon to make a difficult choice, which it did on the
basis of a number of considerations.

Firstly, we are convinced that the mechanisms now in
place to monitor the closure of the frontier between the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
and the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina are, overall,
achieving the objectives they were set up to achieve. In this
regard, we do have confidence in the reports by the Co-
Chairmen and in the work of the observer Mission, which
is unfortunately restricted by a lack of material and
financial means. We reaffirm that the best way of
improving the Mission's operation is by increasing the
resources allocated to it and by increasing the number of
observers too.

At the same time, we recognize that the authorities in
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as the latest report by
the Co-Chairman states and the resolution picks up, have
demonstrated that they are cooperating and have provided
the necessary assistance to the activities of the observer
Mission; this is essentially why my delegation wished to
extend the suspension of sanctions.

Secondly, a number of steps have proved useful in
plugging the gaps resulting from the shortfalls we have
noted in the field, the most striking examples of which are
the helicopter flights - where there is an inquiry now
under way - and the sidestepping of the frontier closure
by passing goods for Bosnia and Herzegovina by way of
Croatian territory, which is why a part of the resolution
includes a strengthening of the existing measures. This
strengthening, in our View, is not such as to cast doubt on
the degree of cooperation being afforded by the Belgrade
authorities, but does respond to the loopholes that have
been shown up by experience.

I should like to stress that, even if the length of the
extension of the sanctions suspension has been cut back, the
cutback is still small in scale. My delegation would have
had no problem with going back to the period set in
previous resolutions, and accepted the time-frame in the
resolution in a spirit of compromise, which seemed to us to
be the only way of achieving in the Council a result that we
think is on the whole positive.

We therefore call on the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to accept the resolution in the same
spirit that should inspire us all, namely, keeping alive the
peace process's chances of success.

