The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Viet Nam.

Viet Nam shares the deep concern about the
current instability, violence and political impasse in
Zimbabwe, which are having an adverse impact on the
lives of the people of Zimbabwe. We support the
mediation efforts by the African Union (AU), the
Southern Africa Development Community (SADC) and
South African President Thabo Mbeki in
implementation of the resolution adopted recently at
the AU summit in Sharm el-Sheik, with a view to
enabling the parties concerned in Zimbabwe to reach a
mutually acceptable solution in the spirit of putting the
interests of the people of Zimbabwe above all, thereby
contributing to the restoration and consolidation of
peace, security and stability not only in Zimbabwe but
also throughout the region. We are pleased to note that
with the good offices led by South African President
Thabo Mbeki, the parties concerned in Zimbabwe are
engaging in dialogue and negotiations towards that
end.

While sharing the concerns about the current
situation in Zimbabwe, Viet Nam is of the view that the
situation prevailing there does not constitute a threat to
regional or international peace and security. That view
is shared not only by regional countries, especially the
neighbours of Zimbabwe, but also by a great majority
of the States Members of the United Nations.

Therefore, Viet Nam holds that the situation in
Zimbabwe at present is not within the mandated
purview of the Security Council. Moreover, subjecting
Zimbabwe to Chapter VII sanctions for the present
situation is of serious concern, because the proposed
sanction measures not only would fail to facilitate
efforts to find a solution to the situation in Zimbabwe,
especially those made by the AU and SADC, but also
would set a dangerous precedent for intervention in the
internal affairs of sovereign States and would run
counter to the fundamental principles of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations. For those
reasons, Viet Nam cannot support the draft resolution.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2008/447.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.
In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, Costa Rica, Croatia,
France, Italy, Panama, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America

Against:
China, Libyan Arab J amahiriya, Russian
Federation, South Africa, Viet Nam

Abstaining:
Indonesia

The President: The result of the voting is as
follows: 9 votes in favour, 5 against and 1 abstention.
The draft resolution has not been adopted owing to the
negative vote of a permanent member of the Council.

I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting.


