Mr. Selim (Egypt): I thank you, Mr. President, for
your kind words. We have undertaken that work in the
context of our responsibility and have been reinforced
by your support, so I thank you for all the efforts you
have exerted.

(spoke in Arabic)

Let me at the outset affirm the importance of this
call by the United States to convene this meeting of the
Security Council, since the Security Council has now
held a meeting following a series of other meetings
on regional and international efforts in order to help
achieve security and stability in Iraq. That requires
the mobilization of an international effort that can take
unified action against the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and other terrorist groups, both in Iraq
and throughout the region, in order to pave the way for
eradicating a scourge that has festered and intensified
in the past decade, especially in the Middle East.

Egypt joined a number of other Arab States and
the United States of America at an important meeting
in Jeddah on 10 September to consider how to deal
with the spreading terrorism in Iraq and in the Arab
region in general. We focused on addressing ISIL
because it is the gravest threat currently confronting
our region. That is in accordance with resolution 2170
(2014) and the ministerial decision of the Arab League
of 7 September. And, last Monday, Egypt participated
in the Paris conference on peace and security in Iraq,
at which the Iraqi Government reaffirmed its request
for military assistance to combat terrorism and the
provision of assitance to terrorists.

Our meeting today in the Security Council is
an expression of the international determination
to coordinate the efforts of all institutions and
regional powers in confronting the Iraqi crisis. That
coordination is needed. Egypt hopes it will continue
and be strengthened to maintain the overall momentum
that we have seen in the recent past. It is logical for such
action to be taken in a country like Iraq, with its vast
territory and rich heritage.

We look forward to relations of mutual respect
among the States of the region, including respect for
their sovereignty and security. We hope that the new
Government will represent all parts of Iraqi society
and that it will be able to face the threat of terrorism
and sectarianism. Egypt is stands ready to provide all
support necessary to help Iraq. We will cooperate at
the regional and international levels in the effort to
overthrow ISIL and all heinous terrorist organizations
throughout the world.

Allow me to repeat in the Council Egypt's position,
which is that every effort must be made to revitalize the
concept of the nation State free from any sectarianism.
We met in Jeddah and we are meeting again in this
Chamber today to support Iraq against ISIL. It
represents a global threat that faces us all, particularly
in the Arab region, and it runs directly counter to the
concept of a modern State.

Ideology is being used to justify barbaric acts
against anyone and anything that is different. ISIL is not
limited to one or two or three movements. It is one evil
ideology that expresses itself under various slogans and
names and is developing in different parts of the world.
At the end of the day, it is a worldwide organization.

Egypt, more than any other State, is well aware
of the threat of such terrorist organizations. We have
confronted that phenomenon and its evil plots. Such
confrontations led, on 30 June, to our elimination of
the Muslim Brotherhood, with its ideology based on
violence - the very ideology that is the basis of all
contemporary terrorist organizations. Those and similar
organizations need to be confronted - in fact, they
have been: in Libya, for example. That is important,
as they are a threat to international peace and security.

At a time when we are stressing the importance
of not ignoring the political and social reasons for the
emergence ofISIL, the international community must be
fully aware that it cannot stop at containment and half-
solutions in confronting such extremist organizations.
We must confront the States that are helping the
terrorist organizations to achieve their narrow political
aims on the international scene. We have to assume our
common responsibility and acknowledge our common
humanity in order to confront and defeat this barbaric
phenomenon.

