Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to express my
gratitude to Ms. Sandra Honore, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for her thorough briefing.
Japan commends the Special Representative and
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) for their continued support to Haiti's
reconstruction, stability and security, including the
institutional improvements that will make Haiti more
resilient over the long term.

I would like to take a moment to mention the
devastation caused by Hurricane Matthew. Japan would
like to express its deep sorrow and affirm its continued
solidarity with the Haitian people, and we thank
MINUSTAH and donor countries and institutions for
their important emergency support. Japan is alsojoining
the humanitarian effort by supplying emergency relief
goods and providing support via the Japanese food
assistance programme.

In the light of the severe damage caused by the
hurricane, we understand that postponing the elections
scheduled for 9 October was unavoidable. We look
forward to the announcement of a new electoral calendar
by 12 October. Much progress was made on electoral
preparations prior to the hurricane, and we have high
hopes for a fair, transparent and smooth election once
the situation subsides. Let me be direct - public and
international trust depends on it.

Beyond the disaster response, the fruits of
MINUSTAH's efforts are visible across Haitian society
today. We see them in the Special Representative's
use of her good offices in support of elections and
the restoration of constitutional order. We see them
in community violence reduction programmes,
improved criminal justice procedure and the response
to criminal gangs. And we see them in security-sector
support to the Haitian National Police on patrols, the
rule of law, community policing and the development
of the 2017-2021 strategic plan. We are pleased that
the Haitian National Police's capacity has been
enhanced and believe that a professional and nationally
owned security sector will enable Haiti to better
stand on its own. In that regard, we look forward to
recommendations from the Secretary-General on the
future of the United Nations role in Haiti, based on a
strategic assessment over the course of the six-month
extension of MINUSTAH'S mandate.

I would also like to touch on the issue of cholera,
which has plagued Haiti for too long and is likely to
worsen, owing to the hurricane. We believe that in
the long term, the best measures for fighting maladies
such as cholera are poverty reduction and improved
infrastructure, with a focus on water, sanitation
and hygiene. Japan has been supporting Haiti's
reconstruction, especially improving cholera prevention
via international institutions, and will continue to make
the greatest possible effort in that regard.
Over the long term, our partnership with Haiti is
based on national ownership ofState-building processes,
including elections. The hurricane has brought new
challenges, but we are confident that the Haitian
people will overcome them. Ultimately, nationally led
development and strengthened institutions will enable
the country to weather any storm. Japan will be there to
help along the way.

