Mr. Arnault: I appreciate this opportunity to
present to members of the Security Council the report
of the Secretary-General (8/2018/723) on the peace
process in Colombia covering the past four months,
which coincide with the conclusion of the mandate of
President Juan Manuel Santos.

It is an honour to share once again the floor with
Vice-President Oscar Naranjo Trujillo, who, throughout
this period, along with High Commissioner for Peace
Rodrigo Rivera and other members of the Government,
has been at the forefront of efforts to press forward with
the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
and to provide as firm a foundation as possible upon
which the next Government can build.

The Vice-President and the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia have developed a
good working method, establishing common quarterly
priorities with regard to issues under United Nations
verification, and applying our respective resources and
leverage to meet those goals. Progress may have been
partial and delays have occurred, but we have been
more successful in pushing implementation working
together than we would have been working separately.

We are ready to adopt the same collaborative
approach with the incoming administration of
President-elect Ivan Duque Marquez. As an example of
our common work during the past quarter, we have put
special emphasis on applying a gender approach more
forcefully in the reintegration of former combatants and
in the security guarantees for communities, with some
positive results, which are reflected in the Secretary-
General's report.

Since the report of the Secretary-General was
issued, on 20 July, Colombia's Independence Day,
the new Congress was inaugurated. It includes
representatives of the political party the Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun (FARC), and its
procedures are aligned with the Law on the Status ofthe
Opposition - a key part of the peace-related legislation
adopted earlier this year that provides for a more level
playing field between the majority and the opposition
in all elected assemblies. The Law guarantees, among
other provisions, the presence of the opposition in the
governing bodies ofboth Chambers. The presence ofthe
political party FARC fulfils one of the core objectives
of the Final Peace Agreement, and this Congress is
among the more diverse, plural and representative in the
country's legislative history. Within our mandate, we
are ready and willing to cooperate with all its members.

That is not the only achievement of the past month.
Special recognition must be given to the work of the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace. The Peace Agreement
recognized the deep aspiration of Colombian society
to truth and justice, along with the termination of the
conflict. Unfortunately, the long delays involved in the
establishment of the Jurisdiction and the adoption of its
normative framework created, within public opinion,
a lingering sense that truth and justice were somehow
overshadowed by the political process.

The first hearings held by the Peace Jurisdiction
on 10 and 13 July involving a former army general and
the former general commander of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) were therefore extremely important to
start dispelling the perception of impunity. The pursuit
of accountability through the Jurisdiction and the
Commission on Truth, Coexistence and Non-Repetition
will continue to be critical to the legitimacy of the
peace process.

Time will tell, but the positive response from
victims and the recent decision of senior army officers
to voluntarily accept the jurisdiction of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace are an indication that the
Colombian peace process may well be close to striking
the right balance between the demands of peace and
justice - a balance that, as those present know, has
been elusive, more often than not, in the negotiated
settlement of armed conflicts. The international
community should therefore maintain its support for the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace, the Truth Commission
and the Special Unit for the Search for Persons.

I would also like to bring into relief the national
pact of repudiation of violence against social leaders,
which was signed by President Santos and President-
elect Duque, among others. It is the first time that
violence against social leaders is received with such
a strong sense of outrage, expressed in the streets of
Colombia and cities abroad, in the halls of national
institutions and across the political spectrum. In the
polarized context of a protracted electoral campaign
and in a society at times indifferent to developments in
the zones of conflict, that national consensus against
attacks on social leaders is significant.

As mentioned in the Secretary-General's report,
the most important measures provided in the Peace
Agreement for improving the security of communities
have begun to be implemented, even if their impact to
date is clearly insufficient. We hope that this consensus
and sense of urgency on the part of Colombian society
will give momentum to the implementation of those
measures and will galvanize the efforts of the justice
system to prosecute those responsible for these attacks.

Supporting institutions in their efforts to curb
violence in the territories will remain a top priority
for the Mission. We very much hope that a similar
consensus can be forged around the central challenge
for consolidating peace - that is, to address the
combination of poverty, violence and illegal economies
to which inhabitants of the zone of conflict continue to
be subjected. A tightly coordinated and well-resourced
effort by State institutions, in cooperation with the
affected communities and their organizations, will be
required to bring the rule of law, security and legal
productive opportunities to areas that have long been
prey to violence and State neglect. I would therefore
like to echo the Secretary-General's report and call
for dialogue and cooperation among the new national
Government, local authorities, social organizations
and civil society in the territories. We believe that such
dialogue and cooperation are a prerequisite for success.

While the participation of FARC representatives
in the Congress is a major step, the reintegration into
civilian life of former FARC-EP members is unfinished
business. The Secretary-General has underlined in
past reports the difficult environment in which that
reintegration is taking place. Completing the work
started by the current Government will no doubt require
dedication and resources, but fulfilling the guarantees
given to those who have laid down their weapons and
now undergo the difficult transition to civilian life is
essential for Colombia. It is also essential for Colombia
to be a source of motivation for parties to conflicts
elsewhere in the world.

In concluding, let me express the Mission's
appreciation to the Government of President Santos,
the leadership of FARC, Colombia's institutions and
civil society, who have welcomed us and cooperated
generously with our work during the past two years. As
the new authorities take office, they can count on the
support of this Mission as they take on the hard work of
consolidating peace and achieving reconciliation.

