Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
open debate and acknowledge your work as Chair of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
I would also like to congratulate Malaysia and the
Malaysian delegation in its capacity as president of
the Council during the month of August. We wish you
every success, Sir, and emphasize that you can count
on our full support. We would also like to congratulate
Japan and its entire delegation for their extraordinary
work in presiding over the Security Council in the
month of July.

We welcome the presence and the statement of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and we thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for
her briefing. We offer her our support and praise for
her efforts to promote and protect the rights of children
affected by armed conflict. Of course, we also highlight
the work done by the Executive Director of UNICEF,
Mr. Anthony Lake./

The concept note (S/2016/662, annex) prepared
for this debate begins with an eloquent quotation from
the 1996 Graca Machel report, which calls upon the
conscience of each and every one of us in the light of
the fact that,

"[i]t is unconscionable that we so clearly and
consistently see children's rights attacked and
that we fail to defend them. It is unforgivable that
children are assaulted, violated, murdered and yet
our conscience is not revolted nor our sense of
dignity challenged." (A/51/306, para. 317)

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela considers it
tragic and ethically unacceptable that year after year
ever more serious difficulties persist in protecting
children affected by armed conflict and that in many
of those cases the situation has worsened in the past
two decades.

Approximately 60 million people are forcibly
displaced worldwide, of which half are under 18 and
all as a result of the tragedy of war, political and
economic destabilization, poverty, violent extremism
and terrorism. It is contradictory to aspire to lasting
and sustainable peace when a significant number of
children have grown up in an environment of armed
violence and hatred, as well as the economic and social
deprivation resulting from poverty and social exclusion.
Without any doubt, those situations compromise the
chances that such children can build up and in a few
years take over the future of their countries based on a
culture of peace and sustainable development.

Venezuela recognizes the political and legislative
progress made in terms of the protection of children in
armed conflicts, which is reflected in the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and its Additional Protocol.
However, despite those advances, humankind continues
to face enormous challenges and contradictions
regarding protection and respect for the rights of the
most vulnerable.

In several conflicts throughout the world,
especially in the Middle East, the Council has reacted
inconsistently despite the suffering and the obvious and
documented serious violations suffered by children.
While in several cases we have adopted resolutions
to facilitate humanitarian assistance and protection
measures for civilians, including children, in other
cases it has been impossible to make progress on the
issue. Several countries in the region face a serious
humanitarian crisis resulting from the wars in Syria,
Iraq and Yemen, in which more than 80 per cent of
the population is in need of humanitarian assistance.
However, no progress has been made due to varying
interests that deviate from the principles guiding the
Organization. The report (S/2016/360) of the Secretary-
General should not remain silent or dilute or put off
addressing those issues because of political pressure of
any kind.

The first great challenge we face is more than ever
a moral and ethical imperative for the United Nations.
It requires us to act consistently in our discussions
on actions to protect children in armed conflict. The
practice of using double standards in those areas
only undermines the international efforts in favour of
child protection and is an immoral contradiction and
wholly unethical. Venezuela opposes and condemns
all violations of international humanitarian or human
rights committed against children in armed conflict
by whomever, and calls upon all parties to a conflict
to meet their obligations under international law. This
Organization, in all instances, from the Secretariat to
all of its Member States, must avoid impunity for those
who commit grave violations against children in armed
conflict. The United Nations must raise its voice for all
children worldwide, particularly those who are victims
of armed conflict, without distinction of any kind.

We note with concern and with shame how some
countries are called to accountability for violations
against children in armed conflict, and yet in response
to calls for accountability for crimes and violations
committed against Palestinian children by Israel a
terrible silence remains. According to figures published
by UNICEF, 22 children were killed by Israel in the first
quarter of 2016. Moreover, more than 400 Palestinian
children have been deprived of their freedom illegally,
still unrecognized as minors and further subjected to
cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. Approximately
500 to 700 Palestinian children are tried before Israeli
military courts each year.

We are alarmed by the double standard policy
used in the case of Palestine, whereby the discussion
changes in order to restrict the calls aimed at
strengthening efforts to fulfil obligations under
international humanitarian law, including the principle
of proportionality. Accountability for violations
committed against children in armed conflict must
comply fully with the principles of objectivity,
non-selectivity and impartiality. No one can be exempt,
whether representing a non-State armed group, a State's
military forces or whatever political interests.

The second of the great challenges that is before
us is that of terrorism and violent extremism. In recent
years, children have been significantly affected by those
scourges and are often direct targets of acts designed
to cause maximum civilian casualties and terrorize
communities, even designating Children as executioners
or forcing them to become suicide bombers. The most
outrageous case is that of the mass kidnappings and
abuses committed against children by Boko Haram,
Da'esh and the Al-Nusra Front. The increase in violent
extremism and terrorism in the Middle East, among
other things, is a product of military interventions and
assistance to armed extremists and terrorists in order to
destabilize States, dismantle their institutional capacity
and destroy the social fabric. That has led to adverse
consequences for international peace and security,
particularly security matters affecting children.

Violent non-State actors, including terrorist
organizations, commit barbarous acts that threaten the
human condition and facilitate abuse and violations of
the rights of children, as happened recently in Syria,
where Abdullah Issa, a Palestinian child 12 years of age,
was beheaded in Aleppo by the forces of the misnamed
"moderate" opposition, which uses the same tactics as
the terrorists of the Al-Nusra Front, Da'esh and their
associated entities.

Foreign military interventions and wars launched
since 2001 in the Middle East, as in the case of Iraq,
have been the main cause of children of no more than 10
years of age becoming the victims of trauma and abuse
and direct victims of violence due to the destruction
of societies in an environment that has been forcefully
transformed in order to justify fear and death. Today
many young people have been recruited by extremist
organizations, such as Da'esh and the Al-Nusra Front,
to spread terror and instability throughout the world,
thereby, and sadly, imposing a culture of death, with no
expectation of a peaceful future for the children of the
Middle East.

In that regard, we demand an end to all foreign
militaryinterventioninthatregionandthedestabilization
of entire societies by way of geopolitical and economic
goals, and the transfer of weapons, funding, training
and safe havens to terrorist and extremist groups. We
urge all States to act in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, the provisions of international
instruments and the resolutions of both the Security
Council and the General Assembly.

It is worrying that in many instances the answer
to the threat posed by extreme violence gives rise to
further human rights violations and increased suffering
on the part of the civilian population, particularly
children. It is alarming that the military operations
conducted by the various coalitions, despite their
names, have resulted in the same harm and pain against
the Civilian population - a situation that has fuelled
the violent narrative of the groups they are combating.
We call for any response to confront terrorism and
violent extremism be consistent with international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law.

States must make use of measures and procedures
consistent with the protections provided by international
humanitarian law and the Convention on the Rights
of the Child when dealing with children associated
with armed or extremist groups. Prosecution and
detention alternatives should be developed consonant
with the interests of the child and prioritizing their
effective reintegration.

We also believe that the most appropriate
strategy to protect children from participation in and
the consequences of war is to prevent and resolve
conflict situations through a comprehensive approach
to the structural causes. We recognize as a fact that
in numerous cases the socioeconomic vulnerability,
abuse, ethnic and religious intolerance, discrimination
and exclusion that children face as a result of war
facilitate their participation in hostilities and amplifies
the adverse effects that armed conflict has on them.
It is therefore crucial that we prevent the use and
recruitment of children in armed conflict and ensure
their protection and rights in such situations. In that
way we can overcome the vicious cycle of violence
and promote sustainable and inclusive social, political
and economic conditions. We must accordingly
continue to support disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes, including capacity-building
devoted in particular to the protection of children as
laid out within the framework of the peacebuilding
architecture. That is a crucial key for the effective and
sustainable transition from war to peace. They must be
in line with the special requirements needed to protect
and assist children, including gender criteria as well the
appropriate budgetary and timely international support.

Venezuela reiterates that the protection of children
affected by armed conflict must be a fundamental
priority for all States Members of the Organization,
as well as for the entire United Nations system, in
all stages of conflict. Under that premise, we are
committed to continue providing our unwavering
support to the efforts in line with international law and
protect children as an inescapable ethical commitment.

I wish to conclude with an excerpt from a poem
entitled "The Infinite Children", written by the
Venezuelan poet Andres Eloy Blanco:

"When one has a child, every laugh sates us, every
tear wrenches us, from wherever it comes. When
one has a child, one has the world inside and the
heart outside. And when one has a child, one has all
the children of the world, the millions of children
with whom all peoples cry, with whom mothers
laugh and everyone dreams."

