Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I would like to
thank Equatorial Guinea for organizing this debate and
Mr. Esono Angue for presiding over it. We would also
like to thank Mr. Fedotov and Mrs. Ukonga for their
excellent briefings.

Piracy, armed robbery at sea and other illicit and
illegal activities in the Gulf of Guinea remain a source
of concern. We are not talking about petty crime. Left
unchecked, such activities could destabilize the entire
region. As we heard from the briefers this morning,
the coastal States, the region and the international
community as a whole have analysed the risks and have
acted on them. However, we can and should do more.
We can build on a solid foundation of regional efforts
and international cooperation in the Gulf of Guinea. We
applaud the leadership demonstrated by the countries
of the region. The Summit in June 2013 that included
members of the Economic Community of West African
States, the Economic Community of Central African
States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission (GGC) was
a turning point. I am especially grateful to Mrs. Ukonga
of the GGC for the great work that the Commission has
done on this over many years.

Germany has been active in the region for many
years, bilaterally and as part of the European Union
(EU). We have supported the Yaounde process for
maritime security in West Africa. To give two examples,
Germany contributed funding to the Interregional
Coordination Centre in Yaounde, and as a member of
the Group of Seven Group of Friends of the Gulf of
Guinea, we have contributed financial support to four
regional coordination centres in Benin, Ghana, C6te
d'Ivoire and Cabo Verde.

Let us not forget the substantial role of the
European Union. Among other things, the European
Union supported the Critical Maritime Routes Gulf of
Guinea project and its successor, the Gulf of Guinea
Interregional Network, and it will continue to help
and assist as part of the EU strategy for the Gulf of
Guinea aimed at supporting efforts by coastal States
and regional organizations.

The European Union's greater maritime security
strategic effort, however, extends beyond the Gulf of
Guinea. In the framework of its common security and
defence policy, to which some speakers have already
alluded, the EU is notably engaged with a military
operation and a civilian mission with a maritime focus
on the Horn of Africa, the European Union Naval Force
Operation Atalanta and the EU Capacity Building
Mission in Somalia. Germany is contributing personnel
and assets to both. Germany is also currently supporting
the implementation of the Port State Measures
Agreement of the Food and Agriculture Organization
to the tune of €1 million in order to support harbour
States in combating illegal fishing. In that context
regional ownership is key to success.

Tackling criminal networks that deal in piracy,
trafficking, robbery and theft requires wit and stamina.
Crimes on the high seas pay well and criminal networks
have proved highly adaptable in protecting their sources
of income. We need a combination of intelligence,
policing and support by armed forces. We have to cut
financial flows and recover the funds derived from
criminal activities. At the same time, we have to
look at the root causes of the issue. The fight against
criminal networks at sea can only be successful when
socioeconomic development in the region is fostered. A
lack ofjobs and opportunities can push marginalized
populations into illegal pursuits. Without legal sources
of income, young people are easily attracted by
criminal networks.

Once again, we are grateful to Equatorial Guinea
for organizing this debate. As a trading nation,
Germany depends heavily on the freedom of the
seas. We will continue to support regional and other
multilateral initiatives aimed at guaranteeing safe and
unhindered navigation.

