Mr. Suarez Moreno (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
briefing on the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253
(2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities; the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism; and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) on preventing the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. We are grateful for the briefings
Ambassadors Gerad Van Bohemen of New Zealand,
Amr AbdellatifAboulatta of Egypt and Roman Oyarzun
Marchesi of Spain, in their capacities are the respective
chairs of those subsidiary bodies. We thank them for
their leadership and for the work they are doing at the
helm of the committees.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is convinced
that the fight against terrorism must be carried out
within the framework of international cooperation,
in strict accordance with existing international
and regional instruments in that area, the rules of
international law, fully respecting the sovereignty of
States, human rights and fundamental freedoms. In that
regard, Venezuela reiterates its categorical rejection of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, because
they constitute a flagrant violation of international law,
including international humanitarian law and human
rights law.

The actions of violent extremism perpetrated by
terrorist groups in countries of Africa and the Middle
East have intensified. Terrorism therefore continues
to pose a serious threat to international peace and
security. Accordingly, we have no choice but to fully
and effectively implement the measures that have
been drawn up to prohibit incitement, the financing of
terrorism, training and the transfer of arms to terrorist
groups and non-State actors, in accordance with the
relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions. My country reiterates its concern about
the nature and activities of non-State actors, as they
constitute an ongoing threat and source of violence and,
in most cases, they evolve into terrorist groups. The
Security Council must take strong measures to prevent
the training, financing and supply of arms to them.

We must act with a holistic perspective in the
fight against terrorism. Above and beyond combating
terrorism, the international community must focus on
overcoming the root causes of armed conflicts that
have impacted the Middle East and North Africa. The
humanitarian tragedy in Iraq, Syria, Yemen and Libya,
among other places, and the actions of Al-Qaida, the
Al-Nusra Front and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS) and associated groups demand from the
international community systematic and forceful
responses to prevent, combat and eradicate the scourge
of terrorism.

With regard to the work of the Committee on
Al-Qaida and associated individuals, we believe that
body serves as an important tool in the broader fight
against terrorism. Although in recent months ISIS
has suffered significant defeats in Syria and Iraq, the
activities of that terrorist organization continue to be
a source of concern for the international community.
According to the latest reports of the Committee's
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team,
the terrorist threat has shifted its approach with regard
to financing, and the threat continues with attacks
on heavily populated areas, which have an enormous
media impact.

We believe that the role played by the Ombudsperson
in facilitating due process has special importance. We
are of the view that this mechanism must be strengthened
in order to provide greater transparency in reviewing
cases ofpersons linked to Al-Qaida and their associated
entities. We hope that, in the wake of the adoption of
resolution 2253 (2015), the Office of Catherine Marchi-
Uhel will be allocated the necessary resources to
ensure the independence and professionalism that have
been the hallmark of its work throughout its mandate
to date. Moreover, it is important to highlight the work
carried out the chairmanship to update the guidelines
of the 1267 Committee and the work carried out by the
Monitoring Group, which provides regular reports and
assessments of the threat posed globally by ISIS.

Turning to the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), concerning counter-terrorism, we welcome the
fact that that subsidiary body, with the support of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), continues to focus its efforts for the full and
effective implementation of the provisions set out in
resolution 2178 (2014), concerning foreign terrorist
fighters, and continues its work in identifying good
practices and existing gaps that must be filled by
Member States to combat a problem that today includes
30,000 individuals, including women and young
people, from approximately 100 countries throughout
the world. In that regard, we welcome the significant
reports issued by that Committee in connection with
the threat posed by the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters and its recommendations for comprehensively
addressing this issue of global scope, taking into
account, inter alia, of the challenges faced by numerous
States in terms of criminalizing the and prosecuting
foreign terrorist fighters.

Venezuela acknowledges the importance of
improving border control capacities, particularly in
areas adjacent to influence of terrorist groups. It is also
important that we continue our efforts to dismantle the
sources of financing of those organizations to restrict
and curb their criminal activities. In the same vein, it
is crucial to make progress in developing innovative
strategies to counter and refute extremist narratives and
ideologies and to fomcnt critical thinking in society,
in order to prevent radicalization, recruitment and the
mobilization of both human and economic resources.

With regard to the work of the 1540 Committee
and measures to prevent terrorist groups from
acquiring weapons of mass destruciton, we believe
that the comprehensive review of the work done by
the Committee over the past five years is essential at a
time when the use of such weapons by terrorist groups,
particularly chemical weapons, has become a genuine
and alarming reality, as is indicated in reported cases
of the use of such weapons in Syria and Iraq. As far
as Venezuela is concerned, the comprehensive review
process must be focused on the establishment of both
human and technical capacity-building throughout the
world, particularly in those countries that are lagging
farthest being in implementing the resolution. The
main strength of resolution 1540 lies in its preventive
capacity, with cooperation and assistance being among
its major tools. Through its coordination of the working
group on the national implementation of the 1540
Committee, Venezuela is working actively to ensure
that the comprehensive review process is successful.

Within the context of the comprehensive review,
the Committee must work towards establishing a clear
link between measures to be implemented within the
context of resolution 1540 (2040) and development,
given that development is the main and overriding
goal of developing countries. Moreover, in order to
maximize its effectiveness, the Committee has to duly
take into account the context in which the resolution is
being implemented. A significant number of countries
throughout the world neither produce nor export
materials that could be used to manufacture a weapon of
mass destruction, but they could nonetheless still serve
as transit points or shipment points for non-State actors.
Therefore, the work of the 1540 Committee must focus
on the implementation of those aspects and provisions
of the resolution that are more directly related to the
risks associated with each country.

Weneedtotakeintoaccountthat,whiletheassistance
requested by States in nuclear and chemical areas can
be channelled efficiently through the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the same is not
the case in the area of biological weapons because
the Biological Weapons Convention's Implementation
Support Unit does not have the necessary human or
financial capacity to fulfil that role. That constitutes a
very serious gap in an area of particular complexity and
danger. The Committee should seriously consider all
potential measures to reverse that major shortcoming.

Finally, we would like to underscore the point that,
irrespective of the need to improve the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and the work of the 1540
Committee in providing assistance and follow-up in
monitoring of the implementation of national plans,
its mandate needs to continue to be characterized by
collaboration and support.

