Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): My delegation joins
others in expressing thanks to Special Envoy Griffiths,
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock, Executive Director
Beasley and social protection specialist Jarhum for
their insightful, eloquent and informative updates.
Kazakhstan is closely following the recent developments
and would like to make three points today.

First, Kazakhstan expresses its grave concern
about the humanitarian crisis, which has continued
to worsen because of the recent military escalation
and a severe and rapid economic crisis, bringing the
country closer to the world's worst famine in more than
a century, while endangering daily the lives of millions
of people in Yemen. We were moved by the grave
assessments of Mark Lowcock and David Beasley of
the horrifying humanitarian situation in the country.
Kazakhstan strongly supports the United Nations calls
on all parties for a ceasefire, to safeguard civilian
lives, prevent deaths and injuries, allow freedom of
movement and protect hospitals, clinics and schools,
in accordance with international humanitarian law
and human rights law. In that regard, we back all of
Mr. Lowcock's five points to be implemented in order
to avert a humanitarian disaster.

Secondly, we urge all parties in Yemen to find
compromises and reject unilateral decisions that could
harm the peace process. The search for a peaceful
resolution of the conflict should be intensified, and an
urgent, universal ceasefire must be reached without
preconditions. The prospects for talks to end Yemen's
devastating war have become more real after Saudi
Arabia recently confirmed its willingness to evacuate
50 wounded Houthi fighters, as a confidence-building
measure. Kazakhstan calls on the Yemeni parties to
seize this opportunity to de-escalate tensions and to
participate fully, constructively and in good faith in
order to build confidence among them and take a step
towards ending the conflict. In that regard, we were
encouraged by the Special Envoy's announcement of
the agreement reached by three parties to the conflict
on the exchange of prisoners of war and detainees.

Thirdly, we believe that a revamped, regional
approach is needed to uphold the ceasefire and promote
the peace process. We commend the Special Envoy's
attempts to involve different States of the Middle
East and the Gulf region in that process. We welcome
the recent productive meetings of the Special Envoy
with the Government of Yemen and regional players,
including the senior leaders of the Houthi Ansar
Allah movement, which will help to reach the desired
agreement. The support of neighbouring countries is
critical and must be sought to work for a violence-free
Yemen. While working on the political front, the
international community should focus equally on
mobilizing resources for alleviating the humanitarian
crisis. Ultimately, the negative impact of the economic
crisis must be overcome with greater financial aid
and investments in development to help Yemen
reach stability.

Finally, Kazakhstan expresses its unconditional
support for the Special Envoy's efforts and urges parties
to engage in good faith and without preconditions in
the political process. We agree with Rasha Jarhum
that the involvement of women and civil society is
important, and their recommendations should be taken
into consideration. We also call upon the parties to the
conflict to demonstrate flexibility in order to avoid
disagreements and properly resolve complex issues.
We believe that a negotiated, United Nations-facilitated
political settlement, through inclusive intra-Yemeni
dialogue, is the only solution, and that all measures
must proceed in that direction. Kazakhstan is ready to
work on the text of a relevant draft resolution to help
resolve the Yemeni conflict.

