Mr. Jenea: According to the official news agency of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and various
Government sources, at approximately 9 a.m. local
time on 4 July, the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea launched a ballistic missile that it termed a "test
fire of intercontinental ballistic rocket Hwasong-l4".
The missile was launched near the Panghyon airfield in
northwestern Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
According to an official Government announcement, it
covered a distance of 933 kilometres during a 39-minute
flight, reaching an altitude of 2,802 kilometres, before
falling into the sea. According to those parameters, the
missile would have a range of roughly 6,700 kilometres
if launched on a more typical trajectory, making it an
intercontinental ballistic missile, according to widely

used definitions. Once again, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea did not send pre-launch notifications
to international organizations responsible for airspace
and maritime safety. The country's official media claim
that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea is now

"a full-fledged nuclear Power that has been
possessed of the most powerful intercontinental
ballistic rocket capable of hitting any part of the
world, along with nuclear weapons".

This is the seventh time that the Council has met to
discuss the Democratic People's Republic of Korea in
2017. Including today's meeting, five ofthese emergency
consultations have followed the launch of ballistic
missiles by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
in open violation of Security Council resolutions.

The Secretary-General strongly condemns the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's launch
of a ballistic missile with intercontinental range,
which constitutes yet another brazen violation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions and a dangerous
escalation of the situation. The country's leadership
must cease any further provocative actions and
comply fully with its international obligations. The
Secretary-General underlines how important it is
that the international community maintain its unity
in addressing this serious challenge. The Democratic
People's Republic of Korea must end any actions that
violate Security Council resolutions and allow time for
sincere dialogue to resume. All the parties must work to
reopen communications, particularly through military-
to-military channels, in order to reduce the risk of
miscalculation or misunderstanding.

Amid the escalating security situation in the
region, the United Nations and its partners play a
critical role in saving the lives of the most vulnerable
people in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
As the Council considers its response, we again remind
Member States of the importance of separating political
and humanitarian concerns and urge them to support
the lifesaving activities being carried out by the
humanitarian organizations in the country.

I would like to close by reiterating the Secretary-
General's commitment to seeking peaceful and political
solutions. The United Nations will remain in close
contact with all the parties concerned and is ready to
assist in any way possible.

