Ms. Sison (United States of America): I wish to
thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Maurer and Ms. Liu
for their briefings.

Let me first of all express my deep appreciation
and respect for the critical, life-saving work that the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF) do around the world.
We also thank the penholders of unanimously adopted
resolution 2286 (2016) for focusing the Council's
attention on the importance of protecting medical
personnel and access to medical care in armed conflict.

At the outset, it is important to be clear: all those
who are engaged exclusively in medical work must
be respected and protected as civilians, regardless of
their affiliation. The United States strongly supports
efforts to safeguard access to medical care in situations
of armed conflict. We also support efforts to increase
awareness of the international laws that provide legal
protection for medical personnel as well as medical
facilities and transportation in conflict situations.

I would like to focus my comments today on
practical ways of protecting medical care in conflict
and on the human consequences of the attacks in
Syria, where we see the most egregious examples of
attacks on medical facilities and personnel. But first
let me take a moment to state up front that United
States deeply regrets the tragic and mistaken attack
on the Medecins Sans Frontieres hospital in Kunduz,
Afghanistan, last October. I would like to echo the
words of President Obama and once again express our
profound condolences in connection with the Afghan
medical professionals and other civilians killed or
injured in the tragic attack. United States forces are
prohibited from targeting protected medical facilities,
and United States forces are committed to complying
with the international humanitarian law principles that
protect hospitals and medical staff caring for patients,
including wounded combatants in conflict zones.

As the Council is aware, the Pentagon, following
a six-month investigation of the incident in Kunduz,
has disciplined 16 service members for mistakes that
led to the tragedy, including the suspension of an
officer from command. The disciplinary action taken
highlights the seriousness with which we take this
incident. This tragedy was the direct result of human
error, compounded by systems and procedural failures,
and United States forces will learn from this incident,
study what went wrong and take the necessary steps to
prevent any such tragic incidents in future.

As some in this Chamber may recall, one of the
worst recorded cases of assault on the wounded and the
sick occurred in November 1991, in the Croatian town
of Vukovar. The same day the ICRC secured agreement
on the neutral status of the hospital, 300 patients and
their relatives were forced onto buses. The bodies of
200 of them were later found in a mass grave, and 51
are still missing today. Despite the outcry that this
event generated more than 20 years ago, we have seen
similar instances of targeted violence against patients
and medical workers in countless conflicts since then.
Unfortunately, many instances occurred only last
month.

Nowhere has the increasing trend of attacks on
medical personnel, facilities and transportation been
more apparent than in Syria, where such attacks
are overwhelmingly carried out by the regime.
The Commission of Inquiry recently reported that
targeting hospitals and medical personnel as well as
the denial of access to medical care remain ingrained
features of the Syrian conflict. Last week, Under-
Secretary-General Stephen O'Brien told the Council
that the presence of a hospital or health facility is now
perceived by neighbours to be a threat to their safety.
For instance, of the 33 hospitals open in Aleppo City
in 2010, fewer than 10 are reportedly still functioning.
Just last week, we all heard the report of the horrific
attack by the Syrian regime on Al-Quds hospital in
Aleppo, a hospital supported by both MSF and the
ICRC. Reports suggest that at least 27 people died in
the attack, including one of the last paediatricians in
Aleppo City, as the Secretary-General and others have
noted, along with a dentist and a nurse. The Al-Quds
attack came the day after a Syrian civil defence station
in the town of Al-Atareb, Aleppo province, was struck
five times, tragically killing five members of the civil
defence, a humanitarian and first-responder group
most commonly known as the White Helmets. Both of
these attacks came a week after targeted attacks on a
cardiologist in Hama, Dr. Hassan Al-Araj, and another
physician in Zabadani, Dr. Mohammed Al-Khous.
It is clear that the regime has been targeting medical
facilities and personnel. We are also concerned by the
report of today's attack on the Al-Dabit hospital, on
which we are still gathering information, and we are
saddened by the deaths resulting from that attack.

I regret to say that all of these attacks on medical
workers and facilities took place in April alone. Today
in Syria, according to several organizations, over 725
physicians in the country have been killed and over
350 attacks on medical facilities have taken place, the
vast majority of them at the hands of the regime. In
fact, from January through March, including during an
agreed cessation of hostilities, Physicians for Human
Rights documented 13 attacks on medical facilities and
the deaths of 25 medical personnel. Syrian Government
forces were responsible for 12 of the attacks and 24 of
the deaths. Allies of the Al-Assad regime, including
Russia, have an urgent responsibility to press the
regime to fulfil its commitments under resolution 2254
(2015) to stop attacking civilians, medical facilities and
first responders and to abide fully by the cessation of
hostilities. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
too, has directed multiple bombings of medical centres,
including the triple bombing of a clinic in Tel Tamer,
in Al-Hasakah governorate, that killed more than 50
civilians on 10 December 2015.

We are also deeply concerned by the devastating
toll of the crisis in Yemen. Throughout the Yemen
conflict, we have urged all sides to take all feasible
steps to avoid doing harm to civilians and to comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law, including with regard to the protection of medical
personnel and facilities. We continually remind the
parties in Yemen of their obligations under international
humanitarian law not to direct attacks against protected
hospitals or places where the sick and wounded are
present. Impartial humanitarian organizations must be
allowed to continue their critical work of saving lives,
free from threats from armed groups.

Let me conclude by saying that we commend the
tireless efforts of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the International Committee
of the Red Cross to promote practical ways that parties
to armed conflicts can better protect medical personnel
and facilities through the establishment ofdeconfliction
systems. Establishing humanitarian deconfliction
systems allows humanitarian organizations to submit
geolocation data to parties to the conflict. Parties to
any conflict share the responsibility for ensuring that
such data is effectively incorporated into no-strike lists.

For the United States, one result of the Kunduz
investigation was to set out a number of operational
improvements that have been made as a result of that
accident, including the preloading of key information
regarding targets onto aircraft systems. However, we
must all do more to improve the protection of medical
personnel and hospitals in armed conflict. With respect
to Syria specifically, we call again on Russia and other
allies of the Syrian regime to use all their influence
to stop the regime's deliberate targeting of medical
professionals and facilities. With the deeply concerning
increase in violence in Aleppo, we support the United
Kingdom recommendation for an open meeting on the
situation there.

We look forward to the Secretary-General's
recommendations on preventive measures. We hope
that this can be an ocassion, on the lead-up to the World
Humanitarian Summit, for us to recommit collectively
to the core principles of international humanitarian
law, including those that protect medical personnel
and hospitals.

