Mr. Mamabolo: It is an honour and privilege for
me to update the Security Council on the situation
in Darfur and the work of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
Detailed information on these issues is contained
in the report of the Secretary-General on UNAMID
(S/2018/389) published on 25 April, which covers the
period from 16 February until 15 April.

So far, the implementation of the second phase
of the reconfiguration of UNAMID is proceeding
very well. Significant progress has been made since
February, when the Chinese engineering company
began construction of the temporary operating base
in G010, while the Pakistani engineering company
is improving the road infrastructure in the area,
specifically the road connecting Nertiti and G010. The
military and police are engaged in the alignment and
establishment of their operational and administrative
structures pursuant to resolution 2363 (2017), and to
reflect the new UNAMID operational configuration.
To that end, the establishment of the State Security
Assistance Force, which is responsible for areas outside
the jurisdiction of the Jebel Marra Task Force, is on
track. The police have deployed to nine of the 10 team
sites ofthe Jebel Marra Task Force, and the deployment
of formed police units to the areas from which the
military has withdrawn commenced on 1 March.

While it is still early to fully assess the impact on
the security and protection-of-civilians situation in
areas from which UNAMID has withdrawn, I can say
that, so far, based on our assessment following visits to
most of the teams sites that the mission has withdrawn
from, we have not witnessed nor heard of any adverse
impact. We continue to monitor the situation within the
framework of our protection-of-civilians mandate. It is
also our expectation that the Government of the Sudan
will, where it has not already done so, soon establish its
authority in the areas concerned, especially the rule of
law and justice institutions.

Although the peace process continues to be stalled,
one encouraging development is that, at a meeting with
the Government of the Sudan in Berlin convened by
the German Berghof Foundation on 16 and 17 April,
the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi faction
and the Justice and Equality Movement in principle
accepted the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur as
the basis for negotiation. The parties at the meeting,
however, could not reach consensus on the timing for
the creation of the implementation mechanism of the
subsequent agreement, but demonstrated a desire to
continue to engage with me in pursuit ofa way forward.
I am therefore in contact with all the parties to bridge
their differences so that they can agree on and sign a
pre-negotiation framework as soon as possible. That
should pave way for a cessation of hostilities agreement
and direct negotiations.

Since my previous briefing to the Council, in March
(see S/PV.8202), the general security situation in Darfur
has remained calm, except for sporadic clashes between
the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction and
Government forces and nomads in the J ebel Marra area.
As has occurred in previous years, clashes during the
dry season became more recurrent between 10 March
and 1 April, and again from 20 to 21 April, with the
Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid staging several
ambushes on Government forces as they deployed in
the Jebel Marra area. Due to access restrictions, the
mission could not verify the number of casualties
reported on both sides or on the number of civilians
affected. There have also been reports of the burning of
villages by the warring parties. A significant number
of civilians have been displaced to different parts of
Darfur, including to the Sortony internally displaced
persons (IDPs) gathering site in North Darfur.

The nature of those incidents and the low casualty
figures reported suggest low-scale skirmishes rather
than a large-scale operation. Nevertheless, they
demonstrate the continued desire of the Sudan Liberation
Army/Abdul Wahid to challenge the Government of the
Sudan and sustain the conflict. Although there were
reports of possible incursions by the Sudan Liberation
Army-Mini Minawi and by the Justice and Equality
Movement in East and South Darfur, that could not
be confirmed. Those two movements remain largely
inactive in Darfur and seem to have observed their
unilateral declaration of ceasefire, recently extended
until 6 August.

According to the revised figures of humanitarian
actors in Darfur, some 1.76 million displaced people
are registered as living in approximately 66 camps.
For unregistered IDPs - that is, displaced people
living in rural settlements and urban areas - estimates
vary considerably, especially as there is no systematic
registration of displacement outside of camps.
Nevertheless, the United Nations humanitarian
agencies and partners estimate that an additional
500,000 displaced people live in host communities and
settlements in Darfur. From our interactions with those
people, they have indicated their desire to return to their
places of origin, as long as the provision of security and
basic public services is guaranteed. Others are willing to
settle where they are only if assured of their traditional
land rights and in their original homes. For Darfur to
be guaranteed lasting peace and development, durable
solutions will have to be found for the plight of IDPs.

As UNAMID continues its reconfiguration and
drawdown, the transitionphase willbe critical in creating
the foundation for durable peace. To that end, together
with the United Nations country team, UNAMID has
finalized a financing approach for sustaining peace in
Darfur. We will count on the support of the international
community, including Member States of the Council,
for its success. It is imperative that concerted efforts be
exerted towards the mobilization of financial resources

to consolidate and sustain the prevailing peace and
stability in the region.

