Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Reconciliation in the
maintenance of international peace and security is a
most relevant theme because, together with mediation
and diplomacy, it becomes an integral component
of peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes. The
modern security architecture, which is based on the
collective responsibility of all States Members of the
United Nations, is undergoing a critical test. The lack
of trust among great Powers, stark economic and social
inequalities and underdevelopment have prevented
progress in many parts of the world.

Kazakhstan has always been at the forefront
of preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention,
reconciliation and confidence-building measures, as
they are the core principles of maintaining international
peace and security. The best example of its practical
implementation has been the creation, on Kazakhstan's
initiative, of the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, which has been
a successful instrument for preventively addressing the
key challenges in our region for more than 10 years.

The prioritization of conflict prevention in
the mandates of the United Nations and regional
organizations is an essential tool for achieving
reconciliation and maintaining international peace and
security. In that regard, we note my country's successful
experience convening the Conference on Interaction
and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia, which has
been functioning for more than a quarter of a century
now and uniting 28 countries.

Being aware that faith and religious leaders can
play a significant role in reconciliation, Kazakhstan
has been proud to convene the Congress of Leaders
of World and Traditional Religions since 2003. The
added value of the Congress is that the forum brings
together religious leaders, politicians, representatives
of international organizations, as well as experts,
non-governmental organizations and civil society on a
common platform.

Believing that war can never be a lasting solution
to any problem, Kazakhstan worked towards a viable,
inclusive and Syrian-led political process and provided
the platform for the Astana process on Syria. We are
sure that the 13 rounds of Astana talks contributed
to United Nations efforts to launch the Syrian
Constitutional Committee, which, according to Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen, "can be a door-opener to a wider
political process that meets the legitimate aspirations of
the Syrian people" (S/PV8628, p. 2).

We make the following observations based on
our experience.

First, reconciliation is a process and an outcome
where confidence-building measures (CBMs) play an
important role since they provide the incentive for parties
to engage in constructive dialogue. Reconciliation
cannot be successful without CBMs. facilitating
people-to-people contacts, promoting tolerance and
enhancing minority rights and participation.

Secondly, reconciliation must take place with
diverse interventions at all levels, from national
leadership to grassroots, while taking into account a
country's unique historical and cultural context. It is
also clear that conflicts should be rectified through
diplomacy and investments in development.

Thirdly, reconciliation cannot be imposed
from outside. It must be worked out by all relevant
stakeholders, including women and youth.

Finally, next year the United Nations family will
mark its seventy-fifth anniversary. That important
milestone represents a unique opportunity to take
a critical look at the problems and challenges that
confront us. My country has been and will always
be at the forefront of diplomacy, mediation and
reconciliation, using them as the strongest armaments
for peace and security.

