Ms. d'Achon (France) (spoke in French): I will
probably not use my full 10 minutes, because, within
the framework of the progress that we are making with
respect to enhancing the methods of work of the
Security Council, later on we will be having a lunch
with the Council coordinators at which we will have an
exchange of views on the programme of work for
January.

I would, however, like to thank you, Mr.
President, for having convened this meeting. I would
like to associate myself with the tributes that have been
paid to your presidency, and we will, of course, take
into account any ideas you can give us for next month.

We believe that this meeting has been particularly
useful, although it is, of course, a sad occasion to see
our Security Council colleagues leave - colleagues
with whom we have forged bonds of friendship and
of - I hope - productive work in many areas. Each
delegation, with its areas of specialization and its
particular sensitivities, has brought to the Council an
interesting and productive vision, and, as our colleague
from the Russian Federation has stated, each one made
a major contribution.

Many very important ideas have been expressed
today by our departing colleagues. As Ambassador
Greenstock said, we must make sure that they do not
remain a dead letter but ensure that they are taken into
account and, going beyond a conceptual framework, we
must try to translate them into reality next year.

I will not go back to many of the areas that were
alluded to by several delegations, but I would like to
recall, in the context of the work that we have done in
2002, the great attention that the Security Council has
focused on the question of Africa. Each month these
questions make up almost two thirds of our work. True,
as many delegation have stressed, many successes have
been recorded - Angola, Sierra Leone, Ethiopia/
Eritrea, and the African Great Lakes region, to which
the French Ambassador led a third mission.

It is true that these questions will remain on our
agenda in 2003. We are concerned in particular by the
situation in West Africa at this time. Indeed, the
questions of Liberia, the Central African Republic and
Guinea-Bissau, as well as C6te d'Ivoire - topics we
will begin to deal with this afternoon - will continue
to be a great concern to us.

As has been noted by many delegations, we have
made quite a bit of progress in the fight against
terrorism and on the questions of Afghanistan and
Timor-Leste, but even there the Council must remain
extremely vigilant. We fully agree with the proposal
made by Ambassador Greenstock that we should
examine in January what we have done in terms of
fighting terrorism.

As to the challenges that we will be facing next
year - you had asked us to think about this issue,
Mr. President - one does not need to be a visionary to
see that, at the beginning of the year, we will continue
to be seized of all the questions of which we have
spoken.

Mr. President, you asked us to think about the
challenges of next year. One does not need to be a seer
to know that all the files we have mentioned will
continue to keep us occupied from the start of next
year

I would like to pick up on what the Ambassador
of Singapore said about continuing to give some
thought to a permanent sanctions mechanism. This
would allow us to better share information, as he
emphasized, and it seems important to us that the
Council should continue to think about the sanctions
sector.

Finally, I wish to note that there has been greater
transparency in the Council's proceedings this past
year. We have made a great deal of progress, which
was partially recognized by the members of the
General Assembly when the annual report was
presented, and we have to continue the good work that
we initiated in this area.

As other delegations have said, it is true that the
Council's workload is such that we are practically at
the saturation point in our monthly programmes of
work. As the Norwegian Ambassador said, we must
continue to think about this so that we can progress in
the rationalization of the work that we do, including
trying to find better working methods. We have to be
more imaginative; we cannot remain content to
continue applying the same methods as our workload
continues to grow.

I do not know if it is through the Working Group
on Documentation and Procedures that we will be able
to do this, but it might be accomplished on a daily
basis, through practical thinking, and maybe, as some
delegations have said, by asking some countries to take
the lead in discussions on specific topics - the matter
of "lead nations" - and maybe also by ad hoc working
groups of the Security Council.

