Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to welcome High Representative Inzko
back to the Security Council and to thank him for his
comprehensive briefing and his service to the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the interests of preserving
peace and promoting stability in the region.
I have three main points to make in reaction to
the High Representative's report (see S/2012/813) and
briefing today. First, the United States would like
to congratulate the Bosnian people on their active
participation in the local elections that took place on
7 October. It is important that so many citizens turned
out to select their local leaders. Free and fair elections,
including voting rights for internally displaced
persons and returnees, are crucial to Bosnia's future
membership in the European Union and NATO. We are
disappointed that the residents of Mostar were unable
to vote on election day because political leaders failed
to implement a constitutional court ruling on changing
the electoral system. But we welcome and strongly
support the efforts of the High Representative to
facilitate negotiations among the parties to resolve that
issue. We hope that the people of Mostar will be able to
exercise their right to elect their leaders soon.

Secondly, the United States is disappointed at
the lack of progress since the last report of the High
Representative (see S/2012/307). The promising
developments on the European Union (EU) and NATO
agenda that took place earlier in the year have stalled.
The decision by some parties to restructure the State
Government coalition after barely five months in office,
following 16 months of stalemate, has distracted the
Government from acting on the pressing reform agenda
that those parties profess to support. We hope that the
new coalition will complete Government restructuring
as soon as possible and resume work on the conditions
that the EU has established for Bosnia and Herzegovina
to be able to submit a credible membership application,
one that will comply with the verdict of the European
Court of Human Rights in the Seja'ie-Finci case and
establish a coordination mechanism for engaging in
accession negotiations with the EU.

Furthermore, the United States stands ready to
support the activation of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
membership action plan at NATO, as soon as the
Government registers State ownership of the defence
properties required by the Ministry of Defence and
Armed Forces. Secretary of State Clinton and EU
High Representative Catherine Ashton delivered that
message when they visited Sarajevo together in October
and urged Bosnian leaders to put aside their differences
in order to complete the reforms necessary for Euro-
Atlantic integration.

Thirdly, the United States remains steadfastly
committed to Bosnia and Herzegovina's sovereignty
and territorial integrity. As Secretary Clinton said
during her recent visit to Sarajevo,
"It is totally unacceptable that, 17 years after
the war ended, some still question Bosnia and
Herzegovina's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Such talk is a distraction from the problems facing
the country and serves only to undermine the goal
of European integration. The Dayton Accords must
be respected and preserved, period."

The United States remains committed to supporting
the reforms made over the past 17 years that have enabled
progress towards EU and NATO integration. Attacks
by politicians from both entities on the independence of
the State judiciary, calls for the dissolution of the armed
forces, efforts to dissolve the State electricity transition
company - institutions that were created in order to
meet EU and NATO integration requirements - raise
serious questions about the sincerity of the stated
desires of those individuals to realize the aspirations
of the Bosnian people to become members of those two
intergovernmental organizations.

In that regard, let me reaffirm the unwavering
support of the United States for the High Representative's
authorities to ensure full implementation of the Dayton
Peace Accords, including the use of the Bonn powers, if
needed. The United States will continue to support the
maintenance of the Office of the High Representative
until the five objectives and two conditions (5+2)
established by the Peace Implementation Council's
Steering Board have been fulfilled.

We commend the High Representative's decision to
close the Brcko Final Award Office and the suspension
of supervision of the Brcko District on 31 August,
moving Bosnia and Herzegovina closer to completing
one of the 5-1-2 objectives. We wish every success to
Brcko residents as their democratically elected leaders
assume full responsibility for governing the district.

In the 17 years since the signing of the Dayton
Peace Agreement, the United States, NATO and our
EU allies have worked diligently to help maintain peace
and security in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We remain
committed to supporting the Bosnian people in their
goal of Euro-Atlantic integration, and are prepared to
work with leaders who are committed to delivering
those results.

