Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let me
first congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of April.
I am confident that under your able leadership the
Council will deal with its agenda items effectively and
efficiently during the current month. I would also like to
pay tribute to Ambassador Legwaila of Botswana for the
excellent manner in which he guided the work of the
Council last month.

 

Over a long period of time, the question of
Afghanistan has been on the agenda of many meetings of
the United Nations, and many resolutions have been
adopted. However, the conflict in Afghanistan and the
suffering of the Afghan people continue. We hope that
today's meeting can help create an atmosphere conducive
to a greater involvement of the international community in
Afghanistan in terms both of finding a peaceful solution to
the conflict and of responding to the humanitarian needs of
the Afghan people, who have been suffering for the past 17
years and are in dire need of peace, stability and
development.

Today, the situation in Afghanistan is a matter of
concern and a source of anguish. The country has been
going through a very destructive and merciless war,
resulting in a great number of deaths and injuries among
innocent civilians, the displacement of thousands of people
and the widespread destruction of property. Heavy fighting
continues to inflict suffering on innocent civilians,
particularly on the civilian population of Kabul, despite
repeated calls by the international community, including the
Security Council, for the cessation of hostilities and an end
to the bombardment and shelling of populated areas. As the
Secretary-General states in his latest report:

"the situation in Kabul continues to be critical,
especially as regards the supply and availability of
food and fuel. Recent surveys show that large sections
of the population that were not previously considered
vulnerable now have extreme difficulties in meeting
their basic needs." (A/50/908, para. 7)

The Afghan parties, who were once united in their
struggle against foreign occupation, have not been able,
unfortunately, to preserve their unity and work towards the
reconstruction of their country after so many years of
destruction. The Afghan parties should stop fighting and
agree on a peaceful settlement so that the Afghan people
can work towards peace and development.

Having a long border with Afghanistan and sharing
linguistic and religious commonalities with the people of
Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of Iran has been gravely
concerned about the situation in that country. Having
witnessed up close the suffering of a neighbouring country
over a long period of time, we cannot be indifferent to the
fate of the Muslim people of Afghanistan, and we have
therefore taken various measures to alleviate the suffering
of the people of that country. We have hosted more than
2.5 million Afghan refugees, whom we have protected with
a very high standard of treatment, despite the fact that
international assistance provided to cover the expenses
has not been proportionate to the size and magnitude of
the problem. We hope that all Afghan refugees can return
to their homeland voluntarily as soon as possible.
Needless to say, international cooperation and assistance
to facilitate this process are vital.

Furthermore, my country has done its best through
various means to help the Afghan people. Building
hospitals and medical centres to treat patients free of
charge, offering educational programmes for Afghan
students, training Afghan medical groups, implementing
a continuous plan of child vaccination, providing
necessary facilities for orphanages and providing food and
non-food assistance are but some of our ongoing activities
aimed at alleviating the suffering and hardships of Afghan
people. But the situation is worse, and more difficult, than
one can imagine. Very basic rights of the Afghan people
have been endangered during the years of conflict, and in
some areas of the country the incidence of disease and
malnutrition has already reached alarming proportions. To
deal with these unfortunate conditions, an enduring
commitment on the part of the international community to
provide both humanitarian assistance and financial support
is of the utmost necessity.

In the political field, we have also spared no effort
to help various Afghan parties to set aside their
differences for the sake of all Afghans, and for the sake
of peace and stability in the region. We have repeatedly
urged them to agree on a durable cease-fire and to seek
a negotiated peaceful solution acceptable to all. The
people of Afghanistan are very tired of the fratricidal war
and the bloodshed. Therefore, there is no justification
whatsoever for rejecting a cease-fire and insisting on
continuing the armed hostilities. We firmly believe that
the people of Afghanistan have every right to fully
determine their own destiny and that they are capable of
doing so. While respecting and supporting the right of
Afghans to choose their own future, our policy has been
focused on maintaining contact with the Government and
with all Afghan groups and using every opportunity to
promote peace. As in the past, the Islamic Republic of
Iran will continue to cooperate with its neighbours to
achieve peace and stability in Afghanistan. We also
continue to support the United Nations Special Mission to
Afghanistan, headed by Ambassador Mahmoud Mestiri.
Moreover, the role of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference in this regard should also be commended. We
are of the View that close coordination and cooperation
among the United Nations, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and neighbouring countries can best

 

serve the peace process in Afghanistan. We once again
reiterate the importance of safeguarding the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and national unity of Afghanistan.

The international community should be called upon to
be more attentive to the needs of the Afghan people. The
United Nations can play an important role in this regard.
The humanitarian needs are so enormous and the magnitude
of the destruction is so high that more concerted action is
required. In this context, an area to which not enough
attention has been paid is the international contribution to
the reconstruction process in those areas of Afghanistan
where there is no fighting. This by itself would give
Afghans an incentive to set aside their arms and resolve
their differences peacefully. The United Nations can help
propel the peaceful settlement process also through, inter
alia, utilizing the experiences of others, including those of
neighbouring countries. There is no need to emphasize the
fact that no plan should be imposed upon the people of
Afghanistan, who have been sensitive throughout their
history to foreign interference.

Finally, we hope that with the sincere support of the
whole international community the Afghans can soon arrive
at an immediate and durable cease-fire and an acceptable
transitional government. For its part, the Islamic Republic
of Iran will continue to play its role in the process of
bringing peace and normalcy to Afghanistan.

