Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would like
to thank Prosecutor Bensouda for the briefing on the
work of her Office to help end impunity for atrocity
crimes in Libya.

In the past few months in particular, Libyans have
engaged constructively with the political dialogue
process facilitated by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Bernardino Leen, and have taken
important steps towards finalizing a political settlement
and establishing a Government of national accord.
However, it is critical that the parties endorse the
political agreement and establish a unity Government
now, without delay. Libya cannot lose this opportunity
and the international community needs a Government
partner in Libya.

As Secretary John Kerry said, finalizing this
arrangement can help return Libya to a path of peace,
stability and prosperity, and the United States stands
ready to support a new Government of national
accord. Libya's political strife has exacerbated existing
humanitarian, economic and security challenges,
while the lack of effective domestic accountability
mechanisms has allowed militias and armed groups to
operate unrestrained, committing serious human rights
abuses and violations of international humanitarian
law against ordinary Libyans. In particular, those
who try to shed light on these abuses, especially civil
society activists, media actors and female human rights
defenders, have been singled out, forcing them to either
leave Libya or go underground.

We commend the efforts of those who are
documenting these abuses and violations, including
in the many detention facilities throughout Libya,
recognizing that the continued violence and instability
in Libya make such work all the more dangerous but
ever more important. The United States remains
deeply concerned about the growing presence in Libya
of groups aligned with the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) and other extremists. We strongly
condemn the ongoing violent acts against civilians
by these groups in Sirte, Derna and Benghazi. All of
these abuses highlight the stakes of the conflict in
Libya and the urgent need to establish a Government of
national accord, which can be a constructive partner in
addressing all of these challenges, as well as irregular
migration and other regional challenges, and develop
the strong institutions in international partnerships that
Libya needs.

The Council has called for those responsible
for violations of international humanitarian law and
violations and abuses of human rights in Libya to be
held to account. This is absolutely critical to the way
forward in Libya. We must seek justice, not only for
crimes committed by the Al-Qadhafi regime but, as
new events have arisen in Libya, we must also purse
justice for crimes committed by ISIL-aligned groups
and other extremists. That is one reason that a strong
and unified Libyan Government is so urgently needed,
so that the extremist threat can be adequately addressed,
including through domestic Libyan prosecution. We
also encourage other relevant States to prosecute
foreign fighters involved with such groups for atrocity
and other crimes, where appropriate.

With respect to the situation before the International
Criminal Court, we continue to support the Council's
unified call for Libya to fulfil its obligation to cooperate
with and provide assistance to the Court and the
Prosecutor. We note,in particular, Libya's obligation
to transfer Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the ICC, and
we urge Libya to refrain from any further proceedings
against Al-Qadhafi that would pose any obstacle to his
transfer to the Court. We also continue to stress, more
generally, that national proceedings in Libya should be
conducted in full compliance with Libya's international
obligations.

To achieve national reconciliation, it will be
important to ensure the confidence of all Libyan
citizens in their Government's commitment to due
process and the rule of law, and that those responsible
for serious crimes are held accountable. As Libya and
the international community work towards a political
agreement, we cannot forget that accountability for
crimes in Libya will be key to achieving lasting peace
and stability.
I thank Prosecutor Bensouda and her Office, once
again, for their work over the past six months and
since 2011, when the Council referred the situation in
Libya to the ICC. The United States looks forward to
continuing to work with the Council, the ICC, a new
Government of national accord and others to end the
violence, promote justice and build sustainable peace
in Libya.

