Mr. Kolby (Norway): After six weeks, innocent
Israelis again became the victims of terrorist acts.
Terrorism builds nothing, destroys everything and must
be fought vigorously. Terrorism works against the
interests of the Palestinian people. President Arafat and
the Palestinian Authority must do everything they can
to stop Palestinian terrorism and eliminate terrorist
structures. Those responsible must be brought to
justice.

During the same period, dozens of Palestinians
have been killed by Israeli military action, among them
many innocent civilians. Norway has appealed to Israel
to stop the ongoing military operation against the
headquarters of President Arafat. We do not think that
the military actions against him will stop terrorism; nor
do we think that they will further Israel's long-term
security needs.

Norway supports the conclusions of the Quartet
meeting held on 17 September. We support the work
done to formulate a road map that can identify a way
out of the present crisis. Security for both Israelis and
Palestinians has to be restored. But equally important is
the need to restore the political dialogue. The Middle
East conflict cannot be solved through the use of arms.
The solution has to be political.

Norway fully supports the Palestinian reform
process. It is now more important than ever to create an
accountable and efficient Palestinian Authority.
Progress has been made despite the very difficult
circumstances in which the reform efforts are being
carried out.

However, reforms cannot be implemented in a
vacuum. The present security situation undermines the
reform efforts. The renewed attacks on President
Arafat's compound have jeopardized these efforts. The
success of the reforms also depends on Palestinians
seeing improvements both in living conditions and in
political prospects. The Palestinians must be given
hope. Norway therefore urges Israel to stop actions that
undermine the Palestinian reform efforts and to assist
in creating an environment that is conducive to
supporting the reform efforts.

Norway is deeply alarmed by the deteriorating
humanitarian situation of the Palestinians. We were
pleased to hear high-level assurances from Israel of
increased cooperation with humanitarian agencies, but
we have to note that officials of those agencies are
reporting only marginal improvements on the ground.
Norway recognizes Israel's legitimate security needs,
but the humanitarian needs of the Palestinian
population must also be safeguarded.

The humanitarian plight of the Palestinian people
is now quickly deteriorating. The curfews continue to
confine to their homes, on average, almost half a
million Palestinians in more than 20 cities and towns,
sometimes for days at a time. The business sector is
paralysed. Malnutrition among children is increasing to
unacceptable levels, and unemployment rates are above
50 per cent. Norway therefore supports the
recommendation of the Bertini report to dispatch a
mission to develop a detailed plan on how to deal with
humanitarian needs. Norway urges Israel to fully
cooperate with aid agencies and to lift the harsh
restrictions imposed on the Palestinians. The
humanitarian situation should continue to be followed
closely by the international community. We therefore
welcome the decision by the Quartet to hold a
ministerial meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
in December, in parallel with the holding of a new
Quartet meeting.

The present situation is deeply tragic for all those
who wish for peace and who are held hostage by
extremist and brutal action. Norway urges maximum
restraint and calls upon the parties to allow the Quartet
to continue to work out a road map that can bring about
new positive momentum in the efforts to establish
security, peace and a lasting political solution.

