Mr. Ivanou (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
delegation of Belarus would like to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. We are confident that, under your
professional and wise guidance, the Council's work
during the month of April will be fruitful and
constructive.

I would also like to thank the Security Council
for providing us with the opportunity to participate in
the discussion of the report of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). Belarus attaches great importance
to the Committee's work in combating international
terrorism on the basis of resolution 1373 (2001). I
would like to thank Sir Jeremy Greenstock, who is
completing his term of office as Chairman of the CTC,
for his valuable contribution to the organization of the
work of the Committee - a fairly new Council body,
established following the tragic events of 11 September
2001 - and for facilitating its purposeful and
significant work.

Belarus welcomes the open manner in which
Chairman of the CTC has guided its work, through
dialogue with States Members of the United Nations
and other participants in international counter-terrorism
activity, with a View to ensuring the effective
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). We hope
that that approach to the organization of the work of
the CTC, as well as the provision of information about
the results of its work, will continue under the new
presidency of Ambassador Inocencio Arias.

Belarus reaffirms its readiness to further
strengthen its interaction with the CTC with a view to
fulfilling the requirements of resolution 1373 (2001)
and to developing international cooperation in
combating terrorism on the basis of international law,
the United Nations Charter and international treaties.

Our Government commends the results attained,
with the help of the CTC, in completing first stage of
the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001):
collecting information about legislative measures and
other steps taken by States in implementation of the
resolution, identifying possible gaps in the anti-
terrorist infrastructure of States and determining when
to provide consultative and technical assistance.

Belarus submitted to the CTC, within the
appropriate time frame, three reports regarding its
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). The work
we have done in preparing our national reports has had
a positive impact on the Belarus legal system,
promoting the adoption of important standard-setting
legislation, including a counter-terrorism law, and has
led to our accession to a number of international
treaties dealing with counter-terrorism.

With regard to the future work of the CTC, we
hope that, beyond legislative measures, priority
attention will be given to activities to strengthen the
law enforcement structures of States involved in
international counter-terrorism and to tightening
customs, immigration and border controls. We await
concrete, practical steps in the Committee's next 90-
day programme of work with regard to the second
stage of the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001),
which includes forward-looking items on the CTC
agenda.

For Belarus and other countries with economies
in transition, effective customs, immigration and
border controls are of particular interest. Belarus has
not to date been subject to terrorist acts - a fact that
attests to the stable political situation in our country,
the productive work done by our law enforcement
bodies and the effective preventive action that we have
taken.

At the same time, Belarus regularly confronts the
need to eradicate the illicit transit of drugs, the illegal
movement and transportation of weapons and other
transborder crimes connected with terrorism. These
problems are under ongoing scrutiny by our leadership.
In particular, the timely identification and suppression
of terrorist threats were among the main purposes of
the 2003 decision to protect the State frontier of
Belarus by our border forces, which was confirmed by
the President of Belarus on 31 March.

An important event in the sixth 90-day period of
the CTC was the special meeting held on 6 March
between the Committee and international, regional and
subregional organizations. The results of the meeting
convinced us that countering international terrorism
has become one of the key areas of the activities of
many international organizations that should be
recognized as active participants in the global anti-
terrorist coalition.
The provision at that meeting of information on
international standards in the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and databases on the needs of
States for technical assistance in countering
international terrorism was very useful and provided
good guidance for States in identifying practical
measures for the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) and sources of necessary assistance. We call on
the CTC to continue the practice of organizing events
with the participation of international, regional and
subregional organizations, if possible with a broader
time frame and with the participation of representatives
of States in the discussions.

