Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French):
Belgium will speak later on behalf of the European
Union, so at this point I would just like to offer a few
comments.

First, I would like to thank Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno for the briefing he has given us on the
situation in Kosovo. The adoption of the Constitutional
Framework for Provisional Self-Government of
Kosovo and the upcoming Kosovo-wide elections next
17 November offer the necessary political prospects for
democracy and stability in Kosovo.
Today it is the duty of all parties concerned, with
assistance from the international community's
involvement in Kosovo, to ensure the success of the
elections. That success will depend primarily on the
participation of all of the inhabitants of Kosovo,
regardless of what communities they belong to.
Belgrade's support for registration by Kosovo Serbs
and the decision, mentioned by Mr. Guehenno, of four
Serb parties to register with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe are very positive
developments. We hope that continued dialogue
between Belgrade and the Serb community in Kosovo,
and the initiatives and efforts under way on security
issues, questions of missing persons and return of
refugees, will all help to convince the Kosovo Serbs
that full and complete participation will serve their own
interests as well as peaceful coexistence and stability in
Kosovo.

In this connection, I have a few questions for
Mr. Guehenno. A recent statement by the Yugoslav
Committee on Kosovo indicated that, according to that
Committee, the conditions for Serb participation in the
elections are absolutely non-existent. I would like to
hear Mr. Guehenno's comments on this statement.

Above and beyond the preparations for the
elections and the vote, it must be possible for the
peaceful discussion of views and the free expression of
democratic choices to be carried out in an atmosphere
of security. I think that the recent adoption of
regulations against crime and the establishment of the
police and justice pillar that Mr. Guehenno spoke about
are useful measures, and we must encourage them. It is
now a question of ensuring full implementation and
effective functioning. We have to continue to step up
our work against crime and against extremists.

My third comment is on Mitrovica, about which
Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno spoke, as did Ambassador
Gatilov. Mitrovica is an important problem, as Mr.
Guehenno said. The situation in Mitrovica cannot
improve without the implementation of the
comprehensive strategy that he spoke about, which
would involve all of the communities and actors
concerned, beginning with the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). In that
way we would be able to tackle the causes of the
problem in Mitrovica and not just the manifestations of
the problem.

Fourthly, like other speakers, I would like to
speak briefly on the situation in Macedonia. The recent
developments there are very disturbing. We have
condemned the confrontations of the last few days, and
we call on the parties to scrupulously and fully respect
the ceasefire agreed to on 5 July last. We call on the
parties to demonstrate a very high level of
responsibility, with a View to ensuring the success of
the ongoing dialogue. There is no other option. Only a
political solution can ensure a democratic and multi-
ethnic future for all citizens of Macedonia. Mr.
Guehenno spoke about what the Kosovo Force (KFOR)
and UNMIK were doing on the border between Kosovo
and Macedonia, and in a way this was a response to
Ambassador Gatilov's concerns. But KFOR and
UNMIK must certainly do even more to ensure that the
border between Kosovo and Macedonia is truly and
completely under control so that there can be no illegal
arms traffic to feed the conflict in Macedonia.

