Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Japanese and United States
delegations for calling for this emergency meeting. I
would also like to thank the Italian presidency for
organizing the meeting and Under-Secretary-General
Feltman for his clear and factual briefing. I would
also like to personally thank and commend you, Sir,
as Ambassador of Italy, for your work in your capacity
as Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006), and for the clarity of your briefing and your
leadership of the Committee over the past year.

The delegation of Senegal in its turn once again
categorically condemns North Korea's latest launch of
an intercontinental ballistic missile, which comes barely
two months after its launch ofa missile on 15 September
and clearly casts doubt on the effectiveness of the
sanctions on North Korea. Despite all the resolutions,
sanctions and other measures that the Council has
adopted on North Korea, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, far from abandoning its military
nuclear ambitions, has managed to call into question
the Security Council's ability to deal with the problem
posed by its illegal military nuclear programme. That is
why the Senegalese delegation would like to emphasize
that targeted measures are a legitimate response to
the threat posed by North Korea's ballistic nuclear
programme. The measures outlined in the Council's
recent resolution 2375 (2017) should be one integral
component of a comprehensive political strategy aimed
at convincing the parties to engage in frank dialogue
with the goal of denuclearizing the Korean peninsula,
with the international community's active support.

In affirming its belief in the importance of finding
a peaceful and diplomatic settlement to the Korean
crisis, Senegal would like to reiterate its appeal to the
parties to resume face-to-face dialogue with the aim of
achieving the verifiable denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula, thereby fostering the possibility of peaceful
coexistence between the peoples and countries of
the region.

However, the challenge of implementing the
sanctions in place still has to be met by all States,
international organizations and the private business
sector, since they are a long way from being effectively
enforced, leaving large gaps that the North Korean
authorities systematically exploit in order to obtain
the resources they need to continue their illegal,
dangerous programme.

With regard to the work of the 1718 Committee,
my delegation commends the efforts of its members
to promote the full implementation of sanctions on
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, and we
encourage them to redouble their efforts.My country
welcomes the awareness-raising work of the Committee
and of its Panel of Experts, who are always willing to
provide guidance to any State requesting assistance,
whether by providing information on designated entities,
giving advice on submitting reports of non-compliance
or sharing ways to improve implementation of the
relevant resolutions.

We encourage the adoption of an implementation
reporting mechanism and support the draft assistance
notes on implementing the resolutions on North Korea,
which are very helpful to Member States. However, we
reiterate our concerns about recent cases of violations
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and
therefore urge it to refrain from provocations and commit
to a peaceful, diplomatic, political and comprehensive
solution through dialogue, with the aim of restoring
peace in the Korean peninsula. In that regard, we call
on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to halt
and abandon its existing nuclear and ballistic-missile
programmes as soon as possible and once and for all,
fully, verifiably and irreversibly.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Senegal's
continuing readiness and willingness to make every
effort to implement resolution 1718 (2006) and other
resolutions pertaining to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. In that regard, my country will
submit its own report on the implementation of
resolutions 2371 (2017) and 2375 (2017) in the next
few weeks.

