Mrs. Martinez Rios (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for his words
and for his excellent report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. We very much appreciate this report and its
recommendations to improve the legal and physical
protection of civilian populations. Those recommendations
rightly deserve to be the subject of a thorough discussion in
the Council. The time has come to channel our worry into
action. To that end, the report of the Secretary-General
provides an excellent point of departure.

The report paints a stark image of the realities that
civilian populations must face in situations of armed
conflict. The violence affecting vulnerable groups in
particular and the attacks on humanitarian and peacekeeping
staff reveal the magnitude of violence that combatants are
prepared to use in conflict zones. The conclusion that the
protective emblems of the Red Cross and the Red Crescent
and of the United Nations flag appear to provide less
protection than ever is particularly alarming. The assault
upon and the looting of the United Nations Mission in East
Timor (UNAMET) complex at Dili is the most recent
unfortunate example of this worrisome trend. The diagnosis
is discouraging and the challenge to be confronted by the
international community in general and the Security Council
in particular is enormous.

In the area of legal protection the international
community has laid down several important instruments to
protect civilians. International humanitarian law has
gradually taken into account the need to emphasize the
protection of civilians. Many of the norms to impose
limits on the carrying out of hostilities and to protect
innocent persons have been couched in universally
recognized principles and norms.

It is clear that despite certain limitations we
generally have an adequate body of norms. This is why
we should focus our efforts on reducing the abysmal gap
that exists between the very high level of development in
legal norms and the very low degree of respect for those
norms. Bridging this gap between the existence of law
and the respect for it calls for action on three levels.
First, States must recognize that under the Geneva
Conventions they have the primary responsibility for
respecting and ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law under all circumstances. We must join
with the International Committee of the Red Cross in its
tireless efforts to promote the dissemination and
understanding of the norms applicable to conflict
situations.

Secondly, it is essential to create adequate national
and international mechanisms to deal with impunity.
Justice is an indispensable component of a stable peace,
as the Security Council has repeatedly recognized in
addressing recent conflicts. In Angola, Kosovo, Sierra
Leone and now East Timor the Council has emphasized
the essential link between peace and justice in
highlighting the need to properly investigate the crimes
that have been committed and to prosecute those
responsible for them.

To deal with impunity, States must have sufficient
domestic law to ensure the investigation of violations and
the prosecution of those responsible for them. When
national systems cannot function properly, however,
appropriate international machinery should be set up. The
Council has created two special criminal tribunals that are
now fully operative and with which States have been
required to fully comply. We must also ensure the speedy
implementation of the International Criminal Court.

Thirdly, we must encourage all States to ratify and
participate in the principal instruments that protect
international law. In this regard we are pleased to
announce that on 14 September our country ratified the
Ottawa Convention on anti-personnel landmines.

In addition we must emphasize the importance of the
1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel. In these days when we are learning

 

that the United Nations flag affords less and less protection,
this Convention becomes increasingly important. Its rapid
ratification must be urged so that we can ensure universal
participation. We must particularly urge participation by
those countries in which multinational forces are stationed.

The mention of this Convention leads us to note
several important legal shortcomings to which the report of
the Secretary-General calls attention.

On various occasions our delegation has noted that the
1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel does not apply to all the people and
organizations present in conflict zones, and therefore it is
necessary to expand the applicability of this instrument. We
note with satisfaction that the Secretary-General echoes this
concern, calling on the General Assembly to urgently
undertake the drafting of a protocol to the 1994
Convention.

Children are the most vulnerable group in civilian
populations. This was recognized by the Security Council
in the adoption of a resolution on this problem less than a
month ago. We support in particular the initiative contained
in the Secretary-General's report of raising - by means of
an additional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child - the minimum age for recruitment and for
participation in conflicts to 18 years.

With regard to physical protection of civilian
populations, the Secretary-General's report proposes a wide-
ranging set of measures that affect various Security Council
areas of action, including sanctions regimes; confidence-
building measures; rapid-deployment of peacekeeping
operations; disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of ex-combatants; embargoes on and destruction of
weapons, particularly small arms and light weapons;
humanitarian access; and special measures for women and
children. This is perhaps not the moment to refer to each
one of these measures, but we reiterate that these proposals
should be thoroughly studied.

We agree entirely with the premise underlying many
of these measures: that in the twenty-first century the
United Nations should increasingly become a source of
preventive measures.

Prevention of conflict calls for urgent and decisive
measures in the initial phases. Responsibility for
implementing many of these measures is the exclusive
purview of this Council. Other measures, such as those that
involve aid for development and humanitarian assistance,
require coordinated action with other bodies, both within
and outside the United Nations system. Cooperation and
consultation among all bodies and agencies is essential,
but visible and dynamic leadership on the part of the
Council is indispensable.

