The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Djibouti, Ethiopia and Somalia, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/654, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Uganda.

I wish to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/2009/602, which contains a
letter dated 23 November 2009 from the Permanent
Representative of Eritrea to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council, and
to a photocopy of a letter dated 15 December 2009
from the Permanent Representative of Eritrea to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, which will be issued as document
S/2009/658.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution. Unless I
hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, Costa Rica, Croatia,
France, Japan, Mexico, Russian Federation,
Turkey, Uganda, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Viet Nam

Against:
Libyan Arab J amahiriya

Abstaining:
China


The President (spoke in French): There were 13
votes in favour, one against and one abstention. The
draft resolution has been adopted as resolution 1907
(2009).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council wishing to make statements following the
voting.


