Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing. We appreciate
his leadership and voice in raising the alarm about the
nations on the verge of famine today. The humanitarian
needs in north-east Nigeria, Somalia, South Sudan
and Yemen are unprecedented. Those countries are
experiencing what is being called the most vicious of
vicious spirals, where conflict compounds food and
health-care shortages, which in turn compound the
risk of disease. All four countries are experiencing
devastating cholera outbreaks. The plagues seem to
come one after the other, but they are not the result of the
wrath of God but of the acts of men. In too many cases,
they are the acts of leaders who are more interested in
power or personal gain than the safety and security of
their own people.

In August, the Council acknowledged that unfortunate
reality when we declared that famine is an issue of
international peace and security (S/PRST/2017/14).
Those conflicts threaten us all. People without access to
food, water, basic services and economic opportunities
are more likely to turn to armed and extremist groups.
Epidemics, like cholera, can spread across borders. It
is not a drought or some other natural disaster that has
caused the largest food-security emergency since the
Second World War. The main reason that there is a risk
of famine in Yemen, South Sudan, north-east Nigeria
and Somalia is that fighters are not letting food get to
those who need it. In some cases there are reports that
warring parties are trying to starve entire communities
into submission. That is horrifying and demands the
Council's full and immediate attention.

Many have responded to the urgent need for
assistance in these four countries. At the opening of
the General Assembly, the United States announced
more than $575 million in additional aid, bringing
our total contribution to populations affected by this
crisis to more than $2.4 billion in 2017. We urge all
States Members of the United Nations to join us and do
their part. But more funding, however necessary, will
not be enough. In most cases, access to desperate people
is the key problem. Food aid may be available, but the
assistance cannot be delivered to those in need. That
is especially true in South Sudan, Nigeria and Yemen.
In South Sudan, a massive humanitarian response
helped to roll back famine earlier this summer, but
the pervasive conflict in South Sudan has left half the
population facing life-threatening hunger.

Armed groups and bureaucratic impediments
frequently prevent or delay the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, and attacks on aid workers are increasing at
an alarming rate. Since 2013, 85 humanitarian workers
have been killed in South Sudan alone - 18 were killed
this year. In Yemen, the people are simultaneously
facing the world's worst cholera outbreak and the
world's largest food-security emergency. Like
elsewhere, women and children are suffering the most.
There is no military solution in Yemen. A lasting end to
the violence will come only through a comprehensive
political agreement. But the humanitarian needs in
Yemen will not wait for a political process. All sides
must do everything in their power to alleviate the
suffering of civilians in Yemen.

There are practical steps that can be taken now,
today, to facilitate the delivery of food, fuel and
medicine to desperate people. These steps begin with
increasing capacity for aid delivery and allowing
humanitarian access in all of Yemen. In Nigeria, as
well, attacks by Boko Haram and the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant continue to prevent aid from being
delivered. The United States is fully committed to
working with our Nigerian partners to defeat terrorists,
but the needs of the 5.2 million suffering Nigerians
must be addressed. The Nigerian Government must
do more to streamline assistance deliveries and allow
humanitarian workers to reach all civilians in need.
In Somalia, unprecedented donor contributions and
the effective leadership of the Federal Government
of Somalia have helped avert famine thus far, but the
threat persists. There too, terrorists and other armed
groups impede the humanitarian response.

In each of those four countries, avoiding famine
means making sure that aid can be delivered to the
hungry. There is no excuse for a delay. All members
of the Council and the international community
must come together to hold all actors on the ground
accountable. When they block aid, we have to call
them out. When they do not allow the safe passage of
humanitarian workers, we have to insist that aid workers
can operate without fear for their safety and can access
all populations in need.

The job of the Council is the promotion and
maintenance of peace, security and human rights.
Famine prevention is an important part of our mandate.
Famine is both the result of the breakdown in peace,
security and human rights, and the contributor to further
violence and insecurity. We request the Council's
sustained attention to this good and necessary work.
We asked that we not stop at words and donations alone.
Let us go one step further to hold those preventing
access accountable for their crimes.

