Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): Slovenia deeply regrets the fact
that the Security Council was unable to adopt today the
necessary decision to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) in
Macedonia. It is regrettable that the Council is once again
paralysed by the negative vote of a permanent member. The
present situation may have a negative effect on
developments in and around Macedonia and on the
functioning of the Security Council as the principal United
Nations organ entrusted with the responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The situation in and around Macedonia is fraught with
instability and potential threats, which call for an array of
international responses, among them the preventive
deployment of the United Nations peacekeeping force in
Macedonia. The Council will have to think deep and hard
to find a way to continue to respond to this and other
urgent needs of the situation at hand.

Today is also a sad day for the Security Council. The
authority of the Council is being diminished as a result of
a variety of factors, and Council members should make a
special effort to reverse the current negative trends. It is
essential that Council members deal with specific situations
from the standpoint of ensuring peace and security in the
world and from the perspective of the Organization as a
whole. This is essential for the realization of the
responsibility conferred upon the Council by the United
Nations Member States and enshrined in Article 24 of the
Charter of the United Nations. We reiterate this point,
which has been made by several Council members on a
number of occasions over the past few months.
Furthermore, today's experience has strengthened our
conviction that there is a real need for reform of the
Security Council, including the reform of the right of veto.

We find ourselves in a situation in which we have to
reflect seriously on the importance of UNPREDEP for the
United Nations as a whole. UNPREDEP is a success
story of United Nations peacekeeping and of the United
Nations in general. It is a model of preventive
deployment which should inspire the United Nations in
dealing with a variety of incipient crisis situations in
various parts of the world. In Macedonia, UNPREDEP
has been operating since the country's independence. It
has been playing a Vital role in the stabilization of the
situation along the Macedonian borders. Equally important
is its civilian component, which is assisting in the efforts
to ease the inter-ethnic tensions and in the application of
the international standards of human rights.

The fact that UNPREDEP operates successfully in a
European hotbed of tension is of importance to the United
Nations in its effort to maintain its global role. Such a
role requires the presence of the United Nations in all the
regions of the world where threats to international peace
persist. The situation in the immediate vicinity of Kosovo,
which continues to represent a threat to peace and
security in the region, gives additional importance and
urgency to the role of UNPREDEP. At this critical
moment for the efforts to stabilize Kosovo, the United
Nations should not diminish its contribution to peace and
security in that region.

For all these reasons, we hope that today's vote on
UNPREDEP will not be the last decision of the Security
Council related to the need to preserve and strengthen
peace and security in and around Macedonia. Slovenia
strongly supports the idea of continued consultations
among the Security Council members and with
Macedonia. These consultations must lead to an
arrangement acceptable to Macedonia and the Security
Council members and should ensure the continued pursuit
of the tasks which made UNPREDEP necessary. We are
determined to contribute our share to such an effort.

