Mr. Braun (Germany): To start, let me thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2014/163), and his Special Representative,
Mr. Jan Kubis, for his briefing and for his availability
for other functions during his time in New York. I
also acknowledge Ambassador Tanin's presence in the
Security Council today.

The German Government aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of European Union
earlier in today's debate.

In three weeks' time, the Afghan people will
elect a new president and provincial councils. For
the first time in Afghanistan's history, power will be
peacefully transferred to a new Administration. We
commend the great efforts Afghanistan has made
so far in the preparations for those elections. My
Government is confident that free, fair and transparent
elections will result in a legitimate outcome, thereby
further strengthening democracy in Afghanistan. We
encourage the Afghan people, particularly women,
to make full use of their constitutional rights and to
actively participate in the elections.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has played a crucial role in
support of preparations for the elections, contributing
to building the capacities of Afghan authorities. For that
reason, we see a continuing role for UNAMA in that
area, pursuant to the Mission's mandate just extended
by the Council.

However, with our shared focus on the elections,
we must not forget that there are many other
challenges lying ahead in Afghanistan. Preserving and
consolidating gains in the protection and promotion of
human rights is of the utmost urgency. The Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission remains a key
partner in that regard. It is also of great importance to
ensure the equal participation of all members of society,
in particular women, in the shaping of the country and
in its institution-building.

The security situation remains volatile. The
Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF) have
proven increasingly capable of responding to security
challenges, although at a high cost. Continued support
by the international community through the transition
period and beyond would further strengthen the ANSF's
capacities to provide security for all Afghans. As
previously stated, Germany stands ready to contribute
its share to that joint effort. To that end, the timely
signing of the bilateral security agreement between
Afghanistan and the United States is a necessary
precondition and should not be delayed further.

At this critical juncture, Afghanistan needs to
see continuity in the work of the United Nations on
the ground. Supporting the Afghan Government's
efforts to protect and promote human rights, increase
coordination and efficiency of international support
and implement its commitments under the Tokyo
Framework requires a strong United Nations Mission
with adequate resources and a presence throughout
the country. We therefore welcome the extension of
UNAMA's mandate for another 12 months.

To conclude, I would like to express my sincere
gratitude and admiration for the work of the Special
Representative and his team in Afghanistan. We are
still mourning the death of four United Nations staff
who died on 17 January in a heinous attack in Kabul.
Under such difficult circumstances, the United Nations
continues to do great work in the service of the Afghan
people. Germany will continue to extend its support to
UNAMA in fulfilling its mandate.

