Mr. Jallow: I, too, should like to express my
appreciation to the members of the Council for their
support and their words of encouragement.

I should like to address three issues that were
raised.

First, there was an expression of interest by the
representative of the United Kingdom on further details
regarding the Rwandan law which has been enacted on
the transfer of cases. It will be circulated to members
of the Council so they can see the details of it. But I
should just like to emphasize the fact that it applies to
the transfer of cases both from the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and from other
States to Rwanda. It therefore opens up the possibility
of greater cooperation between Rwanda and other
countries in that particular area, particularly countries
where Rwandan genocidaires whom we cannot
prosecute at the Tribunal, for various reasons, reside.
This law now provides a framework for cooperation
between such countries and Rwanda.

Essentially, the law provides that all such cases
will be tried by the High Court in Rwanda, not by a
traditional court. They will be tried by the High Court,
which comprises legally qualified and experienced
judges, with appeals going to the Supreme Court,
which will also be similarly composed. It provides for
the traditional guarantees of a fair trial, the right to be
tried within a reasonable time, the right not to be tried
in absentia, the right to call witnesses, the presumption
of innocence and so on - in fact, basically all the
rights that are in the ICTR's Statute - the right to
counsel and so on.
Given the specific features of the process itself,
certain guarantees are provided for defence counsel
and defence witnesses, so that defence counsel and
defence witnesses who have to travel to Rwanda to
participate in this process are provided with legal
guarantees against search, seizure, arrest and so on, so
that they can operate freely and carry out their
functions effectively in the country.

The law also provides that, in the event of
conviction, prisoners will be held in accordance with
United Nations minimum standards for the detention of
persons. All these guarantees are provided, and, as I
said at the beginning, I believe that it does really
provide us with the necessary fair trial guarantees to
enable the process of referral to take place. The text of
the law, as I indicated, will also be circulated.

The second issue relates to the question raised by
the representative of Qatar. My understanding was that
it relates to whether the Council is being asked to take
a decision on the issue of the top six fugitives who are
still at large but whom we wish to have prosecuted at
the Tribunal. We are not asking for any decision now
by the Council on that issue. We are just flagging it as
an issue which may arise next year; we all agree that
these six people, because of their status and the level of
their participation in the genocide, need to be tried
before the ICTR. If they are arrested next year and
brought to the ICTR at a time when their trials cannot
be finished by the end of 2008, then the Council will
have to decide how we proceed with their cases: should
we continue with their cases beyond 2008, or should
we seek to transfer their cases to a national jurisdiction
or to another international mechanism? This is a
question that could possibly arise next year; it does not
have to be decided upon now. We merely flagged it for
the Council's attention.

Regarding the transfer to France, we all agree, of
course, that the international prosecution of these
crimes is a responsibility shared between the Tribunal
and Member States. What we can prosecute and handle
in Arusha, we do. Where we find Member States
willing and able to take some of the responsibility from
us and handle it effectively, we share the burden with
them. That is why we are trying to refer cases to
Rwanda and to other countries. France has indicated to
us its commitment to accept these cases and effectively
prosecute them, and it is on that basis that we have
proceeded to request the referrals to Paris for trial.
Finally, I wish to join my colleagues in placing
on record the appreciation of all the international
tribunals, the entire international community and,
indeed, all those who are interested in the cause of
international criminal justice for the tremendous
contribution of Ms. Carla Del Ponte in promoting the
cause of international criminal justice. I speak
particularly as her successor at the Rwanda tribunal -
one who is keenly aware and appreciative of the very
strong foundation she laid there, which has enabled us
to make progress and to maintain the momentum in this
area. We wish her very well in the future. We will
surely miss her presence at these gatherings.
