Ms. Pillay: I am very grateful for this
opportunity to address the Security Council on the
human rights situation in Cote d'Ivoire.

Let me begin by saying that I welcome the
growing recognition that human rights concerns are
central to the issues of peace and security. In Cote
d'lvoire there is a history of human rights violations
without any accountability or redress, including
discrimination, particularly against people in the north.
C6te d'Ivoire was plagued by years of violence, which
was further fuelled by disregard for the people's right
to choose their own leadership.

The recent arrest of former President Laurent
Gbagbo offers the prospect of an end to the conflict.
Nonetheless, the serious violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law that have occurred
must be addressed, or they may yet serve as cause for
further future destabilization in an already fragile
situation. Immediate and decisive action is now called
for, not only to respond to the dire humanitarian needs
that my colleague has referred to but also to build
public confidence in the rule of law and ensure that
justice is done.

Reconciliation will not be accomplished without
meaningful accountability, which has been lacking in
Cote d'Ivoire over the past decade. In 2004, an
international commission of inquiry established by the
Secretary-General identified alleged perpetrators and
recommended accountability mechanisms, which were
never implemented. To achieve peace and
reconciliation, the cycle of impunity must be stopped,
perpetrators must be brought to justice and victims
must be rehabilitated in their rights and dignity.

As part of the United Nations coordinated
response, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights conducted a mission
to Cote d'Ivoire from 2 to 9 April, which was led by
my Assistant Secretary-General Ivan Simonovie. The
purpose of the mission was to assess the human rights
situation in the country and to remind all parties of
their obligation to respect international human rights
and humanitarian law and of the importance of
bringing perpetrators to justice as a prerequisite to
sustainable peace.

The mission visited Abidjan and the west of the
country. Its members met with President Ouattara, the
Minister of Justice and Human Rights and the Minister
of Health. They also held meetings with victims and
witnesses, as well as with the United Nations country
team and humanitarian actors. The mission found
evidence of large-scale human rights violations,
including extra-judicial killings, enforced
disappearances, torture and sexual violence in Abidjan
and the rest of the country in the course of the conflict.

The United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(UNOCI) Human Rights Division estimates that at
least 400 people were killed in Abidjan between the
first round of presidential elections and the entry of the
Forces republicaines into the city. The dangerous
security situation held the inhabitants of Abidjan
hostage, leaving them short of food, water and
medicines. Many others were directly targeted by
uncontrolled armed elements, including through the
use of heavy weapons. Extended looting and pillaging
of shops and private homes by militia groups, and in
some cases by the Forces republicaines, contributed to
the climate of insecurity and fear.

The human rights call centre established by the
Human Rights Division continues to receive distress
calls from victims. Since its inception, the centre has
registered more than 12,000 calls, 75 per cent of which
pertained to alleged human rights violations. In a very
restricted security environment, the human rights call
centre has proved to be an essential tool for the
collection of information for the Mission and has
provided a much needed link with the civilian
population trapped in Abidjan.

Towns in the west of the country, such as
Duekoue, have reportedly been the scene of large-scale
killings from the second half of March, leading to a
total displacement of at least 28,000 people from
Duekoue alone. Preliminary investigations carried out
by the Human Rights Division suggest that at least 500
people have been killed, including 255 people in
Duekoue, more than 100 in Guiglo, 79 in Blolequin
and possibly 100 in Bangolo. In the Carrefour
neighbourhood of Duekoue, which was known to be a
former stronghold of pro-Gbagbo militia from the
Guere community, 229 bodies were found, mostly of
young men dressed in civilian clothes.

While additional investigation is needed to
determine the exact circumstances of the killings and
the identity of perpetrators and victims, the area was
known to be hosting a heavy presence of pro-Gbagbo
militiamen and had witnessed ethnic and
inter-communal tensions over the exploitation of land
resources. During March, the area was under the
control of pro-Gbagbo forces, and later pro-Ouattara
forces as the Forces republicaines advanced further
south towards Abidjan. Killings and acts of retaliation
were reported on both sides, sometimes with the
involvement of the local population.

As President Ouattara is now effectively taking
power in Cote d'Ivoire, it is of the utmost importance
that, in the transition, all necessary measures be taken
to prevent a security vacuum or acts of retaliation. Law
and order should be restored as soon as possible in
Abidjan, including through the collection of weapons,
which are all too readily available in the city.

President Ouattara's pledge, on 7 April, to
establish a truth and reconciliation commission and to
punish those who committed crimes or acts of
vengeance is a positive and welcome step. Of course,
transitional justice processes must be comprehensive
and interconnected and include meaningful
accountability, such as prosecutions and vetting. These
commitments must be implemented. My Office stands
ready to assist President Ouattara and his Government
in the development of a transitional justice strategy for
the country. Perpetrators must be held accountable for
crimes committed regardless of their affiliation, and all
should be treated with dignity and respect for human
rights, including the right to a fair trial.

I am particularly concerned about the climate of
entrenched division and distrust among the
communities after years of discrimination and
violence, which has been further exacerbated through
the propagation of inflammatory messages and the
wave of retaliation killings reportedly committed by
both sides. Rebuilding social cohesion and fostering
reconciliation between communities will need to be
one of the main priorities of the Government and will
require the support of the international community.

In response to the human rights crisis in Cote
d'Ivoire, the Human Rights Council established an
independent commission of inquiry. The commission
has been mandated to investigate the facts and
circumstances surrounding the allegations of serious
abuses and violations of human rights committed in the
aftermath of the 28 November 2010 elections.
Yesterday, the President of the Human Rights Council
announced the appointment of three high-level experts
as members of the commission of inquiry. They are
Mr. Vitit Muntabhorn of Thailand, who will serve as
Chair of the commission, Mr. Suliman Baldo of the
Sudan and Mrs. Reine Alapini-Gansou of Benin. The
independent commission of inquiry was asked to report
back to the Human Rights Council at its next session,
in June. We hope that the commission of inquiry will
receive full cooperation.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Choi
for his leadership and to commend the work of the
UNOCI Human Rights Division under difficult security
conditions.

Let me conclude by suggesting that Cote d'Ivoire
is another striking example of the inextricable link
between peace, justice and human rights. Rights,
justice and accountability will bolster the prospects for
sustainable peace, an outcome to which the people of
Cote d'Ivoire are entitled. They deserve our full
support.

