Mr. Douste-Blazy (France) (spoke in French): A
little over a month after the adoption of resolution
1701 (2006), which led to the cessation of hostilities
between Israel and Lebanon and established the
parameters for a lasting political solution between the
two countries, one fact is clear: stability in the Middle
East will require the settlement of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. Indeed, the Palestinian question
fuels most of the hotspots in the region. It breeds
frustration in public opinion, deepens
misunderstandings between different societies, and
plays into the hands of extremists.

As the status quo is not a viable one, reviving the
momentum for peace between Israelis and Palestinians
must therefore become a priority for us once again. A
number of factors are coming into play at this time that
encourage us to move forward.

The conflict in Lebanon has confirmed the fact

that there is no military solution to the crises in the

Middle East. The Israeli-Palestinian question is no

exception: a lasting solution will be found only through

a negotiated process. The parties themselves say that

they wish to resume the dialogue. We encourage the

Israeli Prime Minister and the President of the
Palestinian Authority to take that path.

The regional environment is itself more
favourable, with, inter alia, the revival by the Arab
League of its Beirut initiative, which sets out the bases
for a sustainable peace in the Middle East. We support
that initiative.

In Israel and in the Palestinian territories, more
than a decade after the Oslo accords, despite the
deaths, the destruction and the humiliation endured, the
desire for peace is strong among the large majority of
each of the two peoples.

However, confidence must be restored on each
side. Efforts to restore it must be made immediately
through concrete measures on both sides. The release
of Corporal Shalit, the soldier kidnapped early last
summer, would be one such measure - an
indispensable one - together with an end to the firing
of rockets, the freezing of all settlement activities, the
release of the Palestinian leaders arrested in recent
months, and the lifting of the drastic restrictions
imposed by Israel on the movement of goods and
people within the Palestinian territories and between
these territories and the world.

The formation, as announced, of a Palestinian
national unity Government that would take on board
the demands of the international community would be
a major development. If confirmed, such a
development would have to lead to a re-evaluation by
the international community of its policy on assistance
and contacts with the Palestinian Government. It
should be turned to advantage so as to give fresh
impetus to the peace process. It is because we remain
committed to the principles set out by the Quartet that
we must encourage current developments, which bring
us closer to them. The international community must
stand side by side with the President of the Palestinian
Authority. He can count on France's support.
This context offers an opportunity to break the
stalemate, and the parties must seize it. The
international community must help them do so by
resolutely committing to help re-establish dialogue and

re-launch a genuine drive for peace. An initial step was
taken yesterday with the Quartet meeting, which
emphasized the urgent need to move towards a just and
lasting settlement and identified certain measures that
would help restore confidence. Other steps must now
follow, such as the preparation of the international
conference proposed by President Chirac, the objective
of which would be to define the guarantees, especially
the security guarantees, expected by parties in the
framework of a peace agreement. That international
conference could take place in the context of the Arab
League initiative and pave the way for a new regional
framework for collective security and economic
integration.

At this turning point, we are convinced that the
danger lies in inaction, and that action would be rich in
opportunities. The international community must help
the parties transform their new willingness to resume
dialogue into a genuine dynamic for peace. The goal of
two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace and security is not beyond reach if we are able to
demonstrate boldness and, above all, political courage
in the weeks and months ahead.

