The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Indonesia.

I would like to begin by welcoming His Excellency
Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Burkina Faso, to the Chamber and to
thank him for his briefing on behalf of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). I would also like to thank
all the briefers in today's meeting, who have provided
us with a comprehensive overview. The variety of the
briefers certainly represents the excellent cooperation
among regional international organizations in working
together to address the G-5 Sahel.

Let me start by paying tribute to the many
peacekeepers on the ground and honouring those who
have lost their lives in the fight to preserve peace
and security in the Sahel region, including the two
fallen French soldiers. Our condolences also go to all
the innocent victims of the many terrorist attacks in
the region.

I would like to focus on three pertinent points.

First, Indonesia supports the initiative and
determination of the G-5 Sahel countries in addressing
the security challenges that they faced through the
establishment of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. The
cooperation among Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali,
Mauritania and the Niger certainly serves as an
excellent example of neighbouring countries working
together to address a common cause.

As the report of the Secretary General (S/2019/371)
suggests and Mr. Barry mentioned, there has been some
encouraging progress, such as the deployment of 75 per
cent of troops across three sectors, the resumption of
operations of the Joint Force and the increase in civil-
military cooperation activities. In addition, more
efforts have been made in the deployment of police and
civilian components, as well as the implementation of
the human rights compliance framework. We hope that
it will translate into real improvement in the overall
security situation on the ground.

We are cognizant, however, that the Joint Force
continues to work within a very difficult environment.
Therefore, support is indeed important, including
predictable and sustainable funding, as well as training
and capacity-building. In that regard, Indonesia
commends the commitment of donors and calls for the
disbursement of contributions pledged to support the
Joint Force. As also outlined in the Secretary-General's
report, future support options from the United Nations
for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force should be further
considered. Indonesia is of the view that the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) is playing an important
role in supporting the G-5 Sahel Joint Force and that we
should further consider what can be done to enhance
that support, including when we discuss the renewal of
MINUSMA's mandate.

Secondly, we remain concerned about the continuing
deterioration of the security and humanitarian
situation in the Sahel. The security situation in the
Sahel remains precarious, with continued attacks by
terrorists, including an attack on the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force headquarters last year. There has also been an
uptick in intercommunal violence. The persistent
insecurity has resulted in heightened humanitarian
needs and an increasing number of internally displaced
persons and people suffering from malnutrition. The
situation in the G-5 countries also has spillover effects
on neighbouring countries in West Africa and impacts
the overall stability of the region. There is therefore a
need for comprehensive and multisectoral approaches
to tackle the root causes of instability and build the
resilience of the Sahelian people.

Thirdly, Indonesia believes that security initiatives
should be part of broader efforts to ensure lasting
stability in the Sahel, which also encompasses social
and economic development, as well as human rights
aspects. It is important to win the hearts and minds
of the population in addressing security challenges
in the Sahel. We have always advocated for greater
community engagement in that regard. In addition,
good governance, addressing poverty and inequality,
creating opportunities for young people and combatting
climate change remain crucial to improving the living
conditions of the Sahelian people.

We support the joint efforts of regional actors, the
African Union, the European Union and the United
Nations in the implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the United Nations
Support Plan for the Sahel. We also appreciate the role
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in
supporting the Sahel region, as well as the accelerated
implementation of the G-5 Sahel regional strategy
and Priority Investment Programme, particularly for
the most vulnerable. We also call on the international
community to support efforts in the region so as to be
able to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
Indonesia stands ready to contribute and work with
the international community to achieve lasting peace
and stability in the Sahel, including through our
peacekeepers serving in MINUSMA.

We look forward to the press statement to be issued
by the French delegation.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at 12.55 pm.
