Mr. Juppe (France) (spoke in French):
Preventive diplomacy - which was a mere concept

half a century ago, until formalized by former
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali in his 1992
report An Agenda for Peace (S/24lll) - has become
an essential means of action within the United Nations.
The stakes are clearly identified at the very heart of our
Charter. The method for preventing the emergence or
exacerbation of conflicts has been equally well
identified: early warning and speedy action; the need
for dialogue, mediation and partnerships; and a long-
term vision. Preventive diplomacy also seeks to
stabilize social relationships so that peace can be built.
This concern, as stipulated in the report of 17 June
1992,

"to ease tensions before they result in conflict -
or, if conflict breaks out, to act swiftly to contain
it and resolve its underlying causes" (S/24HZ, para. 23).

Now that our Council faces increasingly complex
crises, I believe that it would be useful to ask ourselves
what preventive diplomacy can bring to our current
actions. I would like to thank the Lebanese presidency
for having provided us with this opportunity to share
our considerations and views. I would also like to
thank the Secretary General for his excellent report
(S/2011/552).

Our Council holds the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security and must
therefore be the key actor in the field of preventive
diplomacy. This role is translated first and foremost in
the deployment of peacekeeping operations, which
contribute to preventing the escalation of conflicts. It
also requires taking action as early as possible in order
to prevent emergent conflicts from deteriorating.

In that regard, I endorse the statement by
Mr. Hague to the effect that our Council should adopt
as soon as possible a resolution condemning the
repression in Syria, which is taking on increasingly
intolerable forms as the regime is now attacking
children in their schools, according to the very reliable
information we receive from our ambassadors.

The concept, means of action and expectations of
preventive diplomacy have also broadened in scope.
The Council now has new tools at its disposal. It is no
longer merely about keeping the peace in conflict
areas; it is about intervening before a crisis even breaks
out. That is the purpose of the informal procedures for
monitoring high-risk areas - our so-called informal
interactive dialogues - which seek to anticipate and,
above all, to respond as rapidly as possible. Moreover,
the assessments undertaken by the Department of
Political Affairs and the information provided by
mediators and Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General are invaluable, as they shed light on
local situations, which are always complex.

Fortunately, the Council is not alone in its
involvement. Within the United Nations itself,
numerous institutions have actively developed
preventive diplomacy tools. I cite two examples.
Through its Education for Sustainable Development
programme, UNESCO has harnessed education in the
service of conflict prevention and the fight against
insecurity. The United Nations Development
Programme is equally involved in this area, inter alia,
through its disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme, which has been implemented
in a number of African countries and seeks to
reintegrate former combatants into local economies. To
that end, it provides specific support to post-conflict
countries.

Above and beyond the United Nations, the main
regional organizations have also used this instrument.
These organizations include the European Union, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the African
Union. I have in mind, too, the actions undertaken by
the Economic Community of West African States and
the Southern African Development Community in
Madagascar.

I also stress the role played by non-governmental
organizations. There are too many examples to
enumerate here, but each and every one of them, by
working to forge more peaceful and harmonious
societies, is contributing to conflict prevention.

Preventive diplomacy must also prepare for the
challenges of the future. Indeed, we must address the
root causes of crises, as a number of speakers have
said. It is a question no longer merely of preventing
conflict, but of maintaining or even recreating the
conditions for peace. That is the preventive strategy
that the Secretary-General has called "structural",
consisting of adopting an array of measures - not only
political, but also social, cultural, economic and even
environmental - that help reduce the factors
contributing to conflict.

Thus, in Guinea and Niger, post-transition
electoral processes that could have given rise to
confrontation were concluded through the joint
involvement of the various Special Representatives of
the United Nations, the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States. With
respect to the crisis in Madagascar, France has
supported the efforts of the mediator of the Southern
African Development Community.

I should like in particular to emphasize the
environmental dimension of crises, which I have no
doubt will grow even further in the years to come.
According to the United Nations Environment
Programme, 40 per cent of the conflicts of the past 60
years are rooted in issues involving natural resources,
be it timber, oil, arable land or water.

What will happen tomorrow, when 10 billion
people are living on the planet? Let us be frank. The
United Nations still lacks tools that could help it
prevent incipient catastrophe. In the absence of a
strong multilateral entity, future strife over resources or
commodities is likely to be resolved bilaterally, to the
detriment of the weakest, and on the basis of force.

We must rectify that situation by reforming
international environmental governance. The upcoming
United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development will be a singular opportunity to register
progress in this field and to lay the foundation for a
global organization for the environment. We must seize
that opportunity.

Resolving crises is the duty of our Council, as is
preventing them. France believes that preventive
diplomacy in all its aspects is a key element of the just
and effective governance to which my country aspires
with all its heart.

