Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation believes, first, that the added value of
missions to the work of the Council largely depends on
good follow-up to the recommendations made in the
ensuing reports. We feel in particular that, in the course
of such missions, when concrete undertakings have
been made by the authorities of the countries visited, it
is essential for the Council to follow the subsequent
developments very closely in order to ensure that those
commitments are reflected in action.

Secondly, as regards the countries visited by the
Security Council mission to West Africa, we believe
that there are now opportunities for progress in the
stabilization of Guinea-Bissau, Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia
and Sierra Leone.

In Guinea-Bissau, a date has already been set for
legislative elections and the provisional authorities,
with the support of the international community, are
taking steps to help the country emerge from the
political and economic crisis.

In Liberia, the United Nations Mission is deploying
throughout the country and has launched a public
information campaign on disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement, an
indispensable cornerstone of the peace process.

In Cote d'Ivoire, the return of the Forces
nouvelles to the Government of National
Reconciliation and the future establishment and
operation of a peacekeeping mission, which my
country supports, are positive developments that should
decisively propel the implementation of the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement, which is the only path to peace
and reconciliation in that country.

In Sierra Leone, we note that progress has been
made in stabilizing the country and we await the
forthcoming recommendations of the Secretary-
General on the final phases of the drawdown of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone and the
possibility of a residual United Nations presence.

In conclusion, with respect to the regional
dimension, important progress has been made since the
Security Council sent a mission to the area. We
particularly support efforts at coordination among the
peacekeeping operations in the subregion. We also
await the publication of a Secretary-General's report on
cross-border issues in West Africa, which will serve as
a basis for the Council's consideration of measures that
will allow us comprehensively to address the
challenges in the region as a whole.

