Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Ghassan Salame,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his detailed and objective briefing. Russia supports the
steps taken under the auspices of the United Nations to
get results in the work of unifying Libya and stabilizing
its internal political situation, which are so crucial to
improving the situation in the region as a whole.

We note the positive effect that the international
conference on Libya held in Palermo in November
has had in restoring mutual understanding between
the two rival forces in the country's east and west. In
the absence of tangible progress in the intra-Libyan
reconciliation process, the parties have been sent a
message about the importance of surmounting their
differences by a political route within the framework
of an inclusive national dialogue based on the Libyan
Political Agreement signed in Skhirat and the United
Nations action plan for settling the Libyan crisis, with
the ultimate goal of consolidating the key political
forces and establishing unified State institutions that
are fit for purpose. The Palermo conference enabled
the international community to show its commitment
to preserving Libya's sovereignty, territorial integrity
and unity.

We greatly value Mr. Salame's professionalism
and steadfast focus on restoring Libyan statehood
and support his diligent efforts to promote a national
dialogue and prepare for holding a national conference
early in 2019. Against that backdrop, it will be
crucial to ensure that all Libyan stakeholders show a
sense of responsibility for their country's future and

work together to give the settlement process positive
momentum. A great many obstacles remain in their path.
We are obliged to conclude that despite all the efforts
to promote an intra-Libyan dialogue, any prospects for
a speedy settlement of the crisis are barely discernible.
The disagreements between the key players in Libya's
political landscape have prevented the reconciliation
process launched under the aegis of the United Nations
from being implemented. The situation is complicated
by security problems as well as the lack of compromise
among the parties. The bloody terrorist attack of
25 December on the Foreign Ministry building was a
sad confirmation of that, and we firmly condemn it.
Unfortunately, those tragic events and the very recent
clashes in the Tripoli area testify to the inadequate
control over the situation in Libya and remind us of
how crucial the restoration of unified systems of State
governance and security forces is.

The problem of the illegal proliferation of weapons in
Libya has not diminished, and it is affecting security both
in Libya itself and in the Sahara-Sahel region generally.
That is why the international stakeholders, particularly
the Security Council and its Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
should refrain from taking steps, including any related
to application of the arms embargo on Libya, that might
make the process of fostering dialogue and cooperation
among the key Libyan political forces harder. We
have consistently emphasized the importance of
consolidating the international efforts to supply outside
support for the intra-Libyan dialogue, along with an
understanding of the importance of strengthening the
central coordinating role of the United Nations. If that
assistance is not harmonized under the auspices of the
Security Council, it will be exceedingly difficult to
resolve the crisis.

Russia is deeply committed to restoring peace
and stability to Libya, which we envisage as a united,
independent State playing a major role in international
and regional politics. We are ready to advance the
political process further and help Mr. Salame by
supporting our trusted contacts with all Libyan
parties and encouraging them to focus on seeking
compromise for the sake of peace and stability in Libya
and the Mediterranean region as a whole. That is our
principled position.

