I thank the briefers. While some of the news we have received is encouraging, other news is less so. With regard to the political situation and the preparation for elections in Somalia, the country has shown the capacity to make progress on its priorities. The signing of the electoral law is an important step, yet more efforts are needed to work out its implementation. Among other things, the participation of women must be ensured. Work has also started on other pieces of legislation, such as the political parties law, and will have to resume. Technical preparations, including on electoral security, should stay on track. Elections can still happen in accordance with the planned timetable. We also ask the Federal Government to re-establish the dialogue with the federal member states. Somalia needs this dialogue to overcome challenges not only to the elections but also to the transition plan and to those presented by the current humanitarian crises. This lack of dialogue has gone on long enough. Unfortunately, Somalia has not been spared by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, or by seasonal floods or locust infestations. Belgium stands with the people of Somalia and is contributing to the humanitarian response. We also think it is important for the international community and the Somali authorities not to lose sight of the country's development and political objectives while responding to these crises. As the Security Council is about to discuss the renewal of the mandate of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), we note that Al-Shabaab remains a very significant threat. There have been successes with joint Somali National Army/ AMISOM operations, but they have not been sufficient to lead us to expect the successful conclusion of the transition plan in the planned time frame. The Federal Government and the federal member states must come together to forge a shared vision for national security. We welcome the Government's willingness to revise the transition plan. The international community, including the European Union as an important financial donor, will work with Somalia to implement this plan. Coordination should also be ensured among the security partners, under the leadership of the Federal Government. Finally, in the immediate future, looking towards the elections, we believe that AMISOM should continue to perform its mandate in its current form and, before considering plans for 2021, will seek to renew its mandate with no significant changes, but for a slightly shorter time period. Let me also thank the troop-contributing countries for their commitment.
