Mr. Yap (Singapore): First of all, we should like
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Steiner, for yet another useful briefing, as
well as to thank Deputy Prime Minister Covie for his
important statement. I should like to make a few points
of particular interest and concern to my delegation, and
to pose some questions.

At last month's public Council meeting on
Kosovo, we commended Mr. Steiner for spelling out
detailed benchmarks for the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999). Today, we are taking advantage
of the opportunity of his presence to commend him in
person. As the Secretary-General said in his report
(S/2002/779), those benchmarks
u

. will be used as a strategic planning tool to
provide direction and a vision for both the
provisional institutions and UNMIK. They will be
used as a means of regularly measuring progress,
building capacity within the Kosovo institutions,
stimulating planning processes and engaging the
resources of the entire Mission." (para. 61)

We agree fully with the Secretary-General on the
purposes of the benchmarks, and we are glad to note
that the provisional institutions have embraced
benchmarks as internal goals and ends and that they are
becoming more and more involved in developing and
taking tangible steps to meet those benchmarks.

Indeed, the benchmark process appears already to
have contributed to substantial progress in a number of
critical areas in Kosovo - responsible Government
institutions, law and order and the return and
reconciliation of displaced persons, to name a few.
However, it is clear that Kosovo is not yet out of the
woods. Much more remains to be done to bring
security, stability and advancement to the province, and
the Vision of an all-inclusive, multi-ethnic society is
still some distance away.

In that regard, we would appreciate it if
Mr. Steiner could give us his assessment concerning
the factors that have led to the substantial progress
made in Kosovo in recent months. Perhaps he could
also share with us his views on how such factors could
be harnessed and reinforced to bring Kosovo further
towards his vision for the territory.

We know that one key issue with regard to which
there has been little forward movement is Mitrovica.
The fact that the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has been
unable fully to exercise its authority over Mitrovica is
worrisome. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has
cooperated well with UNMIK in many areas. We hope
that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will extend its
cooperation to the Mission with regard to Mitrovica as
well.

It is evident from the statements of Mr. Covic' and
Mr. Steiner that there are wide differences on the
Mitrovica issue. In that regard, we should like to ask
Mr. Steiner and Mr. Covie what confidence-building
measures can be put in place to bring Mitrovica closer
to a solution.

