Mr. Brammertz: I would like to thank the
members of the Security Council for this opportunity
to provide the Council with an update on the progress
made by the International Independent Investigation
Commission.

The Commission's latest report covers activities
over the past four months. The work of the
Commission during this reporting period was marked
by a wide-ranging effort to bring together the
considerable amount of information collected since the
creation of the Commission in 2005. That process
allowed the Commission to critically analyse the large
volume of information collected and to assess progress
made to date. As a result, a series of detailed reports
totalling more than 2,400 pages were produced,
covering all aspects of the Hariri investigation and the
other investigations being conducted or supported by
the Commission.

The Commission continues to focus primarily on
the investigation into the assassination of Rafik Hariri
and 22 others on 14 February 2005. The Commission's
review of its sizeable holdings and analysis in this case
is covered in a 2,000-page confidential consolidated
report that deals with all aspects of the investigation.
For example, in relation to the forensic aspects of the
investigation, the Commission has consolidated more
than 10,000 pages of information and forensic reports
produced since 2005 and has reviewed dozens of
experiments and examinations undertaken by the
Commission and by external experts on the Hariri case.

Regarding the improvised explosive device (IED)
used in the attack, the consolidated results confirm the
Commission's conclusions about the type and quantity
of the explosives, the initiating system and the
container used to carry the IED, as well as the exact
circumstances of the blast. Investigations are ongoing
to trace the precise origin of the explosives and to
establish possible forensic links with other cases.

In the most recent of the earlier reporting periods,
during which 32 interviews were conducted on the
Hariri case, special emphasis was placed on the
investigation related to the Mitsubishi Canter van used
to carry the IED. As previously noted, the van was
stolen in Japan before being shipped to the United Arab
Emirates and was then transported to northern Lebanon
07-43152
in December 2004. The Commission is currently
working on new information regarding the sale of the
van to individuals who could have been involved in its
final preparation for the attack on Rafik Hariri.

The Commission has also brought together and
advanced its investigations regarding the suicide
bomber. Forensic analyses using samples collected in a
number of locations have allowed the Commission to
narrow down the countries from which the suicide
bomber could have originated. Those experiments are
currently ongoing.

To support the investigations in all areas of the
Hariri and other cases, the Commission has developed
DNA and fingerprint databases that are being used to
identify possible matches using other similar databases.
The Commission has also created a sketch database
and has initiated an inventory of all the physical and
biological exhibits it has accumulated.

The Commission continues to further its
understanding of the motives to assassinate Rafik
Hariri. Some aspects related to the motives have been
resolved to the satisfaction of the Commission. These
include, among others, the role of the Bank Al-Madina
affair.

As noted in my last briefing, the Commission is
concentrating on Rafik Hariri's political activities and
on the political events and dynamics in the period
leading up to the attack, as these most probably shaped
the motive for the assassination. They include the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004),
the events surrounding the extension of President
Emile Lahoud's term and the perceived outcomes of
the 2005 parliamentary elections.

Following a detailed review of its information
and findings, the Commission has identified a number
of persons who present a particular interest to the
investigation into the assassination of Rafik Hariri. The
Commission's findings suggest that these individuals
may have been involved in some aspects of the
planning or execution of the attack, or that they could
have known that such a plan was under way. This line
of the investigation will be a priority for the
Commission in the next few months.

The Commission conducted a similar
consolidation of its findings in each of the 17 other
cases where it was mandated to provide technical
assistance to the Lebanese authorities. Over 400 pages
07-43152

of consolidated reports were produced on those cases,
and the findings from 25 forensic examinations
undertaken by the Commission and by external experts
have been reviewed. In the attacks targeted at Marwan
Hamedeh, Samir Kassir, George Hawi, Elias El-Murr,
May Chidiac, Gebran Tueni and Pierre Gemayel, the
Commission has focused on analyzing threats and
claims of responsibility, determining possible motives,
examining and comparing the modus operandi,
drawing up a profile of each victim and attempting to
determine possible commonalities. The Commission
also continues to look into possible links between these
cases and the Hariri case.

On 13 June 2007, Member of Parliament Walid
Eido, his son and six other people were killed by an
IED in central Beirut. Following a request from the
Lebanese Prime Minister to the United Nations, the
Commission was tasked to provide technical assistance
to the Lebanese investigations into this attack. A team
of forensic experts working for the Commission
completed a two-week examination of the crime scene,
and the Commission is currently awaiting results from
those examinations to proceed with comparative
analyses.

In total, 27 interviews were conducted by the
Commission on those targeted attacks during the
reporting period. In addition, 25 interviews were
conducted on the nine attacks where no individuals
were targeted, including the Ain Alaq bombings of
February 2007.

The Commission has continued to maintain a
close and collegial relationship with the Lebanese
judicial authorities, who have been regularly informed
about the progress made in all investigations. Since my
last briefing to the Council, the Commission has made
88 requests for assistance to the Prosecutor General of
Lebanon, and responses have been provided fully and
expeditiously.

Cooperation with Syria remains generally
satisfactory. Syria provided timely responses to the
Commission's 11 requests for assistance during this
reporting period. In addition, the Commission is
grateful for the logistical and security arrangements
made by the Syrian authorities for the Commission's
various activities in Syria, in particular during four
missions to Syria in this reporting period. In addition,
18 requests for assistance were sent to 12 other States,
and responses have been mostly positive.
3
I would like to take this opportunity to note once
again that the Commission relies on the support of all
States to provide information, assistance and expertise
when required. The Commission is grateful for the
support it has received from a number of States during
this reporting period. That support remains essential
for the successful completion of the Commission's
mandate.

As the Council is aware, the security situation in
Lebanon has deteriorated since my last briefing to the
Council. The Commission is very mindful of the
prevailing security conditions and of specific threats it
faces due to the nature of its work. In this reporting
period, the Commission has conducted regular
assessments on all aspects of its security in close
cooperation with the Lebanese security forces, and a
number of additional mitigating measures have been
put in place. In this regard, the Commission notes that
the security of witnesses and persons who cooperate
with the Commission needs to be guaranteed. This
remains a priority for the Commission and will also
have to be addressed by the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon in a timely manner.

The comprehensive consolidation effort carried
out by the Commission during this reporting period has
yielded several important results by highlighting areas
of the investigation that have been resolved to the
satisfaction of the Commission, as well as a number of
open questions that will have to be addressed as
priorities in the months to come.

As noted earlier, the consolidation of the
Commission's findings across several areas of the
Hariri case, and in some of the other cases, has helped
identify a number of persons who may have been
involved in some aspect of the crime. A number of
commonalities across cases have also been brought to
light as a result of the consolidation exercise. Based on
these and other results, the Commission has produced
detailed work plans in each area under investigation;
those workplans will help to make the best possible use
of the Commission's limited resources in the next few
months.

Set against the backdrop of Security Council
resolution 1757 (2007), the confidential consolidated
reports will provide a useful starting point in the
transition from the Commission to the Special Tribunal
for Lebanon. This process will be facilitated by a state-
of-the-art information management system established
by the Commission, based on the best practices used in
international tribunals.

In closing, I would like to reaffirm to the Council
that the Commission stands ready to cooperate with the
Secretary-General and with the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon to ensure a smooth handover to the Tribunal
at the time when the Tribunal will begin functioning.

