Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to begin by thanking all Member States for their
support for Egypt's efforts to achieve consensus in
the Security Council regarding a comprehensive
international framework for countering terrorist
narratives. We have achieved consensus on resolution
2354 (2017) so as to establish such a framework.

Countering terrorist narratives and the ideologies
of terrorist groups is one of the most important aspects
of global counter-terrorism efforts. It is critical for the
international community to emphasize this aspect in
the international fight against terrorism, in particular
as terrorism draws upon its narratives and ideologies
to spread its poison, justify its crimes, mobilize young
people and push them to kill themselves, convincing
them that they are undertaking a heroic act of self-
sacrifice.

Egyptwas one oftheveryfirstcountriestounderstand
the importance of combating terrorist narratives and
makes crucial contributions here and internationally, in
particular through its religious institutions, Al-Azhar
University first among them, acting in a noble manner
and enjoying international respect.

Egypt reiterates that the global drive against
terrorism requires us to take into account all terrorist
organizations without exception, as well as all factors
that could lead to terrorism, including financing,
weapons, politics, ideologies and media support. We
reiterate that what we are doing today is not simply
adopting another document to join the pile of others
that have already been adopted by the Security Council.
What is at stake is implementing what has been agreed.
There is political will to comply with all resolutions
adopted by the Security Council, first and foremost in
the framework of counter-terrorism.

The will of the international community cannot
be translated into Security Council resolutions when
a small group of States continues to violate said
resolutions clearly and unambiguously and to maintain
their support for terrorism. In that regard, I would refer
to President Al Sisi's statement at the Arab-American
Islamic Summit in Riyadh to the effect that a terrorist
is not just a bearer of weapons, but someone who trains,
finances and provides ideological cover for terrorism.

In conclusion, the approach to countering terrorism
must be decisive and unified. We must convey a
message to the entire world and to terrorists, who must
be made to understand that they are mere dust in the
eyes of humankind and that they certainly represent
no religion and are doomed to disappear. Terrorists
must understand that their narratives, propaganda and
ideologies run counter to logic, nature and all religions.
I reiterate that Egypt will always remain at the forefront
of counter-terrorism efforts.

