Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to express
my delegation's gratitude to you, Sir, for having
organized this consideration of the draft resolution
contained in document S/2003/63O at this public
meeting.

I would also like to welcome the statement which
was made this morning to the Council by the Secretary-
General. We have taken due note of his statement and
views.

The issue which is under consideration in the
draft resolution is an important one for all countries.
Pakistan is committed to upholding the rule of
international law in accordance with the principles of
the United Nations Charter. Pakistan also fully
supports the need to provide justice to victims of
crimes against humanity, genocide and other serious
violations of international humanitarian law. It is only
thus that we can hope to establish the rule of law in
international relations.

Pakistan believes that international crimes,
especially crimes against humanity, must not enjoy
impunity. Where such crimes are committed, especially
in conditions of foreign occupation or alien domination
and where State terrorism is utilized to suppress the
legitimate freedom struggles of peoples, they must be
punished. In the first instance, the actions required
should be taken by the national authorities. Where all
such national measures of redress have been exhausted
or are unavailable or inactive, recourse can be had to
available international mechanisms.

It was in this spirit that Pakistan voted in favour
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) at the United Nations Diplomatic Conference of
Plenipotentiaries in 1998. We have noted developments
since then, especially the coming into force of the
Rome Statute on 1 July 2002 and, most recently, the
establishment of the International Criminal Court in
The Hague in March this year. We hope that the
existence of the Court will act as a deterrent to serious
violations of international humanitarian law, crimes
against humanity and war crimes.

However, it is unfortunate that the Rome Statute
did not provide for reservations by countries. This may
have ensured wider adherence to the Statute. There are
several provisions of the ICC Statute with respect to
which Pakistan has certain concerns. These include the
mechanism for initiation of proceedings, provisional
arrest, provisions dealing with armed conflicts not of
an international character and the question of immunity
of heads of State or Government.
Pakistan is the largest contributor to the United
Nations peacekeeping operations at present. We believe
that United Nations peacekeepers should not be
exposed to any arbitrary or unilateral action by any
national or international body. This possibility could
further reduce the incentives for Member States to
offer United Nations peacekeeping forces. Pakistan
reserves for itself the right to adjudicate in cases
involving Pakistani peacekeepers in all peacekeeping
operations and duties.

This is the primary concern which has inspired
the present draft resolution, as we understand it, no
matter how unlikely the circumstances it envisages.
Therefore, Pakistan supports the objective of the draft
resolution. We of course understand and respect the
position taken by those States which have expressed
reservations regarding the renewal of resolution 1422
(2002). We believe that annual renewal may be avoided
in future through separate arrangements.

While supporting the draft resolution, Pakistan
strongly adheres to the position that the Security
Council, despite its wide authority and responsibilities,
is not empowered to unilaterally amend or abrogate
international treaties and agreements freely entered into
by sovereign States. The powers of the Security
Council are constrained under paragraph 2 of Article
24 of the United Nations Charter, which obliges it to
discharge its duties in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter. Article 1 of the Charter
provides that measures to maintain international peace
and security shall be "in conformity with the principles
of justice and international law". The Council's
decisions cannot and do not override these provisions
of the Charter.

