Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Allow
me to begin by thanking the Presidents and the
Prosecutors for their reports. The United Kingdom
continues to support wholeheartedly the work of both
Tribunals. Bringing justice to the indictees is
particularly important some 10 years after the signature
of the Dayton Agreement and the establishment of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).

Allow me to begin by addressing the issue of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). We welcome the Tribunal's efforts
to increase efficiency and to stay on course for meeting
the completion strategy. The re-election of most of the
Tribunal's sitting judges last Friday will help keep
things on track. However, what we heard this morning
is a rather sobering account of the obstacles to keeping
that strategy on course. I would like to concentrate on
just a few of what I believe to be the most important
points.

First, regarding financing, as we have heard, the
freeze on recruitment is beginning to affect the
Tribunal's work, and that can only get worse. The
obligation of and the need for all States to pay their
dues to the Tribunal are obvious. The failure to do so,
as we have heard, is jeopardizing the completion
strategy and will lead to more costs. The 25 per cent
vacancy rate quoted to us this morning is an appalling
figure.

Secondly, regarding the transfer of cases to the
region, the Tribunal has done excellent work in
assisting national courts in the former Yugoslavia to
prepare and receive transferred cases. We hope that the
war crimes chamber of the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina becomes operational in January, as
predicted. There can be no doubt, the Chamber will
need the continued support of the donor community.
The United Kingdom has pledged £2.6 million over the
next five years. Our hope must obviously be that other
countries in the region will be able to develop the
capacity to receive cases from the Tribunal in the near
future.

But I want to underline our very strongly held
view that the three key indictees, Mladic, Karadzic and
Gotovina, have to be tried before the ICTY. The United
Kingdom does not believe that the replacement of the
Stabilization Force by the European Union-led force,
which we do indeed welcome, should bring any
diminution in our resolve to arrest Karadzic.

Thirdly, regarding cooperation with the ICTY, the
Tribunal's work is dependent on the arrest of the
indictees and their transfer to The Hague. That is
crucial, and 20 indictees at large is far too many. In our
View, the transfer of Karadzic, Mladic and Gotovina is
crucial to the long-term stability and prosperity of the
region.

I would like to be absolutely frank about this. We
know that Karadzic spends most of his time in
Republika Srpska and that he moves from place to
place. A network of people and institutions protects
and presumably finances him. Why is it, therefore, that
no one seems to know where he is i or indeed, where
he has just been, which should be much easier to
know? Why is it that none of the arms of the
Government, local individuals or local figures in
contact with the community, such as priests, are
prepared to volunteer information? That information
would enable the most sought-after indictee to be
brought to face the Tribunal. What we need is real-time
intelligence that permits this man to be apprehended.
Do those in positions of authority really believe that
they can outwait justice or that their inaction is
consistent with integration into European and Atlantic
institutions? Do they believe that continued avoidance
of arrest actually promotes the reconciliation that we
all hope for in the Balkans?

The same goes, very clearly, for Mladic, whom
we know to be in Serbia. It is very disappointing to
hear once again this morning that Serbia and
Montenegro remains the country that is the most
reluctant to cooperate. Cooperation is not optional. It is
a legal obligation. Yet certain indictees in Serbia and
Montenegro remain free to move about the territory
without even bothering to hide.

We welcome Croatia's cooperation in giving
unrestricted access to documents and witnesses. We
agree with the Prosecutor that Croatia's cooperation
cannot be regarded as complete until Gotovina is
arrested and transferred to The Hague. Earlier this year,
the Prosecutor was able to give a positive assessment
of Croatia's efforts to arrest Gotovina. But this
morning the Prosecutor reported that efforts have
slowed down and that no significant progress has been
made. Moreover, the Prosecutor asserts that Gotovina
continues to benefit "from a well-organized support
network, including within State structures" (supra).
Cooperation is about more than meeting a legal
obligation. It is about ending impunity; it is about
bringing to justice individuals indicted of horrendous
crimes; and it is about furthering reconciliation within
and between Balkan States. There should be no doubt
that continuing non-cooperation will frustrate any
aspirations of the authorities in Belgrade, in Zagreb or
in Banja Luka to closer integration with Euro-Atlantic
structures. I would be very grateful if the Prosecutor, in
responding to this debate, could be more direct not
only about what she believes are the reasons why the
Governments concerned are not meeting their
obligations, but also about what specifically she thinks
they should do and how we might be able to help to
encourage them to do it.

Finally, the President of the ICTY has drawn
attention to the need to address the issue of prisoners
serving ICTY sentences after the end of the completion
strategy. The United Kingdom was pleased to enter
into a sentence enforcement agreement with the
Tribunal earlier this year, and we would welcome
further dialogue on this and on other residual issues in
due course.

Allow me to turn now to the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), on which I will
be much more brief. This brevity, however, does not in
any way imply less interest in that key Tribunal. We
warmly welcome the Tribunal's efforts to improve its
efficiency, the changes that have taken place in the last
12 months and the trend towards shorter trials. The
completion strategy is clearly at the centre of the
overall management of the Tribunal. However, once
again, as for the ICTY, the freeze on recruitment is
bound to have an impact on the Tribunal's efficiency.
Again, the need for States to meet their financial
obligations is obvious.

The number of fugitives is, again, too large: 15 is
far too high a number. In another parallel with the
other Tribunal, States must comply with their
obligations to cooperate by arresting individuals and
transferring them to the Tribunal. The transfer of cases
to national jurisdiction is, again, a sensible strategy.
We assume that the majority of cases will be
transferred to Rwandan jurisdiction. We would
therefore welcome views on the readiness of Rwandan
courts to accept such cases and on how the capacity of
the national courts could best be supported.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the whole
question of ending impunity and delivering people to
justice is fundamental to the rule of law, which is a
crucial element in leading any country out of conflict
and in actually building peace. That is why, for the
United Kingdom - and, I believe, for the Security
Council, in all the resolutions we have adopted - we
do not trot out that we want individuals to go to The
Hague just for the sake of retaliation or for some
response after the event; we want that because it is in
everyone's essential interest that that should happen.

In the end, Governments have the ultimate
responsibility to ensure that the rule of law applies and
is supported. Those are the fundamentals of the Euro-
Atlantic structures. That is why the Governments that
look to benefit from those structures need to get a
simple message: these people have to be taken to The
Hague.

