Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the speakers for their
valuable briefings this morning. We also commend the
mediation efforts undertaken by Mr. Salame and his
team at the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) to reduce tensions and resolve conflicts in
that nation. The Dominican Republic fully supports
Mr. Salame.

Just two months ago we felt optimistic about Libya.
We harboured the hope that a political solution would
be reached, and trusted that the national conference
would be held in the second week oprril, bringing the
day of reconciliation closer. Those hopes are currently
dissolving because Libya is once again at the door of
widespread conflagration. The manifestation of these
military offensives erodes the progress made, which
has been facilitated mainly by the United Nations
Support Mission. In addition, the outbreak of violence
constitutes a danger for regional and international
peace and security.

For that reason, we call for the cessation of all
violence, not just military offensives but also the
aggressive rhetoric that fuels tensions. We also urge
the parties to the conflict, in particular the Libyan
National Army, led by General Haftar, to resume
dialogue, with a view to finding a solution to this
situation and resuming the political process. We also
call on the parties to commit to protecting civilians
and civilian infrastructure, as well as to allow,
without discrimination, access to humanitarian aid
to the areas affected by the conflict, in accordance
with the provisions of international humanitarian
law. Furthermore, we call on the parties to establish
safe and unimpeded mechanisms to assist the civilian
population, including access by medical personnel.

An example of how this conflict worsens the living
conditions of the population can be found in the actions
carried out by armed men last Sunday. They occupied
a station of the pipeline network project that transports
groundwater from the Sahara to the western region of
the country. Their objective was to deprive hundreds
of thousands of Libyans of the supply of that resource,
and they threatened not to restore the service until their
demands were met. That atrocious act constitutes a
violation of international humanitarian law, which we
categorically condemn. We demand that the parties
refrain from attacking infrastructure that is essential to
the survival of the population.

Likewise, given the reported allegations of
violations involving advanced technology artillery and
vehicles, including unmanned vehicles, being used by
the parties to the conflict, we encourage the international
community to respect the obligations established in the
arms embargo. Member States have the responsibility
to comply with the provisions outlined in the Libya
sanctions regime and refrain from supplying, selling or
transferring any type of weaponry and munitions and
their related materials, without exception. Likewise,
we encourage States that produce and import weapons,
munitions and related materials to strengthen the rules
of transfer and control mechanisms in order to prevent
zones of conflict from being the final destination of
weapons, thereby avoiding irresponsible transfers and
helping to save lives and to de-escalate the situation.

In barely a month and a half the conflict has
intensified, leaving 510 people dead and 2,467 injured,
with the number of the displaced rising to 75,000. The
continuation of this conflict could mean that the mass
exodus will soon be the next great humanitarian crisis
in the region. We also express our serious concern that
this situation may allow extremist groups to recapture
an area from which they had been expelled with very
great effort. The Council should therefore not remain
impassive. The voice of the Council must be united
in order to stop what is currently unfolding in Tripoli
and its environs. We cannot underestimate the fragility
of the country's social cohesion, which could not
survive this conflict or the potential severity of the
humanitarian impact.

On another note, we condemn the attacks,
intimidation and violence against human rights
defenders, including journalists, and we hope that the
crimes committed against human rights defenders
will be investigated. We believe that civil society
organizations are autonomous and play a fundamental
role in the functioning of a democracy. They must
therefore not be restricted, with or without the consent
of internal forces in Libya, when they want to reach
out to the international community and carry out their
work with communities and citizens.

We ask the parties to prioritize the protection of
children at all times, while adhering to international
humanitarian law, and to cease immediately the
recruitment of children to be used as soldiers in the
conflict. We also ask for the immediate release of any
child who has been detained owing to their association,
or presumed association, with armed groups.

The Dominican Republic is convinced that the
solution to the Libyan conflict should be political and
not military, and that such a solution should be reached
through consensus among the parties. We recognize and
appreciate the courage, determination and commitment
that the UNSMIL team, led by Mr. Salame, demonstrate
on the ground at this crucial time.

Finally, like other colleagues, we welcome the
release of Mr. Moncef Kartas, who had been detained
in Tunis in the exercise of his functions as a member
of the Panel of Experts of the Sanctions Committee on
Libya. We hope that light will be shed on this case as
swiftly as possible.
