Mr. Kolby (Norway): I would like to reiterate
Norway's appreciation for the efforts of High
Representative Petritsch, of Special Representative
Klein and of the women and men working with them to
implement the Peace Agreement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Norway will continue to support their
activities, including in priority areas of economic
reform, refugee return and consolidation of State
institutions. We welcome the progress made in these
areas.

But we must recognize that progress has been
incremental, not fundamental. This is not because of a
lack of effort on the part of the international
community. Norway is but one of many countries that
have been steadfast contributors of personnel and
resources to the peace process. Almost six years after
Dayton, it is high time that the Governments of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and its entities assume their share of
responsibility for developing a peaceful, multi-ethnic
and democratic society. It is high time that all Bosnian
politicians follow the paths taken by the democratic
leaderships in Belgrade and Zagreb, put the past of
destructive nationalism behind them and prepare for
the only viable future: regional cooperation and
European integration.

There are encouraging signs: the election of new
non-nationalist leaders who could show the way
forward; the adoption of a new Election Law; the
substantial increase in minority returns; and the steps
taken to improve cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. At the
same time, the economic situation is critical. Growth
rates are plummeting. Emigration is increasing. This
situation is not sustainable. Bosnian leaders must
implement the economic reforms drawn up by the
international community without delay.

Nationalist forces on all sides are still preventing
reforms and returns and inciting violence. Norway
condemns attempts by Croat nationalists to establish a
Croat entity within Bosnia. We condemn the ethnic
violence in places like Mostar and Banja Luka.
Sustained national and international efforts are needed
to undermine the negative forces and support the
reformists.

In order to succeed, we must ensure better
coordination among the international organizations
active in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The United Nations,
the High Representative, the Stabilization Force and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe all have important roles to play and we must
ensure that they do not compete, but complement each
other. Norway supports a streamlining of the
international presence in Bosnia.

Regional stability is indivisible. We must avoid a
piecemeal approach. Developments in Bosnia cannot
be seen in isolation from events taking place in the
wider Balkan region. On the contrary, neighbouring
States have a crucial role to play in making possible a
viable, multi-ethnic and unified Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

The international community and the Security
Council must continue to focus on supporting
democratic forces and preventing extremists from
creating further conflicts in the region at large. In this
way, we will promote political stability and economic
growth in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

