The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Cote d'Ivoire in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djedje
(Cote d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/2007/144, containing a
letter from the Secretary-General dated 13 March 2007.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
Agreement signed by President Laurent Gbagbo
and Mr. Guillaume Soro in Ouagadougou on 4
March 2007 under the facilitation of the
Chairperson of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), President Blaise
Compaore of Burkina Faso (S/2007/144). It
commends the parties signatory to the Agreement
for the spirit of compromise and the sense of
responsibility they have displayed, and pays
tribute to President Blaise Compaore for his
efforts to facilitate the conclusion of the
Agreement.
"The Security Council takes note of the
commitments of the parties to its resolutions on
C6te d'Ivoire, including resolution 1721 (2006),
and underlines that the Ouagadougou Agreement
provides a good basis for a comprehensive and
all-inclusive settlement of the crisis in Cote
d'Ivoire through the organization of credible
elections.

"The Security Council takes note of the
recommendations of ECOWAS and of the African
Union. It endorses the Ouagadougou Agreement
of 4 March 2007 and calls upon the Ivorian
parties to implement it fully, in good faith and
within the timetable set out in the Agreement.

"The Security Council commends the
outgoing Prime Minister, Mr. Charles Konan
Banny, whose tireless efforts permitted progress
in the implementation of the peace process and
contributed to restoring a climate of confidence
in Cote d'lvoire.

"The Security Council takes note of the
agreement among the parties on the institutional
arrangements, as indicated by the letter dated 27
March 2007 from the Permanent Representative
of Burkina Faso to the President of the Security
Council, and supports the appointment of
Mr. Guillaume Soro as Prime Minister.

"The Security Council expresses its
readiness to take further steps, in the light of the
progress achieved, in order to help the parties in
implementing their commitments and to support
the peace process in Cote d'Ivoire, in particular
the electoral process. It requests the Secretary-
General to submit to it recommendations by 15
May 2007 on the role that the United Nations
should play to support the implementation of the
peace process, taking into account the latest
developments in Cote d'lvoire."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2007/8.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.
07-28593

