President Ahmed (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to start my statement by extending my thanks to the
Security Council and by expressing our appreciation to
it for its continued and vital support to achieving peace
in Somalia. The visits by Council members to Djibouti
in June 2008 and to Nairobi in May 2011 to look into
and investigate the distressing events taking place in
Somalia and efforts to bring about peace, as well as the
relevant resolutions adopted by the Council on the
same topic, clearly demonstrated the Council's
determination to resolve the Somali issue. All those
2
endeavours reflect its good intentions and the pressing
desire to restore security and stability in Somalia and
to put an end to the suffering experienced by its people
for nearly two decades.

My thanks and appreciation also go to United
Nations Members, to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon -
who, at international forums, underscores the
importance of restoring security and stability in
Somalia- and to the African Union (AU) countries
that fully support the Somali Government and people. I
would also like to thank the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), which has issued
resolute and successful decisions on the Somali issue.
IGAD sent the finest young men to Somalia to stand by
our people and to protect innocent Somali citizens, as
well as our independence, freedoms, fundamental
rights and honour, which were being violated by the
advocates of war, looting and chaos. Its courageous
decisions brought about the expulsion of Al-Qaida and
Al-Shabaab from many areas that are now calm and
stable after our Government received the support of
AU forces, backed by the international community. I
would be remiss if I did not thank all States and
international and regional organizations that have
contributed to alleviating the suffering of our citizens,
who were in dire need of assistance in past years.

Owing to the disorder and instability prevailing
in the country, the terrorist movements of Al-Shabaab
and Al-Qaida took the opportunity to launch a
merciless war against the Somali people and committed
crimes and atrocities in the name of jihad, under the
guise of religion, which is completely opposed to such
atrocities. That forced Somalis to emigrate and live in
camps in neighbouring and other countries, or to
become internally displaced persons. Our people
placed their hope in their Government and the
international community, in anticipation of a new dawn
of security and safety emerging.

Our people, who suffered the worst acts of
violence and frequent crises, did not yield to the
violence and oppression, but continued to seek a
peaceful solution that was satisfactory to all. It strove
for the formation of a national unity Government in
order to lead the country to the security and stability it
deserves and to unite all sectors of Somali society,
without isolating any party from the other national
groups. Priority was given to a total of 15 reconciliation
conferences held in neighbouring countries, culminating
in the fourth Djibouti Peace Conference in 2009. That
12-33979
gave rise to the formation of this Government in order
to achieve lasting peace and prosperity, as well as the
well-being and comprehensive development of its
citizens.

The Government of the Somali Republic, which
receives the support and assistance of the international
community, has withstood the blows of its opponents
among Al-Qaida, Al-Shabaab and international
terrorists. It has succeeded in expelling them from most
of the country and has regained control in many
regions. Today, it administers its own affairs and
engages in reconstruction. It has returned the smile to
the faces of Somali children, exhausted by war and
constant sedition, having expelled those who sowed the
seeds of discord and internal disputes.

The Transitional Federal Government appreciates
the importance of the transition to normalcy through
the implementation of the policies set down in the road
map, outlining the development of a permanent
constitution for the country and its ratification by clan
leaders, intellectuals, members of the diaspora, social
organizations for young women, and community
members entitled to participate in its ratification. The
draft constitution is the result of eight years of
painstaking efforts sustained by Somali and international
experts to draft its provisions and study its contents,
with the aim of making it a comprehensive text that
takes the interests of Somalia into account and
responds to its requirements and current situation.

The new draft constitution is not the result of
happenstance or emotion, but has emerged from the
aspirations of the Somalis, who continue to await the
end of the transitional system and a return to the
regular system of governance. We hope and believe
that the constitution is one of the best in the world in
form and substance. It is the outcome of the
deliberations of Somali scientists and specialists,
supervised by committees of the clergy and senior
citizens. I assure the Council that the draft constitution
is responsive to the interests of the Somali people and
in line with Islamic principles, traditions, systems and
norms. Following its approval by the Constituent
Assembly, the draft will be reviewed and subsequently
voted on.

I left Mogadishu as the leaders of Somali clans
continued to meet with a view to selecting
825 representatives who are trusted by all the Somali
clans to ratify the draft constitution of the Somali
Republic. Today, after all these efforts, we commit
ourselves before the international community and
affirm that we mean to pave the way for the selection
of a national parliament representing all sectors of
Somali society, including the clergy, youth, women and
children. The parliament must be ready to choose a
new president in order to form a Government of
national unity composed of qualified men and women
able to manage the key components of the State with
competence and wisdom, distributing our national
resources equally to all members of society on the
basis of the legislative, executive and judicial powers
of the State.

In addition to the steps we have already taken, we
would like to assure Council members once again that
the process of reconciliation through negotiation has
begun between the Government and the people of the
north in order to reach an agreement ending the dispute
with our brothers who have sought to secede
unilaterally. We will pursue these efforts until the
waters are calm and national cohesion is restored,
returning the situation in Somalia to what it once was.
The management of the country will be in the hands of
the Somali people in a democratic society where
everyone is equal and no one is marginalized.

We draw the Council's attention to the fact that
we are on the threshold of a new phase. We have come
a long way in the implementation of the road map. We
need the international community to redouble its
efforts to assist us in completing the current stage on
time so as not to open an opportunity for the return of
anarchy and terrorism, to safeguard the achievements
made to date, and to justify the money that has been
spent and the blood shed to get where we are.

My country, which suffered a long period of
chaos and instability after the collapse of the
constitutional institutions and administrative services,
needs today to make further efforts to revive its
institutions so that they may perform their vital
functions and serve the people of Somalia. I believe
that the current stage is conducive to the
re-establishment of these institutions and that the
conditions exist to justify these efforts following the
defeat of Al-Qaida in Somalia and given the growing
international interest in developing our institutions as
well as the readiness of our people to participate in
making these institutions perform the desired functions.
The next stage will require us to create the
appropriate climate for this work. It is essential that
Somalia be stable, safe and free of chaos and violence
if it is to rebuild its infrastructure and Government
institutions and to select Government officials and
administrators to manage the various governorates and
the training of cadres capable of managing the
Government bodies, business services, hospitals and
schools, and of undertaking other tasks necessary to
serve the members of the Somali people. We therefore
expect the Security Council to support us in the
following tasks.

We must politically and economically strengthen
the work of the Constituent Assembly assigned to
ratify the new constitution by providing the financial
means necessary for the success of its work. In this
task, we have received none of the anticipated
international assistance.

We must promote reconciliation conferences to
preserve the national unity of Somalia and
comprehensive peace throughout Somali territory.

We must take a firm stand against those who
would hinder the achievement of peace in Somalia,
including those destructive individuals who would fish
in troubled waters and act to return the country to the
years of loss and fighting.

We must support the building of a Somali army
capable of protecting the homeland and its
independence and territorial integrity.

We must strengthen national security and train
the police forces and national intelligence officers,
arming them with up-to-date security equipment and
qualifying them to undertake the responsibilities
entrusted to them.

We must develop a comprehensive plan to
address the terrorist movements that are stepping up
their activities in Somalia. These movements will be
difficult to eradicate from the region unless concerted
international efforts are made to address them.

Without effective security forces able to impose
law and order and to act as a powerful deterrent to
criminals and aggressors of the innocent and defenceless,
it will not be possible to protect fundamental freedoms
and human rights in a country rampant with gangs of
pirates and terrorist movements that are killing
innocent citizens and imposing ransom and royalties on
commercial ships crossing international waters. That
will not be possible unless the Council allows the
Somali Government to import the necessary weapons
for the security services and lift the arms embargo that
has been imposed on it.

Further, international bodies and organizations
and the international community in general should be
invited to contribute to reconstruction in Somalia and
to work to reactivate economic institutions and services
in the country.

Continued support for the forces of the African
Union Mission in Somalia should include an increase
in their numbers and military assets in order to improve
their combat efficiency and enable them to address the
Al-Shabaab terrorist movement, which recently
announced its complete merger with Al-Qaida.

Financial support should be provided to local
administrations that have been established in areas
newly liberated from Al-Qaida.

Current members of Parliament should receive
their allowances and salaries to compensate them for
the service they have provided to the nation during
their term of office. They should not be exposed to the
risk of neglect and oblivion.

The foregoing is a mere drop in a sea of turbulent
waves and represents only a small part of the larger
task that the Somali people face at this critical
transitional juncture. We believe that the Council is
well aware of the deteriorating situation in our country,
and of its own responsibility for protecting the Somali
people and their fundamental freedoms.

I hope that I am not being overly optimistic in
saying that the Somali people, who are an integral part
of human society, believe that the international
community will not leave them bleeding and that the
eyes of the world are upon them, in particular
following the recent London Conference, which was
attended by representatives of 55 countries, with a
positive outcome that showed genuine sympathy with
the Somali people.

The British Government led by David Cameron
deserves our thanks and appreciation for organizing
and managing the Conference. We hope that it will
pursue its efforts to bring peace to Somalia, and we
extend our thanks and appreciation to all States,
international and regional organizations and
personalities who attended the Conference. We urge
them to maintain their commitment to achieving peace
12-33979
in Somalia and to attend the conference to be held in
Turkey next month.

The international community, through its
international and regional organizations, played an
effective role in the delivery of aid and humanitarian
assistance to those affected by famine and drought in
Somalia last year. Before concluding, I would therefore
like to invite all States and countries that pledged
contributions to alleviate the burden on the Somali
people, who are in dire need of assistance, to fulfil
their pledges. I thank them for their commitment and
for the assistance they extended to us during the crisis.
We hope that the outstanding aid and assistance will be
forthcoming, along with continued support to enable
those in need to resume their activities and a standard
of living appropriate to people living in the twenty-first
century. I also hope that they will help us to rebuild our
damaged infrastructure and to restore all the services
our citizens need.

In conclusion, I would like to extend all thanks
and appreciation to the members of the Council and to
wish them success.

