Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, the
Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs,
and Mr. Edmond Mulet for their very enlightening
briefings, as well as for their outstanding work.

A few days ago, the report of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (S/2017/904, annex)
established the responsibility of the Syrian regime for
the chemical attacks in Khan Shaykhun in April 2017 and
that of Da'esh in Umm Hawsh in September 2016. The
report's conclusions are clear and unambiguous. They
are consistent with the assessment published by France
in April after the attack on Khan Shaykhun. On behalf
of France, I salute the exemplary professionalism of the
Mechanism's team, which conducts its work in complete
independence and with the utmost thoroughness.

The facts that have been established are, we know,
extremely serious. To those who claim to have doubts,
I wish to recall that it has been four years since the
independent investigative mechanisms came to the
same conclusions. The Joint Investigative Mechanism
has already determined the responsibility of the Syrian

regime and of Da'esh for attacks committed in 2014
and 2015. Today, once again, the Mechanism has
been able to comment unambiguously on the parties
responsible for the attacks under investigation, after an
irrefutable process.

If we stick to objective observation of the facts,
the reality is that the Damascus regime has never fully
complied with its international obligations, despite
the commitments it made. Month after month, the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
has continued to inform us of grey areas in the
declaration submitted by Syria in 2013 on its chemical
stockpile. Those doubts, which focus on the Syrian
regime, underscore the cynicism and duplicity of the
Damascus regime. That regime has cooperated with the
investigative mechanisms in ways that allow it, at the
very least, to lie about the nature of its stockpile and,
at the worst, to pursue a chemical programme. Above
all, that regime has not hesitated to use those weapons
against its own people. The massacre of Khan Shaykhun,
like so many others, has been a tragic reminder for
us. The Mechanism only highlighted the regime's
responsibility in that regard, just as it confirmed that
chemical terrorism has become a reality.
Now that the truth has been clearly established,
now that no one can say that they did not know, our
collective responsibility is to identify and punish
those responsible for those abject acts. There will
be no lasting peace in Syria while there is impunity.
Beyond Syria, everyone sees that the future of the
international non-proliferation regime is at stake today.
While the international non-proliferation regimes have
not equalled the achievements of previous decades, let
us not let the most successful of those - the chemical
non-proliferation regime - be undermined by divisions
and manoeuvres. It would be a deadly precedent for the
other non-proliferation regimes and an irresponsible
stance for which we will all pay a heavy price. The use
of chemical weapons by anyone is a moral abomination
that goes against the most basic principles of humanity;
to look away and accept the use of chemical weapons in
Syria without response would be to give a blank check
or a green light to the proliferation and use of such
weapons elsewhere, and would create fertile terrain for
the chemical terrorism that we all fear.

At the joint initiative of Russia and the United
States, we created the Joint Investigative Mechanism
in order to transcend our political disagreements and
to establish the truth. That was why we did it. Let us
not then renege on our pledge or our commitments at
the hour of truth. The Mechanism is not a tool of the
West. Rather, it is one that is shared by the community
of nations as a whole, and one that we have the duty
to strengthen. That means the Mechanism cannot and
should not become hostage to political quarrels, or
worse, tactical games. To weaken the Mechanism is
to play with fire and to risk undermining the chemical
non-proliferation regime that we built together stone
by stone. The Mechanism must be able to continue
its activities, without preconditions and without
any interference.

Let us assume collectively and individually
the heavy responsibilities that we face. France,
as a permanent member of the Security Council,
understands well its own responsibilities. We will not
yield in the fight against impunity or on the issue of the
full and complete dismantling of the Syrian chemical
programme. I call on everyone to do the same and to
support the draft resolution presented by the United
States on the renewal of the mandate of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism. Let us take careful measure
of the gravity of the moment so that we can come
together for the service of the values, instruments and
law that underlie our collective security. The immensity
of the stakes demands it and compels us to do so.
