The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Denmark.

Let me start by joining others in thanking
Assistant Secretary-General Angela Kane for her
update on the situation in the Middle East.
Furthermore, Denmark fully associates itself with the
statement to be delivered later by the representative of
Austria on behalf of the European Union.
Like other delegations, Denmark is deeply
concerned about the current deterioration of the
security situation in the Middle East. In particular, we
are concerned at the situation on the border between
the Gaza Strip and Israel following the attack by
militant Palestinians, the abduction of Corporal Gilad
Shalit of the Israel Defense Forces and the killing of a
young Israeli settler. We call for the immediate and
unconditional release of Corporal Shalit and urge the
Palestinian leadership to undertake all necessary efforts
in that regard.

We also call on Israel to exercise utmost restraint
in the current crisis. The detention of elected members
of the Palestinian Government and legislature gives
rise to particular concern.

All parties must do their utmost to avoid further
escalation. The parties should not let themselves be
provoked further. Additional violence will only serve
to promote the agendas of extremists. Hopes for a
resumption of political dialogue after the recent
positive signals, including the meeting between Prime
Minister Olmert and President Abbas, must not be
dashed.

As set out by the Quartet, the Hamas-led
Palestinian Government needs to meet and implement
the three principles of non-violence, recognition of
Israel's right to exist and acceptance of existing
agreements and obligations.

In View of the urgent need to re-launch the
process towards a negotiated two-State solution which
would bring peace to both the Israeli and the
Palestinian peoples, we call for early engagement
between the Israeli Prime Minister and the President of
the Palestinian Authority. We reiterate our expectation
that both parties will respect existing agreements and
obligations, including the road map.

Moreover, we call on the Palestinian Government
to bring terrorist violence to an end. We condemn the
extremist groups responsible for these acts and all
those who jeopardize the prospects for peace.

Finally, we call on all parties to protect all
civilians and not to add to their suffering. We urge
them to assume once again their full responsibility to
restore security, allowing for the resumption of the
peace process and for a return to the road map.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Algeria.

