Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank all the
speakers for their briefings today.

We commend the efforts of President Farmajo and
the leaders of the federal member states to resume
dialogue. However, we note with concern the persistence
of tensions and the political stalemate between the
parties. We understand that overcoming that impasse
must be the main objective in support of the national
reconciliation process taking place in Somali society.

We are also deeply concerned by the security
vulnerability in Somalia. We condemn the attacks
perpetrated by the terrorist group Al-Shabaab, carried
out through the use of improvised explosive devices
placed in vehicles.

We welcome the progress made in the constitutional
review process. We urge the stakeholders to continue
to make the necessary efforts to ensure that the
review is inclusive and transparent and guarantees
the participation of women in political processes
throughout Somalia.

We appreciate the briefing delivered by Ms. Arale,
who spoke on the role of Somali women in the
settlement of conflicts. We are convinced that investing
in girls and women in Somalia would create a domino
effect leading to numerous benefits, not only for them
but also for their families and communities. Greater
participation by women is needed in the various areas
of public and political life. The introduction of the
quota system in the draft electoral law of at least 30 per
cent of seats for women on the list of political parties in
Somalia is a breakthrough that we hope to see come to
fruition in the near future when that law is enacted. The
representation of women in the political system is key
to promoting socioeconomic development.

We welcome the strides made in technical
preparations for the elections and underscore the need
to continue making progress on the legal framework
for the 2020 and 2021 elections. We call on the Federal
Government and the federal member states to spare no
effort in reaching an agreement on a political framework
for the fundamental electoral issues. With regard to the
elections in Jubaland, we urge all actors to reach an
agreement on a single electoral process that is credible,
inclusive, fair and peaceful.

The effects of climate change continue to be a
challenge for Somalia. Added to existing vulnerabilities
and the absence of resilience in communities, lower
than normal seasonal rains have resulted in a troubling
intensification of humanitarian needs in the country,
whereby humanitarian assistance is necessary for
survival. Food insecurity, largely caused by adverse
climatic conditions, increased by almost 30 per cent
over projections made in February. The lack of access to
potable water and the increase in the number of displaced
persons have led to a deterioration in the humanitarian
situation, which comes at a time when humanitarian aid
agencies have had to curtail their activities due to a lack
of resources. We urge the international community to
redouble its cooperation efforts and suggest that those
who are able contribute to the humanitarian response
plan for Somalia so as to alleviate the country's present
humanitarian needs.

To conclude, I would like to highlight and
acknowledge the role of the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia, the African Union Mission in
Somalia and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia, as well as all the stakeholders who support
Somalia in achieving peace, lasting stability and
sustainable development in the country.

