Mrs. Albright (United States of America): Argentina,
the United States, the United Kingdom and Oman began
work on this resolution at the specific request of a number
of Arab, non-aligned and European States. We shared a
common concern about the unnecessary humanitarian
suffering of the Iraqi people caused by the Iraqi
Government's policies, particularly its refusal to implement
the resolutions of the Security Council. We agreed to make
a good-faith effort to draft a plan that Iraq would have no
reason to reject.

We decided that we must be guided by the following
principles. Firstly, the purpose of the resolution is to
address humanitarian needs, not to meet political or other
extraneous objectives. Secondly, this resolution is not an
easing or lifting of sanctions, but an exception to the
sanctions regime for a specified purpose. Thirdly, we
wanted a greatly simplified resolution, building on both the
positive and negative lessons from resolutions 706 (1991)
and 712 (1991) and other experiences. Finally, against the
desire for simplification, we had to balance the need to
take full account of the fact that Iraq had not proven
trustworthy in implementing previous resolutions, and had
consistently sought to turn innocent-sounding phrases into
excuses for non-compliance.

We approached the task of drafting the new by
returning to the old, and examined carefully the complete
record of resolutions 706 (1991) and 712 (1991). We
looked carefully at all the reasons Iraq gave at that time
to justify its refusal to implement that plan. We also
reviewed the record of negotiations between Iraq and
Turkey in 1994, when Council members considered a
plan, at first supported by Iraq, to export oil through the
Turkish pipeline and use the proceeds for humanitarian
purposes. Throughout our drafting, we made every effort
to understand every concern expressed by Iraq, and we
addressed those concerns in a serious and open-minded
way.

While we addressed every issue Iraq had raised
before, we never underestimated Iraq's ability to generate
dozens of new objections and excuses. We realized from
the beginning that Iraq would never say in advance of the
vote that it accepted this plan, just as it has never
accepted any Council resolution before or at the time of
its passage. We note that, eventually, Iraq has found it in
its interest to accept, and on occasion even implement,
several Council resolutions. We hope that Iraq's current
position, taken for the sake of posturing and negotiations,
will not be the same as its final position, taken on the
basis of a calm measurement of the benefits this
resolution offers to the Iraqi people.

Let me address just some of the arguments that some
delegations have advanced on behalf of Iraq. First, I
reaffirm here, as we reaffirm in the resolution, my
Government's unchanging support for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq. But I must note that the
greatest threat to the territorial integrity of Iraq is Saddam
Hussein. His is the only Government in history to have
used weapons of mass destruction against its own
citizens. His is the Government that has imposed an
economic and electricity blockade against one section of
his country. Doubts about Iraq's territorial integrity, and
the need to make special arrangements to provide for
humanitarian needs in northern Iraq, arise only because of
the actions of the Iraqi Government.

The Council has other business before it with regard
to Iraq, as we wait with impatience for a change in Iraq's
attitude and its compliance with all the Council's

 

resolutions. Today's resolution, however, does not prejudge
in any way subsequent actions the Council may take in this
regard. The United States believes that Iraq's compliance
with all the Security Council's resolutions is the only way
in which it will prove to the international community that
its intentions are peaceful. Then, and only then, can this
Council move to modify the sanctions regime. This
resolution today is technical, not political, and we have
resisted efforts by Iraq and others to insert political
provisions into the resolution.

Our work on this new resolution is based on our
humanitarian concern that the people of Iraq are suffering
as a result of the policies of their Government. We believe
sanctions are a valuable tool for the Security Council to use
when dealing with rogue States that refuse to live peaceably
with their neighbours. But we have always shared the
concern expressed by so many here that sanctions not strike
an unintended target. We believe we have found exactly the
right compromise here - not a lifting of the sanctions on
the Iraqi regime, but a humanitarian exception to the
sanctions for the benefit of the Iraqi people.

Even before the passage of this resolution, and even
before the passage of resolutions 706 (1991) and
712 (1991), this Council has always demonstrated that it
has no quarrel with the Iraqi people. The Council has tried
to assure that the people of Iraq had access to basic
humanitarian goods, and has never prohibited the shipment
of food and medicines. The Council and Member States
have supported the United Nations Inter-Agency
Humanitarian Programme, which operates throughout Iraq.

We want the Government of Iraq to accept and
implement this resolution. The co-sponsors made
extraordinary efforts, even before entering a phase of
flexible and productive cooperation with other members of
the Council, to craft a text that would address Iraq's
concerns. If it still refuses to implement it, it will only be
because the Government of Iraq does not know how to take
"Yes" for an answer.
The Government of Iraq already has at its disposal the
means to lift the sanctions: compliance with the Council's
resolutions. It declines to exercise this option. If it refuses
to implement this resolution, it will be clear for all to see,
and especially to the Iraqi people, that the blame for the
suffering of the people of Iraq rests not with the Security
Council, but with the Government in Baghdad.

Let me stress that that is not the outcome we desire.
We call on Iraq to take its time, study this resolution with
an open mind, and decide to accept it and implement it.
The Council has once again given Baghdad the
opportunity to act in the best interests of its citizens. For
their sake, we urge the Government of Iraq to take
advantage of this chance.

In closing, let me make it clear that this resolution
would not be necessary, and the Iraqi people would not
be suffering, if Iraq's Government were not driven by
ruthless ambition. Let us not forget that this is a
Government that has invaded its neighbour, supported
terrorism, built weapons of mass destruction and
continues to threaten the stability of the Persian Gulf. It
is only when the regime changes its underlying objectives
that the resolutions will no longer be necessary and the
Iraqi people will no longer be suffering.

