Mr. Khare (spoke in Chinese): Today is Chinese
Language Day. I would like to begin by congratulating
the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Chinese
Mission to the United Nations, Mr. Wang Min, and to
convey my best wishes to all Chinese-speaking people.

(spoke in English)

Thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the situation in Sudan.
The Council has before it the Secretary-General's most
recent report (8/2011/239) on the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS), outlining the
Mission's activities up until 1 April and
recommendations for the extension of the UNMIS
mandate, which will expire on 30 April.

I would like to start my remarks today by
outlining the latest developments in the Sudan,
followed by updates on the post-referendum
2
negotiations and the status of the outstanding
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) provisions,
before highlighting some of the key issues related to
the planning for a follow-up United Nations mission in
South Sudan.

During the reporting period, the successful
completion of the Southern Sudan self-determination
referendum was a momentous achievement. It is a
testament to the commitment of the CPA parties to
peace and to the courage of His Excellency President
Al-Bashir and His Excellency First Vice-President Kiir.
The CPA parties went to great lengths to ensure that the
referendum progressed smoothly, peacefully and on
time, and that its results clearly reflected the will of the
Southern Sudanese people and were accepted by all.

The referendum also demonstrated how the peace
and security work of the United Nations can be
effective when supported by a unified and coordinated
international community. The logistical and technical
assistance of UNMIS and the financial support of the
international partners were indispensable. Just as
important was the political facilitation provided by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Menkerios and the tireless work of the staff throughout
the United Nations in the Sudan.

Despite these achievements, several challenges
lie ahead. Key CPA issues remain unresolved or
incomplete, and if not addressed effectively could
quickly undermine progress and threaten to pull the
parties back into conflict.

Following the referendum, tensions in the South
have risen. In particular, conflicts between the Sudan
People's Liberation Army (SPLA) and a number of
insurgents and militia resumed and posed a significant
threat to civilians in the Jonglei, Upper Nile and Unity
states.

The situation in Abyei remained volatile
throughout the reporting period. The continued failure
of the parties to make progress towards resolving
Abyei's future status fuelled frustration and
empowered hard-line elements within the Misseriya
and Ngok Dinka communities and contributed to
continued violence. There has, fortunately, been no
significant upsurge in violence since early March, and
the Kadugli agreements have contributed to containing
the situation even though their full implementation
remains a major challenge.
11-30506

In all cases, the Mission responded through

political facilitation and increased military presence.

However, denial of access severely curtailed the ability

of UNMIS to patrol conflict areas such as Abyei,

J onglei and Upper Nile and further deter threats against
civilians.

The majority of UNMIS patrols took place across
the Mission area unhindered by any deliberate
restrictions to UNMIS freedom of movement. As I
mentioned earlier, however, this was not the case in
Abyei, Jonglei and Upper Nile, where this positive
trend has been reversed. Out of a total of 221 patrols
conducted in the Abyei area during the reporting
period, at least 33 - or around 15 per cent - were
denied, with a sizeable increase in March, when
21 cases - or 26 percent - of the 82 UNMIS patrols
were denied access. More importantly, since January
and despite persistent attempts, UNMIS patrols have
never been able to gain access to the sites where the
fighting took place, such as Makir Abior, Noong,
Todach and Tajalei. In addition, UNMIS patrols have
frequently been harassed, most recently in Diffra on
18 April, which has led to the non-attainment of
original patrol goals. There were also overt displays of
aggression towards UNMIS, for example in Goli,
Diffra, Shegei and Um Khaer.

In March, due to SPLA operations against the
armed militias in Upper Nile and Jonglei States, the
SPLA requested that UNMIS remain out of the
counties where the operation was occurring. This
restriction was revoked by the SPLA in late March, but
it severely hampered the ability of UNMIS to verify
the military and humanitarian situation in these areas
and of humanitarian actors to gain access to affected
civilians. Since the lifting of the restrictions, UNMIS
and the United Nations country team have been able to
conduct verification and assessment missions to
address the plight of the civilian population and
security concerns.

To counter these restrictions, UNMIS engaged
with both Governments and their military command.
The issue was brought to the attention of the area joint
military committees and the Ceasefire Joint Monitoring
Commission, and also discussed within the Ceasefire
Political Commission. In Abyei, the standing
committee also discussed the problem, and it was
decided that UNMIS should have unhindered access to
the whole area. This has increased the Mission's
11-30506
mobility to some extent but restrictions remain a
challenge.

We have been pleased with the cooperation
between the National Congress Party (NCP) and the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM), but
remain concerned about the slow progress on
outstanding CPA issues, such as border demarcation,
Abyei, popular consultations, and the integration of
SPLA North into the Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF),
and on the post-referendum negotiations.

The recent round of negotiations in Addis Ababa
from 9 to 11 April concluded with an agreement on a
joint approach to debt management ahead of the World
Bank meeting last weekend, but a number of economic
questions, such as the ownership of pipelines and
transitional financial arrangements for oil-revenue
sharing, remain to be resolved. Equally, some progress
was made on the joint management of the border, such
as the establishment of a joint command mechanism to
ensure the implementation of the post-referendum
security arrangements and the development of a joint
paper on border security, but the parties still differ on
the necessity of third party involvement.

In this context, we are very concerned about the
lack of progress in finding a solution to the crisis in
Abyei. While the SPLM. insists on an agreement on the
basis of the CPA Abyei Protocol and the ruling of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration, the NCP has stressed
the importance of equal participation by the Misseriya
in a referendum. Abyei remains a flashpoint that has
the potential to further escalate and damage the
relationship between the North and the South. In this
regard, UNMIS has recorded a sizeable military build-
up in the area on both sides. We are also concerned
that, due to the continued obstruction of migration in
the central corridor, migration-related conflict cannot
be ruled out.

Due to these disagreements, there is a possibility
that the residual CPA issues will not be solved or that
the post-referendum negotiations will not be concluded
by 9 July. The popular consultations in Blue Nile state
are lagging behind and have not started in Southern
Kordofan, pending the state elections. Furthermore, the
physical demarcation of the border has not yet
commenced, and the integration of the SPLA troops in
the two areas has not been resolved, creating a
potential security threat. It is our view that third party
engagement will remain necessary to bring the CPA to
3
a satisfactory conclusion and to further support the AU
High-Level Implementation Panel in its efforts to
negotiate a post-referendum package.

The popular consultations in Blue Nile and
Southern Kordofan states are vital to the development
of peaceful North-South relations and the North's own
adjustment in the post-CPA period. It is of the utmost
importance to ensure credible popular consultations in
Blue Nile and South Kordofan states and that the
parties commit themselves to mechanisms to
implement their results beyond the CPA's interim
period.

We are concerned about the security risks relating
to the integration of the SPLA from Blue Nile and
Southern Kordofan states into the SAF, especially
pending progress on the popular consultations process.
These troops, located on the border with Unity and
Upper Nile states, insist that their political grievances
be adequately addressed in the popular consultations,
and await their outcome and implementation before
agreeing to any formal agreement on their integration.

Furthermore, the upcoming elections in Southern
Kordofan, which are to commence on 2 May, are of
importance to both parties, and the increase in violence
is of great concern to us. The NCP-SPLM. partnership
has been a stabilizing factor over the past two years,
but since this election will influence Southern
Kordofan's political balance of power, the rhetoric of
the election campaign has been increasingly
aggressive. As a result, on 13 April, four predominantly
Nuba villages within the locality of Al-Rashad,
200 kilometres north-east of Kadugli, were targeted by
violence, resulting in the death of 19 persons, including
three children, four women and 12 men, and the injury
of 29, including three women.

Conflicts between the SPLA and insurgents pose
a significant threat to civilians in Jonglei, Upper Nile
and Unity states. Several issues are at stake here: first,
disgruntled high-level officers of the SPLA who do not
see eye to eye with the SPLM. leadership; secondly,
Southern militia leaders - such as Murle and
Shilluk- whose local grievances have not been
addressed; and finally, Southerners who fought within
the Sudanese Armed Forces but want to be integrated
into the SPLA. The Government of Southern Sudan
will need to take concrete measures to address ethnic
tensions, mismanagement, political and social
marginalization, economic development and
governance, especially in rule of law institutions.

The integrated technical and operational planning
team of the United Nations has completed its report,
which is being considered at Headquarters now. As part
of the planning process, there has been continual
engagement through the Integrated Mission Task Force
to ensure that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations has full awareness of the needs and
objectives of other departments, funds, agencies and
programmes in the post-9 July period.

The outcome of this work has been the
development of a broad mission concept, a concept for
the military and police component, and an initial draft
of a mission support concept. These concepts have
informed a paper for the consideration by the Policy
Committee chaired by the Secretary-General when it
meets some time around 26 April. The Secretary-
General's recommendations will then be outlined in a
special report that will be issued for the Council's
consideration in mid-May.

