Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I deliver this statement on behalf of the three
African members ofthe Security Council: cote d'Ivoire,
South Africa and Equatorial Guinea - a group that I
have the honour to chair. I thank you, Sir, for allowing
us to have two turns of the hourglass. I had hoped for
three but two are enough.

We thank Germany for convening today's briefing
on refugees, which we believe is very timely. We
sincerely thank Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, for his detailed
and comprehensive briefing on the plight of refugees
throughout the world, which highlighted the worrisome
statistics regarding the number of refugees in various
parts of the globe, enabling us to better understand
that the world needs a practical and urgent solution
to address the challenging plight of refugees. We take
this opportunity to commend the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for its efforts
to fulfil its obligations to provide refugee-protection
programmes in challenging conditions.

Conflicts are the principal drivers of forced
displacement. That reality demands that we address
the structural causes of armed conflicts, which require
collective long-term strategies. The role of States in the
quest for preventive political and diplomatic solutions
is crucial. The magnitude of the current statistics
presented by the High Commissioner remind us that we
are witnessing a time in human history when we have
exceeded the highest numbers ever recorded. As States,
we must act now.

The African continent is also affected by massive
forced displacement and is home to more than 1 million
of the world's displaced population. We acknowledge
the refugee crisis on our continent. To address it,
the African Union pledged to implement specific
measures. In that regard, within the framework of the
long-term vision encapsulated in Agenda 2063, in 2016
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
African Union adopted the Common African Position,
decision 604 (XXVI), to strengthen humanitarian action
on the continent. The Common African Position defines
Africa's new humanitarian architecture, which includes
the creation of the African Humanitarian Agency as a
vehicle for humanitarian action. The new humanitarian
architecture also emphasizes addressing root causes and
achieving durable solutions, as well as strengthening
the capacity of States and other stakeholders, to address
the challenges of forced displacement on the continent.

In that context, the Assembly of Heads of State,
held in Nouakchott in July 2018, adopted decision AU/
Dec.707 (XXXI), in which it declared 2019 as the year of
"Refugees, Returnees and Internally Displaced Persons:
Towards Durable Solutions to Forced Displacement in
Africa". In the same vein, we are proud about the fact
that our Head of State, His Excellency President Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo, was appointed as the guarantor of
that decision and initiative.

We understand that African efforts to encourage
refugees should be supported and in line with
international efforts. In that regard, we welcome
the adoption of the sentiments expressed in the 2018
global compact on refugees, which demonstrated the
commitment of the international community to deal
more effectively with a large number of displacements.
We commend countries that opened their borders to
accommodate refugees independently of resource
constraints and call on the international community
to fulfil its commitment to sharing burdens and
responsibilities. We would like to specifically mention
Bangladesh here.

This year, the African Union will commemorate
the two key treaties on forced displacement: the fiftieth
anniversary of the adoption of the 1969 Organization
of African Unity Convention Governing the Specific
Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa and the tenth
anniversary of the 2009 African Union Convention for
the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced
Persons in Africa (Kampala Convention). We hope that
all of those legal instruments will be reflected in the
Vision of improving the lives of refugees. We welcome
collaboration among the African Union, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and other interested stakeholders.

In conclusion, we reiterate that all States must be
united in the cause of refugees. We express our full
commitment to cooperating in those urgent efforts.

I would like to ask a question. What kind of
modalities can be taken into consideration for the
establishment of a strong partnership between the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the African Union to ensure the
implementation of the decision of the Heads of State
adopted in Nouakchott to find lasting solutions to
forced displacement in Africa?

