Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): Pursuant to sub-paragraph
19 (e) of resolution 2140 (2014), I have the honour
to report to the Security Council on the work of the
Committee established pursuant to that resolution. My
text will be circulated to the members.

This is my first briefing to the Council in my
capacity as Chair of the Committee. My predecessor,
Ambassador Raimonda Murmokaite, last briefed the
Council on 23 October 2015 (see S/PV.7542). I take this
opportunity to express my gratitude for her excellent
work as a Chair of the Committee.
The Committee's Panel of Experts submitted
its final report (see S/2016/73) to the Committee on
11 January and briefed the Committee on its main
findings and recommendations on 22 January. In
accordance with paragraph 5 of resolution 2204
(2015), the Panel submitted its report to the Council on
22 January, which was published on 26 January.

My briefing today comes shortly before the
Council is scheduled to vote on a new draft resolution
renewing the assets freeze and tavel ban measures, as
well as the mandate of the Panel of Experts. The new
draft resolution presents Council members with an
opportunity to refine, and offer additional guidance on,
the implementation of the targeted sanctions measures,
particularly the targeted arms embargo. While there are
different views regarding the sanctions instrument, the
Council is unanimous in its calls for a political solution
to the crisis and for support for the efforts ofthe Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General. With that in mind, I
would like to reiterate that sanctions are an important
tool available to the Security Council for preventive,
as opposed to punitive, purposes, and that the Council
should be guided by Articles 39 and 41 of the Charter
of the United Nations when considering sanctions.
Sanctions are not an end in themselves, and they should
be leveraged to support the political process, which
should be Yemen-led and brokered by the United Nations
and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General.

In conclusion, I would like to underline the
importance of the full implementation by Member
States of all sanctions measures imposed by resolutions
2140 (2014), 2204 (2015) and 2216 (2015), as well as
the need for the relevant reporting obligations to be
upheld. I would like to encourage the cooperation of
all Member States with the Panel of Experts, including
by providing the Panel with requested information in a
timely manner and by facilitating its visits.

