Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to commend the Ambassador
of Venezuela for his outstanding work as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009), concerning
Somalia and Eritrea. I also express my resolute support
for the work being done by the Monitoring Group.

In line with the Toledo formula, I fully endorse the
statement made a short while ago by the Ambassador of
New Zealand. As such, I will confine my intervention
to the five most salient points.

First, with regard to transparency, this is an
inescapable requirement of our time. Society calls
on us to provide it and demands that the Council be
democratic. For the Council to be democratic, more
transparent and stronger, we must open ourselves up
to the membership. Therefore, open briefings by the
Chairs of the Council's subsidiary bodies should be the
norm, as should be the reports of the panels of experts
that support the committees.

Secondly, on the political process in Somalia,
today at last, there is hope for a new Somalia,
which, from reconciliation to the political dialogue,
should determine to move forward along the path
of progress and development for the benefit of the
Somali people - with, of course, the support of the
international community.

Thirdly, with regard to security, I express my
sincere condolences for the victims of Al-Shabaab
attacks. The victims are civilian, military and of all
genders, for Al-Shabaab lacks any sort of morality. In
order to rein in this violent movement, it is urgent that
we adapt the strategy in the fight against Al-Shabaab
to the current situation. To that end, we need to be
especially determined in two aspects. The first is to
impede the export of charcoal, and the second is to
cut off the sources of financing. Somalis should have
no doubts as to two issues: first, Al-Shabaab will be
defeated and Somalia's future will not include them;
secondly, the African Union Mission in Somalia and
the Somali National Army are on the side of the people.

Fourthly, on human rights and the humanitarian
situation, I shall confine myself to stating our great
concern with regard to the humanitarian situation,
especially in areas under the control of Al-Shabaab. It
is important that we prevent and punish violations of
human rights, which are a genuine threat to the future
of Somalia.

Fifthly, on Eritrea, I would like to underscore the
importance of fostering a genuine and substantive
dialogue between the Monitoring Group and the
Government in Asmara. We welcome the Visit by the
Monitoring Group to Eritrea.

I would like to conclude by touching on the issue
of sanctions. Spain's position on sanctions is well
known. Members know that we believe that sanctions
are never an end in themselves. However, they are a
basic prevention tool in the Council's efforts, including
to maintain international peace and security.

