Mr. Giacomelli da Silva (Brazil): I thank you,
Madam President, for organizing this open debate,
and I extend my appreciation to the briefers for
their presentations.

I wish to begin by reiterating Brazil's long-
standing support for the primacy of politics, conflict
prevention and non-military approaches. Our collective
responsibility does not need to translate into collective
security action in order to be effective. It is crucial
to develop an understanding of what force can and
cannot accomplish. The notion that civilians are more
effectively protected by resorting to military action is
not supported by any real evidence. More often than
not, it exacerbates suffering and leads to negative
humanitarian consequences. In the exceptional
circumstances in which resolutions authorize it,
military action should be limited to the mandate.
The Council should demand enhanced reporting and
monitor the implementation of such resolutions. Those
troops might not be wearing blue helmets, but they act
upon the authority and legitimacy of a blue text.
Protecting civilians is a core part of the mandates
of many peacekeeping operations. Missions cut across
diverse areas relating to the protection of civilians,
such as gender affairs, the rule of law, security
-sector reform, community violence reduction and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. A
comprehensive approach to sustaining peace must
start by simultaneously integrating peacekeeping and
peacebuilding objectives, thereby recognizing the role
ofpeacekeepers as early peacebuilders. We must ensure
that peacekeeping missions have both the capabilities
and the resources that they require.

Non-State actors, including terrorist groups,
deliberately target civilians as a military tactic. Such
violations warrant the strongest condemnation. At
the same time, it is impossible to ignore the fact that
violations of international humanitarian law have also
been perpetrated by national Governments, including
under the claim of protecting civilians. We cannot lose
sight of concerns about the use of new technologies,
in particular armed drones. Such technologies might
be testing the limits of the principles of humanity,
distinction, proportionality and precaution - not to
mention the challenge to general international law
when used extraterritorially outside conflict zones.

It is unacceptable to witness indiscriminate attacks
on civilians, the destruction of cultural heritage and
military action against schools and medical facilities.
Brazil commends those who carry out medical
activities during armed conflicts, while enduring harsh
conditions to save human lives and minimize suffering
on the ground. It is crucial that all parties to armed
conflicts facilitate safe and unimpeded access for
medical and humanitarian personnel.

The nature of warfare might have changed, but the
rules of war have not. All parties to armed conflicts
must comply with their obligations under international
law, including the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their
Additional Protocols. Violations must be investigated
and their perpetrators must be held accountable. In
that regard, Brazil reiterates the central role of the
International Criminal Court and remains a steadfast
supporter of the universality of the Rome Statute. We
need to enhance humanitarian compliance and legal
accountability. We would also benefit from enjoying
a dedicated space for States to discuss international
humanitarian law in a voluntary and non-politicized
manner. Brazil calls upon all States to engage
constructively in the intergovernmental process
aimed at finding such a space and promoting valuable
exchanges on international humanitarian law.

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to stress the importance of mainstreaming a gender
perspective into all our efforts to protect civilians.

"There will never be peace in the world as long as
women do not help create it".

Those are not my words. They were voiced by
Bertha Lutz, a member of Brazil's delegation to the
San Francisco Conference in 1945. We are proud to
co-organize a panel to be held today in the Trusteeship
Council Chamber on the theme "Women and the
Origins of the United Nations - A Southern Legacy".

