Mr. Klein (United States of America): Thank you
very much, Mr. President, for convening this important
discussion. I also thank the Secretary-General and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
for their insightful and informative briefings. I also
thank the High Commissioner for her service to the
United Nations and to the cause of human rights.

The United Nations was established in the wake of
two devastating world wars, with the intent of saving
future generations from the scourge of such conflict.
Now the United Nations, including the Security
Council, remains the focal point for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Yet we look out at a
world mired in crisis and conflict.

The complex conflicts of today increasingly involve
heavily armed non-State actors, some of whom are
infused with extremist ideologies. Those actors push
clashes across borders, traffic illicit goods, undermine
Governments and destabilize entire regions. While the
international community did not fully imagine such
conflicts at the inception of the United Nations, the
United Nations system has nonetheless developed ever
more nimble and well-suited tools to respond to the
early warning signs of conflict and instability. Today's
debate offers us a valuable chance to broaden our focus
beyond the crisis of the day and to think strategically
about how we can better leverage United Nations tools
now and in the future to prevent conflict.

In that connection, the United States commends
efforts by the Department of Political Affairs (DPA)
to monitor and analyse political developments around
the world and to alert the Security Council and the
international community about brewing crises. For
example, last year, Assistant Secretary-General Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco warned the Council that heightened
frictions around an election dispute in the Maldives
could lead to violence. Calls for restraint by high-
ranking United Nations officials coupled, with the
Assistant Secretary-General's visit to the Maldives
the week before the elections, helped to usher in a
peaceful transfer of power. In that vein, we welcome
DPA's continued efforts to deepen its analysis, work
with other United Nations offices and take measures to
identify potential triggers of violence.

The Department of Political Affairs has also used
active responses to potential conflict scenarios through
its regional political missions. In Guinea, for example,
the United Nations, with the savvy diplomacy of Said
Djinnit, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of United Nations Office for West
Africa at the time, engaged successfully in mediation
efforts ahead of the 2013 legislative elections after
recognizing key warning signs of potential conflict.

Likewise, we welcome DPA's Standby Team of
Mediation Experts. The demand for such experts
has increased every year since the Team's inception.
Mediators are playing a critical role in peaceful
dispute resolution in Africa's Great Lakes region and
in Mali, where mediators have facilitated the difficult
reconciliation process between Bamako and northern
rebel groups.

At the same time, dozens of United Nations special
envoys, political missions, mediators and good offices of
the Secretary- General work tirelessly to bridge political
differences. There is a common thread for successful
missions: they need sound and credible leadership,
strong mandates and monitoring and reporting capacity
on potential drivers and flashpoints of conflict. We now
need better mechanisms for recognizing the earliest
signs and for delivering the right prevention tools at
every stage of a conflict to address root causes, end
impunity and save lives.

One key aspect of that is peacebuilding. In each
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) country-specific
configuration, the PBC coordinates efforts to build
national political, economic, judicial and civil society
institutions. In Burundi, the PBC Chair's regular
engagement with local leaders has helped to highlight
potential flashpoints, such as problematic practices
by Burundian leadership, that have the potential to
exacerbate societal frictions and result in violence in
the run-up to elections.

This year's headlines also remind us that serious
human rights abuses, including sexual violence, can be
an early indication of imminent conflict, as well as a
consequence of it. The horrible accounts of abduction,
detention, rape, murder and other acts of violence
against women in Iraq at the hands ofthe militants ofthe
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and in Nigeria by
Boko Haram appal and concern us greatly. Supporting
the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
the efforts of the High Commissioner on Human Rights
is an essential tool in addressing and preventing such
injustices.

Finally, we welcome today's resolution 2171
(2014), on conflict prevention. We share a common
responsibility to do everything in our power to pursue
sustainable solutions to disputes and prevent violence
and bloodshed. It is indeed the reason the Council was
created.

