Mr. Nishida (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to express my appreciation to the Chairs of the
Council's three counter-terrorism-related committees
for their respective briefings on the developments
during the last six months.

Japan welcomes the recent remarkable progress
in the field of counter-terrorism. Yet the death of
Osama Bin Laden does not mean the end of the fight
against terrorism. The threat of terrorism remains
serious, and it is necessary for the international
community to cooperate closely in all areas of counter-
terrorism. In that regard, the work of the three
committees continues to be of high significance.

In order to strengthen the counter-terrorism
capacity of individual Member States, the enhancement
of assistance for capacity-building is a matter of
urgency.

We welcome the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1977 (2011) and the decision contained
therein regarding the 10-year extension of the mandate
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). We commend the fact that the resolution
focuses on activities such as implementation,
assistance, international cooperation and transparency.
With respect to the implementation of the relevant
resolutions, we must address the issue of Member
States' limited resources, expertise and capacity to
fully implement the resolution. We must also increase
awareness among Member States through assistance
and outreach activities. In this regard, Japan is co-
organizing a seminar, to be held on 31 May, to
exchange views and experiences on non-proliferation,
including with regard to resolutions 1540 (2004) and
1977 (2011). We will continue to cooperate with the
activities of the 1540 Committee so that we may
achieve the international objective of non-proliferation.

In order to strengthen counter-terrorism capacity,
an assessment of the shortfall of counter-terrorism
measures in Member States is essential. In this regard,
we attach great importance to the preliminary
implementation assessment by the CTC as a crucial
tool and consider the country visits conducted by the
CTC to be one of the most valuable mechanisms for
making the assessment more effective. Such visits
facilitate an accurate assessment of the current
situation of counter-terrorism in a given country, as
they provide direct contact with the relevant
authorities. The CTC has decided to conduct a country
visit to Japan by the end of 2013. We anticipate that the
visit will be a good opportunity for Japan and the CTC
to have a fruitful discussion on the implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions.

Japan will continue its efforts to strengthen its
national capacity and to assist, to the maximum extent
possible, in the enhancement of the counter-terrorism
capacities of other States, especially developing States.
Even after the death of Osama bin Laden, Member
States should continue to implement rigorously assets
freezes and other relevant measures against him and
against individuals and entities associated with him.

In order for the 1267 sanctions regime to be fully
effective, continued efforts to ensure the credibility of
the Consolidated List are indispensable. To that end,
Japan took active part in the negotiations for resolution
1904 (2009) as a member of the Security Council.

It is my hope that, at the review in June this year
pursuant to resolution 1904 (2009), the legitimacy and
credibility of the Consolidated List will be enhanced
and the 1267 sanctions regime will be strengthened. In
this regard, we call on the members of the Security
Council, taking into account the obligations of the
Member States under the Charter of the United
Nations, to duly consider the proposals by like-minded
States, including Switzerland and Costa Rica. Japan
will continue to cooperate actively with the 1267
Committee, the Ombudsperson and the Monitoring
Team.

As we approach the tenth anniversary of
September 11 and of the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001), Japan supports the initiative by
the Counter-Terrorism Committee to organize a special
meeting open to the wider membership and relevant
stakeholders. We expect that, as this year marks a
milestone in our collective global counter-terrorism
efforts, this meeting will provide a good opportunity
for the international community to reflect on and
review the progress made so far in the fight against
terrorism.
At the same time, we strongly request that the
three Committees make a determined effort to enhance
their mutual cooperation, while avoiding duplication of
work, and to cooperate with Member States and other
relevant organizations both inside and outside the
United Nations to achieve our common goal of
eradicating terrorism. The Government of Japan will
continue to take all possible measures to counter
worldwide terrorism and to cooperate positively and
proactively in the efforts of the three Committees.

