Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): The Permanent
Representative of Spain will speak on behalf of the
European Union later in this debate, and I fully
associate myself with the statement he will make then.

It is right that the Council should be meeting in
emergency session this evening. The situation is
extremely critical for the millions of people who live in
Israel and the occupied territories. Israelis and
Palestinians should benefit from having the views of

the Council, the Secretary-General - to whom I am
very grateful for the statement he made at the
beginning of tonight's debate ~ and the wider

membership tonight.

Security Council resolution 1397 (2002) sets out
the key elements of the way forward. That resolution
was a clear demonstration of the Council's will, and it
should be acted upon. The key elements include a
vision of a region where two States - Israel and
Palestine - live side by side within secure and
recognized borders; an immediate cessation of all acts
of violence, including all acts of terror, provocation,
incitement and destruction; and a call upon the Israeli
and Palestinian sides and their leaders to cooperate in
the implementation of the Tenet work plan and the
Mitchell report recommendations, with the aim of
resuming negotiations on a political settlement. The
United Kingdom stands foursquare behind resolution
1397 (2002). Both sides must take action to ensure that
it becomes a reality.

As the Secretary-General said earlier today, the
way out ofthis escalating and vicious cycle of reprisals
and counter-violence is for both parties to move ahead
as speedily as possible, via the Mitchell
recommendations, to achieve the two-State vision
expressed in resolution 1397 (2002). We, like others
who have spoken tonight, support the ongoing efforts
by General Zinni, the Secretary-General, the European
Union and others to assist the parties to halt the
violence and resume the peace process.

The Arab Summit in Beirut earlier this week
presented a new opportunity. We welcome its
endorsement of Crown Prince Abdullah's initiative and
urge Israel to respond positively to the assurances Arab
States have offered on its future security. A
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East is attainable based on relevant United Nations
resolutions, in particular Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973). The Arab Summit outcome
strengthens the consensus on the broad outlines of a
settlement. But the events of the last few days show
that never has there been a greater need for restraint to
be shown on both sides. Restraint in the face of
violence is a sign of courage, not weakness.

It can only be through negotiation that there will
ever be a peaceful future for Israel, Palestine and the
people of the entire region. A lasting settlement
remains frustratingly elusive. The simple fact of
geography means that both sides will have to live
together in peace. Restraint and statesmanship are
required, and all forms of violence must end
immediately. These should be the Council's messages
to the two sides tonight.

