President Chirac (spoke in French): Peace is our
primary objective and it is here, within the Security
Council, that it must be ensured. Now that the cold war
is over the conditions are right for our Council to fulfil
its role. Yet, despite intense activities over the last 10
years, its results have been mixed. Along with its
indisputable successes, the United Nations has been
haunted by failures and by the image of peacekeepers
taken hostage and humiliated. The Security Council has
come under criticism and the assessment of
peacekeeping operations has been harsh, but, it must be
said, fair.

What can we do and what must we do to enable
the Security Council to better assume its primary
responsibility under the United Nations Charter for
maintaining international peace and security? I see four
orientations.

The first is that we must take on board all the
consequences of the changing nature of conflicts,
which are increasingly internal in origin. All too often,
massive violations of human rights and humanitarian
disasters hit entire regions. The Council must be able
to respond.

How can we prevent conflicts? The world
community needs to tackle the causes, and when the
causes are underdevelopment and lack of democracy,
of the rule of law and of respect for human rights, the
Secretary-General should be able to bring them to the
Security Council's attention and use his power of
mobilization.

We must also tackle everything that finances and
fuels conflicts, such as the illegal exploitation of
natural resources, as we see in the Great Lakes region;
drug trafficking; and small arms accumulations. It has
also become necessary to make embargoes more
effective. More specifically, we need to set up a
permanent body within the Secretariat to control
diamond trafficking and probably trafficking in rare
precious metals.

Finally, we need to be concerned with
consolidating peace in the long run. This means that
the application of peace agreements will have to be
based on strategies to rebuild the State and the
economy, to be implemented by multilateral
institutions.

The second orientation is that we must improve
the Security Council's means of action. In the 19903
the Security Council made unprecedented use of
sanctions. But we must face the facts: the results have
not been conclusive. The lesson is that we must make
better use of these restrictive measures, using them
only in exceptional situations, defining our objectives
more clearly and setting time-limits, open to renewal.
Furthermore, sanctions must be proportionate to their
objective and not carry morally unacceptable
humanitarian costs, as we sometimes see today. They
must be implemented rigorously, without creating
inhumane and unacceptable side effects.

The Security Council also decided on a large
number of peacekeeping operations during the 1990s.
Such operations tackled a substantially more
diversified range of problems and tasks. Most ran into
a great many difficulties. Like Mr. Brahimi, whose
report I entirely endorse, I see four lessons to be
learned.

First of all, budget concerns must not be a
paralysing constraint from the outset. The United
Nations finances need to be consolidated. All countries
must pay what they owe, and expenses should be
shared fairly.

Then, we need to make sure that objectives are in
line with the operating mandate and the resources
provided. This means organizing consultations very
early on between the Security Council, the Secretariat
and the countries that contribute troops.

Furthermore, States must provide the United
Nations with the right quality and quantity of personnel
and equipment. When developing countries help by
sending troops, they should be able to get support from
the developed countries that have resources for training
and equipment.

Finally, we increasingly have to deal with
warlords or States that refuse to keep the commitments
that they have made in peace agreements. Credible and
respected peace agreements are the key to the
effectiveness of the United Nations action. It is
inadmissible for our Organization to be held hostage to
conflicts, and it is not right that those who do not keep
their word should continue to receive international aid.
Here again, I am thinking of the Great Lakes region.

The third orientation is strengthening the
partnership between the Security Council, the
Secretariat and regional organizations and initiatives.
Some progress has been made. But, closer
consultations at an earlier stage are critical when
planning to call on the United Nations to facilitate
implementation of an agreement or to take over a
regional action.

The fourth and last orientation is reforming the
Security Council. In order to maintain its full authority,
the Council must be more representative of the real
world. France supports an enlargement of the Council
in both permanent and non-permanent membership,
and also greater representation of the countries of the
South.

By deciding today to reform peacekeeping
operations, the Security Council is also paying homage
to all those who have given their lives for peace. I am
thinking in particular of the three United Nations staff
members that were killed in Timor yesterday. I am also
thinking of all the soldiers who have fallen under the
blue flag, the French soldiers in particular, and those
who serve or have served the United Nations in Bosnia,
Kosovo, Lebanon and elsewhere. We are committing
the United Nations to a necessary and long-term task.
France supports this effort. It will assume its full
responsibilities for peace.

We have frequently spoken of the problem of
globalization. I myself referred this morning to this
problem and its tragic consequences of excluding a
growing number of men, women and children and
countries from the prosperity or from the dignity of
being able to live in today's world. This can only be
aggravated if we do not all together take the reins of
globalization, which must be controlled and
humanized.

The twentieth century was the century of regained
independence, and the twenty-first must be the century
of reaffirmed dignity, shared prosperity and secured
peace.

