Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Allow
me also to thank the Acting Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Nigel Fisher, for his briefing
to the Council and for his commitment at the head
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), whose significant work we commend.

Luxembourg associates itself with the statement to
be made by the observer of the European Union.

Over the three years since the tragic earthquake of
January 2010, Haitians have begun the long and difficult
reconstruction of their country with the support of
the international community and the United Nations.
Significant progress has been made. The number of
displaced persons living in camps has decreased by
77 per cent. Rebuilding has moved forward thanks
also to the activity of the MINUSTAH military
engineering units and the many quick-implementation
projects led by the Mission. Thanks to the combined
work of MINUSTAH and the Haitian National Police,
characterized by greater information-sharing and
an increased number of joint operations, the security
situation has stabilized. On the political front, the
President and the elected Government have been able
to take up their functions.

However, as the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/139) notes that, over the past six months, the
stabilization process has encountered many difficulties.
The country again suffered serious damage in the wake
of Hurricane Sandy. The socioeconomic situation
continues to be characterized by poverty, which
affects three-quarters of the population. The human
rights situation leaves much to be desired. Despite the
praiseworthy work of the MINUSTAH child protection
team, many forms of violence, including sexual
violence, have been perpetrated against children. We
also note with concern the reference in the Secretary-
General's report to the recruitment of children by armed
gangs in Cite Soleil.

Building the rule of law is moving forward with
difficulty. In that regard, the appearance of former
President Jean-Claude Duvalier before the Court
of Appeal in Port-au-Prince on 28 February was a
significant test. As the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ms. Navi Pillay, recalled, the State has the
obligation to ensure that there is no impunity for the
serious human rights violations perpetrated in the past.

The continuing differences between the executive
power and the opposition parliamentarians continue to
affect the country negatively. That structural paralysis
of the institutions is certainly one of the root causes
of the problems facing Haiti today. The holding of
elections, initially set for 2012, is essential in order
to move forward the necessary reforms. I can only
echo the Secretary-General, who urgently calls on the
Haitian authorities "to spare no effort in ensuring a free
and fair environment for the holding of credible and
inclusive elections as soon as possible". (S/2013/139, para. 61) Following the agreement of 24 December
2012, it is crucial to finalize the establishment of the
temporary Electoral Council so as to launch an electoral
process that has been too long in coming.

Luxembourg remains committed to helping Haiti
to overcome the challenges linked to the humanitarian
situation and the reconstruction of the country.
The commitments that we undertook in 2010 will
be honoured and we encourage the international
community to remain fully mobilized. Food security is
worsening. A high number of children under 5 continue
to suffer from malnutrition. The scourge of cholera
continues to claim victims and requires decisive action
as the rainy season approaches. In that regard, we
commend the initiative to eliminate cholera launched
by the Secretary-General on 11 December 2012. The
international community has the moral responsibility
to help the affected population.

In conclusion, I would like to affirm Luxembourg's
support for the conditions-based consolidation plan for
the stabilization of Haiti, which provides for focusing
MINUSTAH's efforts on a limited number ofcore tasks,
achievable in four areas within a reasonable time frame.
They are police training, electoral capacity-building,
the rule oflaw and human rights, and governance.

However, we would like to underscore, as indicated
in the plan, that such objectives can be achieved only by
Haitian officials being even more resolutely committed
to working for the good of the country and with a long-
term partnership between the international community
and Haiti. In that connection, we commend the
integrated strategic framework for 2013-2016, drawn
up by the United Nations and the Haitian Government.
We hope that it will soon lead to tangible developments.

