Mr. Lide'n (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro, Iceland, Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.

Let me first thank Austria for organizing this
debate, which marks the tenth anniversary of the
beginning of the Security Council's work on the
protection of civilians. Let me also commend the
Secretary-General for his statement today and for his
leadership on this important issue. The European
Union welcomes resolution 1894 (2009), just adopted,
in particular its emphasis on clarifying the role of
peacekeeping missions in the protection of civilians.

In the past 10 years, the protection of civilians in
armed conflict has assumed a prominent place on the
Council's agenda. This prominence has been manifest
in regular open debates and by increased inclusion of
the protection of civilians in country-specific
deliberations and decisions. However, the reality on the
ground has not kept pace, and lip service to principles
is no substitute for real action. The European Union
joins calls for much greater efforts to turn rhetoric into
reality.

The lack of compliance with international
humanitarian law and human rights law leads to the
death and injury of thousands of civilians every year
and to the displacement of many more. We must
enhance respect for these standards by all parties to
armed conflicts, with particular attention given to the
protection of civilians.

The Council needs to systematically promote
compliance with international law in situations on its
agenda, and also in situations not formally on its
agenda but with dramatic impact on the protection of
civilians. The Council should consider imposing
targeted and graduated measures against parties to
armed conflict that violate applicable international law.
Furthermore, we must enable relevant actors to engage
and seek compliance by all parties to conflict,
including non-State armed groups.

Regrettably, in many conflicts, impunity prevails
due to the lack of political will and action. The culture
of impunity in many conflicts allows violations to
continue to be committed. Violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law must have
consequences for the perpetrators. All measures,
including strengthened national legislation, should be
used to prevent violence and to bring perpetrators of
serious violations to justice.

The European Union calls for the ratification of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
and for full cooperation with the Court by all States.
We also welcome and support the steps to implement
the responsibility to protect set out in the Secretary-
General's report (A/63/677), the subsequent General
Assembly debate and its adoption of resolution 63/308.
The concept of responsibility to protect has to be
integrated into our overall normative framework.

Peacekeeping operations continue to make
significant contributions to the safety and security of
civilians. The Expert Group and the aide-memoire on
the protection of civilians have further contributed to
systematic and consistent attention to the issue in their
mandates. The challenge now is to maximize the
impact by addressing the gaps between mandates,
interpretations and implementation capacity.

Mission-specific protection strategies need to be
developed on a systematic basis. The capacity and
resources provided need to be genuinely appropriate to
the task of protecting civilians. The provision of
information and reports to the Council needs to be
enhanced, and missions on the ground need clear and
practical guidance on implementing protection
mandates. The European Union looks forward to
engaging with the Secretariat and Member States, in
particular the main troop- and police-contributing
countries, on the development of these operational
guidelines as part of the next steps in the New Horizon
process.

The European Union calls for the implementation
of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1612 (2005), 1820 (2008),
1889 (2009) and 1888 (2009), mandating peacekeeping
missions and all other relevant actors to take effective
measures to protect women and girls, as well as boys
and men, from sexual violence in armed conflict. We
look forward to the Secretary-General's appointment of
a special representative to lead concerted international
action against sexual violence.

Humanitarian actors carry out life-saving
protection activities in all complex emergencies.
However, as highlighted by the Secretary-General,
humanitarian access to populations affected by conflict
is too often unsafe and impeded. Millions of vulnerable
people are deprived of assistance and protection as a
result.

The most worrying constraint on access stems
from violence against humanitarian staff. There has
been an alarmingly sharp rise in attacks affecting
United Nations and other humanitarian actors this year.
United Nations humanitarian workers are for the first
time being targeted for political reasons. The European
Union strongly condemns all attacks against
humanitarian workers, including against locally
recruited personnel. These incidents will not disappear
without concerted action. It is critical to broaden the
understanding and acceptance of independent, neutral
and impartial humanitarian action.

The European Union joins the call by the
Secretary-General to seize the opportunity afforded by
this anniversary of the protection of civilians to turn
words into action. Let me reassure the Security Council
of the European Union's continued commitment to and
active engagement in enhancing the protection of
civilians.

