Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank the
President for having organizing this morning's meeting
on the peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict. I also
thank the speakers for their detailed briefings on the
topic.

Today, the world is ravaged by a multitude of
conflicts. Darfur, the Sudan, South Sudan, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Syrian crisis, to mention but a few, are
the best examples. Those conflicts have completely
undone social fabrics, which have become difficult to
reconstruct. Populations are traumatized and divided
by deep hatred that gives rise to war, which turns
sometimes into genocide. That is the case with Syria
and the Central African Republic, where large-scale
destruction have forced distraught populations to leave
to seek refuge in neighbouring countries. To put an end
to the spiral of violence, the United Nations, in its role
as guarantor of world peace, mobilizes massive human,
material and financial resources.

Conflict is a moment of tension with multiple
potential causes - the clash of opposing political,
economic and cultural interests or due to expansionary
ambitions. A conflict can be long-lasting and engulf
human lives and bring about human rights violations,
such as rape, the enlistment of children in the army,
population transfers and modifications of borders. War
is a source of underdevelopment because it generates
ignorance, hate and lack of trust, and is therefore a
useless waste of time and energy. It is clear that military
intervention can contribute to the settlement of certain
conflicts, but dialogue remains the simplest and least
costly of all methods.

Peacebuilding through dialogue is the way to
maintain lasting and viable peace, while development
assistance provides the tools for strengthening it.
Africa experiences many problems that dangerously
undermine its socioeconomic development. The extreme
poverty of its populations is a major source of conflict.
Countries such as the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, South Sudan
will not experience lasting peace in the short term after
an agreement is reached following national dialogue if
peacebuilding is not folled up with massive amounts of
development aid. To achieve that end, donor countries
must work out comprehensive national strategies for
better peacebuilding. They must define intervention
strategies for peacebuilding in those countries when the
need is felt and support national dialogue and provide
development assistance, inter alia.

Peacebuilding requires the mobilization of
various actors on the ground. In Africa, women are
peacebuilding actors. As women and children are the
primary victims of conflict, they need to be involved
in the search for peace, peacebuilding and peace
negotiations. Women are a positive force that is often
overlooked. Women of the African diaspora can play
a significant role in reconstruction and peacebuilding.
Examples throughout the world show that women
generally participate actively in seeking peace.

What makes peacebuilding difficult in the aftermath
of conflict is not only the absence of will on the part of
the parties in conflict to stop the violence, but also the
refusal ofparties involved in the settlement of conflicts
to address the underlying causes of conflicts.

My country, Chad, experienced several decades
of civil war from which it was able to escape thanks
to mediation and dialogue among the different
components of its society, where women are in the
majority. Peacebuilding became a reality thanks to the
mobilization of all parts of the nation. Today, the results
achieved are appreciated by the entire international
community, even if progress is still needed in some
areas. Women are significantly represented in State
institutions. Medical, anti-retroviral, obstetric and
surgical care are given cost-free, and a mother's and
children's hospital was built.

As for development, the structures for distributing
aid were implemented to help women to develop
income-generating revenues.

In conclusion, in Chad, like elsewhere,
peacebuilding requires robust support from the
international community as a whole, and in particular
the United Nations.

