Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by thanking Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Ms. Sima
Samar, Chair of the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission, as well as our colleague, Ambassador
Saikal, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan
for their briefings. I also thank Ambassador Kairat
Umarov, Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan, and
his entire team for the excellent work they have been
conducting at the helm of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) since January 2017.

The security situation in Afghanistan remains of
concern, with deadly terrorist attacks like that carried
out on 10 January in Kandahar, which killed 15 civilians,
including six diplomats of the United Arab Emirates,
and the attack carried out on 8 March i International
Women's Day - on a military hospital in Kabul,
claiming more than 40 victims. On behalf of my
delegation, I take this opportunity to strongly condemn
indiscriminate terrorist attacks that take the lives of
thousands of innocent people. That tragedy serves to
remind us that despite the progress made, in particular
to promote political dialogue and national cohesion, the
country still faces major political, security, economic
and humanitarian challenges.

At the political level, we welcome efforts towards
a rapprochement between the country's two leaders,
President Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah
Abdullah through constructive dialogue to improve
their working relationship. Similarly, progress made
in implementing the peace agreement between Hizb-
international Islami (Gulbuddin) and the Government,
as well as the launch of the electoral reform process
and the good management and smooth functioning
of upcoming elections, not to mention the Afghan
Government's efforts to combat drug trafficking with
new legislation, should be welcomed. Nonetheless, we
lament the lack ofprogress in the peace process between
the Government and the Taliban, as it continues to
have an adverse impact on the country's continually
deteriorating security situation, in particular in
provinces in the south, north and north-east of the
country where fighting persists. In an environment of
frequent terrorist attacks, we are reassured nonetheless
by the presence and efforts of international forces
fighting against terrorist groups, in particular the
Taliban and Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

The human rights and the humanitarian situations
remain of concern due to ongoing insecurity, as
reflected by the increase in the number of civilian
victims, including women and children who continue
to pay a high price. The return of refugees, in particular
from Pakistan, including more than 650,000 additional
internally displaced persons - a record number in
2016 - exacerbates a humanitarian situation that is
already of concern in an economic environment that
remains grim. The work of the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations that continue to meet
the needs of the needs of those people is remarkable.

Nonetheless, it is clear that Afghanistan requires
additional support and solidarity from the international
community. In that regard, the Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission that Ms. Samar so
courageously and ably chairs deserves special support.
With regard to regional cooperation, we welcome
the improvement of relations between the Afghan
Government and the Governments of neighbouring
countries, such as Pakistan, Uzbekistan, Iran, the
Russian Federation, the United Arab Emirates, in the
political, security and economic spheres.

In conclusion, once again, on behalf of the
Senegalese delegation, I would like to offer
congratulations and encouragement to the Afghan
Government on its commendable efforts to combat
corruption and impunity, as well as on its land tenure
legislation and commitment to promoting gender
equality and improving the status of women. I reiterate
Senegal's support for the Special Representative and
his team at the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan. Once again, Senegal calls upon the
international community to offer ongoing, multifaceted
support, as illustrated at the 2016 Brussels Conference,
and to remain committed to the stability and recovery
of the great country that is Afghanistan. My delegation
also supports the extension ofthe mandate ofthe Mission

by one year so that it can build on its achievements and
make further progress.

