Luxembourg thanks the Russian presidency of the Security Council for organizing this open debate on women and peace and security, as well as all the briefers, who have enriched the debate with their experience and expertise. This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the Security Council's adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. The resolution represents a key milestone in acknowledging women's meaningful and effective participation at all levels of peace and security processes as a prerequisite to achieving sustainable peace. The women and peace and security agenda is based on the understanding that there is a high correlation between gender inequality and the threat of conflict, as well as a strong link between individual safety and respect for women's human rights and international peace. While significant progress has been made in terms of gender equality over the past 20 years, the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic has exposed the fragility of those gains and the risk of a setback for women's rights. The Secretary-General's latest report (S/2020/946) highlights gaps in the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. It also underlines the need to ensure steady and ongoing funding for the commitments made. It is incumbent on all States to continue to provide political and financial support for women's human rights, gender equality and women's meaningful and effective participation at all levels so as to contribute to the successful implementation of the women and peace and security agenda, whether in the context of budget negations or Security Council mandates, within regional organizations or through their national policies. In that regard, Luxembourg fully endorses the statement submitted by the European Union (annex 38) and will assist in the implementation of the commitments that it has outlined. Luxembourg continues to actively implement its national action plan Women and Peace and Security 2018-2023 in conjunction with civil society. We also continue to fund projects and initiatives to address sexual and gender-based violence and to combat impunity, including through a policy of gender mainstreaming in our official development assistance, which represents | per cent of our gross national income. Luxembourg is among the top 20 contributors to UN-Women in real terms and supports the work of the United Nations Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences. Such commitments are part of the feminist foreign policy of the Luxembourg Government. The policy promotes women's human rights, be they political, economic and social rights or sexual and reproductive rights, as well as women's representation and participation at all levels. Gender equality is also one of the priorities that Luxembourg will seek to promote if elected to the United Nations Human Rights Council for the period from 2022 to 2024. Now more than ever, it is essential to redouble our efforts to advance the women and peace and security agenda at the national level and within multilateral institutions. The Security Council can count on Luxembourg's commitment and determination to do that.
