Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for his comprehensive briefing.
I also welcome the presence among us of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Mr. Carlos Holmes
Trujillo Garcia.

This meeting is being held one week after the
Council's visit to Colombia. I would like to thank the
Colombian authorities, as well as my Peruvian and
British colleagues, for the excellent organization of that
visit. The mission allowed us to witness the commitment
of the Colombian authorities at the highest level to the
peace process. It also demonstrated the importance
of involving all parties, including civil society and
the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun, to
ensure the sustainability of the process over time.

I would like to emphasize three points.

First, the increasing polarization of Colombian
society and the security situation continue to be
sources of concern. The outcome of the peace process
is extremely positive, but the uptick in violence and the
lack of confidence on the part of the population and civil
society are worrisome. France condemns the killings
of former combatants, social leaders, human rights
defenders, journalists and individuals involved in crop
substitution. Those are not isolated acts but recurring
phenomena. It is important that this movement of
political violence be combated in and of itself and that
impunity be ended.

In that regard, we welcome the Colombian
Government's initiatives, including those aimed at
protecting former combatants who choose the path of
reintegration. The implementation of the Action Plan
for the Protection of Social and Community Leaders,
Human Rights Defenders and Journalists, which was
established last year, and the recently announced pilot
projects are steps in the right direction. Those efforts
should be continued and strengthened, particularly in
the run-up to the local elections in October, in order
to ensure that Colombian democracy can flourish in a
climate of trust, calm and security.

Secondly, I would like to stress the importance of

the full implementation of the Final Agreement for the
Termination of Conflict and the Construction of a Stable
and Lasting Peace in all its aspects. The progress made
in recent months must be continued and expanded. In
particular, the entry into force of the statutory law of the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace is an important milestone
in the transitional justice process. Its implementation
presents many challenges, including with regard to
the retroactive application of certain provisions, but
respect for the commitments made by all parties must
prevail. It is important that Colombia continue to build
its capacity to strengthen the legitimacy, independence
and sustainability of the transitional justice system.
It is also important that women, who have too often
been victims of violence, be able to find justice. We
will remain vigilant on those subjects, because justice
cannot be separated from the objective of lasting peace
and national reconciliation.

The economic and social reintegration of former
combatants is the main key to the success of the peace
process. Long-term solutions must be found for former
combatants living in the territorial areas for training
and reintegration.

Another key element is the implementation of
measures on rural reform. The issue of access to land
cannot be separated from a sustainable economic
and social development policy. The continuation of
programmes illicit crop substitution programmes
is also important. Finally, the deployment of State
services to the areas that are most vulnerable to illegal
armed groups is essential for successful socioeconomic
reintegration throughout the country.

Thirdly, the support of the Council and, more
generally, the international community is indispensable.
Through the political courage and painful choices
that it has required on the part of all stakeholders, the
Colombian peace process is in many ways a source of
inspiration for all, and the Council in particular. In
that regard, we have a responsibility to support and
sustain the historic choice made in 2016 for forward-
looking national reconciliation. That collective
support, which is reflected in particular in the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia and the
United Nations country team, whose work I commend,
deserves to be continued, including in the light of the
forthcoming renewal of the Mission's mandate.

In my national capacity, I would also like to assure
the Colombian people of France's friendly support and
readiness to continue to stand by them, together with
our partners in the European Union, on the demanding
path of peace.

