Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
for his briefing. I would also like to welcome the
presence of the Minister for Foreign affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Vuk Jeremie, and that of Mrs. Vlora Citaku.
Mexico recognizes the important work carried out
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), the entities, fund and programmes
of the United Nations and the strategic partners.

We welcome the approval of the United Nations
Strategic Framework for Kosovo, as this instrument
will contribute to the planning and consistency of
international efforts aimed at reconstruction and
development in the region.

My delegation believes it extremely important
that the international community continue to support
the presence of UNMIK so that it is able to comply
with its mandate in accordance with resolution 1244
(1999). We call upon the parties to cooperate with
UNMIK and to avoid any actions that could affect the
presence of the Mission or endanger its personnel.

We welcome the cooperation between UNMIK
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX), the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Kosovo Force, the
international security force there. The cooperation
between UNMIK and EULEX is particularly important
for promoting the rule of law in Kosovo, particularly in
strengthening judicial and human rights institutions.

We note with concern the increase in acts of
inter-ethnic violence in the northern part of Kosovo,
particularly between young people, since the
International Court of Justice issued its advisory
opinion on 22 July with regard to the accordance with
international law of the unilateral declaration of
independence in respect of Kosovo.

My delegation would like to reaffirm the
importance of the Security Council reiterating to the
parties their obligation to respect international law and
to avoid any acts of provocation that could lead to an
increase of tension or exacerbate the differences
between the communities. It is important that we
maintain the positive momentum for dialogue following
the adoption, on 9 September, of resolution 64/298 by
the General Assembly.

We call for constructive dialogue that would lead
to peacebuilding, stability and reconciliation in Kosovo
while making use of the support and cooperation
provided by the European Union, in conformity with
the General Assembly resolution to which I have just
referred.
The delegation of Mexico believes it crucial to
increase the cooperation of UNMIK with Pristina and
Belgrade in matters relating to investigations into
missing persons, the reconstruction of religious and
cultural heritage sites and support to minority
communities in the provision of public and civil
services.

The United Nations team in Kosovo should
strengthen its cooperation with regional and local
organizations in order to undertake actions aimed at
promoting reconciliation, tolerance and solidarity
between communities, particularly children and young
people. It is alarming to see how vulnerable children
belonging to repatriated minority communities are.
They live in poverty and have high dropout rates from
school and insufficient access to health care services.
This is also true for children with special needs or
chronic illnesses. We call on the parties to promote
conditions that allow for the secure and voluntary
return, free from discrimination, of those who wish to
do so.

It is important to promote the strengthening of
programmes for reintegration and development, as well
as for the construction and rebuilding of housing.

We consider it important that UNMIK work
closely together with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, local institutions
and other humanitarian bodies on the ground in order
to achieve those objectives, particularly bearing in
mind the planned repatriation of thousands of families
from minority communities that are living in other
countries in Europe.

Finally, my delegation would like to stress the
need for the parties and countries in the region to
cooperate with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia in order to fight the impunity of
those responsible for serious crimes committed in the
past, thus promoting peace, justice and national
reconciliation.

