Mr. Li Yongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I wish to thank President Agius and
President Meron for their briefings on the work of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.

In the past six months, the ICTY continued to
make progress in its work, delivering judgments in the
Radovan Karadeie and Vojislav Seselj cases. It also
delivered a final judgment in the case Prosecutor v.
Jovica Stanisie and Franko Simatovie. The Appeals
Chamber delivered the final judgment in the appeal of
the Nyiramasuhuko et al. case ("Butare" case). China
appreciates the above work and hopes that, under
the leadership of President Agius, the Tribunal will
continue to improve efficiency and accelerate its work
with a View to completing its work by the end of 2017.

Pursuant to resolution 2256 (2015), the Office
of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) conducted
an evaluation on the methods and work of the ICTY
completion process and provided a number of valuable
recommendations. China thanks OIOS for its work and
believes that, based on its report (S/2016/44l) and the
aim of accommodating the specifics of the Tribunal, it
is imperative that the ICTY take measures to improve
its work based on the report's recommendations. China
hopes that any progress achieved in that regard will be
reflected in the Tribunal's next report.

With respect to the issues that have arisen in the
context of the specific cooperation between the ICTY
and Serbia, it is China's hope that the two sides will
continue consultations with a View to resolving those
issues.

China has noted the various activities, including
judicial activities, carried out by the Residual
Mechanism in the reporting period and Views
positively the measures undertaken by the Mechanism,
including the "one-office" approach and double-batting
arrangements. It is hoped that the Mechanism will
draw on best practices and lessons learned of other
international tribunals, including the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the ICTY to continue
improving efficiency and reducing costs, so as to live
up to the Council's expectation for the Mechanism to be
small, temporary and efficient.

The ICTY and the Residual Mechanism
represent an important effort on the part of the
international community in the fight against impunity,
demonstrating its firm determination to support rule
of law at the international level. China will continue
to support the two institutions in the hope that they
will further strengthen and improve their work with a
View to meeting the expectations of the international
community.

In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity
to thank Uruguay, as Chair of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, and the Office of
Legal Affairs for their work.

