Mr. Pleuger (Germany): My delegation fully
supports the position of the European Union, as
presented yesterday by the Greek Presidency.

The Security Council comes together in difficult
times. The war in Iraq is a tragedy for those affected
and for all of us. While we speak, men, women and
children, civilians and soldiers alike, are suffering from
its tragic consequences. The Security Council cannot
remain silent in this situation.

We deeply regret that our intensive efforts to
achieve a peaceful solution through this Council did
not succeed. I think that Germany and other members
of the Security Council made constructive proposals
that were conducive to reaching our common goal -
the peaceful disarmament of Iraq.

But now we have to face the reality of war.
However, as Foreign Minister Fischer highlighted
recently, this is not the time for accusations or
apportioning blame. Our focus should now be on the
future and on the immediate challenges for the
international community.

The foremost and most important challenge is, of
course, bringing this war to an end as soon as possible.
But while it continues, we call upon all parties to the
conflict to assume their responsibilities under
international humanitarian law, especially the Geneva
conventions. Prisoners of war in particular have to be
treated in compliance with it.

We are deeply concerned about the plight of the
Iraqi people and the imminent threat of a humanitarian
disaster. Even before the war, the Iraqi people
depended to a very large extent on the oil for food
programme, which is now suspended. As the Secretary-
General pointed out yesterday, the primary
responsibility for meeting their needs now falls on the
belligerents who control the territory. However, the
international community and the humanitarian agencies
of the United Nations, for their part, must do
everything possible to avert a humanitarian disaster.
Germany stands ready to contribute in this regard.
Furthermore, as we now hold the presidency of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 661
(1990), we are actively involved in the ongoing efforts
to adapt the oil for food programme to the new
situation.

We have heard from the Secretary-General that,
before the war, 80 per cent of the food basket in Iraq
came from the oil for food programme. Sixty per cent
of the population depends on that programme 100 per
cent, and other people are also dependent on it.
Therefore we must make sure that the necessary
adaptations are made in order to get the programme,
which has been stopped, going again as soon as the
situation on the ground allows it. We hope that the
Council will regain its unity of purpose by adopting a
resolution on this issue as quickly as possible. I will
introduce a draft resolution shortly that I hope will find
unanimous support in the Council.

Germany is convinced that the United Nations
and the Security Council must continue to play the
central role in the resolution of the Iraq crisis. We fully
concur with the Secretary-General that the two guiding
principles on which this resolution must be based are,
first, respect for its sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence, and, secondly, the right of the Iraqi
people to overcome their isolation, determine their own
future and use their natural resources to their own
benefit. For its part, Germany will actively contribute
to the future work of the Security Council on this
matter. In the light of numerous international crises and
challenges, we see a need to restore the unity of the
international community and of the Security Council.

The United Nations, in our view, is the key
institution for the preservation of peace and stability
and for the peaceful reconciliation of interests in the
world of today and tomorrow. The war in Iraq cannot
call into question the foundations of the rules-based
system of collective security provided for by the
Charter of the United Nations. The Security Council
bears, and will continue to bear, primary responsibility
for world peace and international security. There is no

substitute for the Council's function as a guardian of
peace.

