The Secretary-General: I am happy that you are
here, Mr. President, and that so many Foreign Ministers
are also here in this Chamber to mark this solemn
occasion with us.

September eleventh is one of those cataclysmic
events - like the assassination of John F. Kennedy -
that will stay forever fresh and Vivid in our memory.
No matter how long each of us lives, we will remember
where we were and what we were doing when we heard
the news. Recalling that terrible, dark day, I wish to
start by expressing my profound sympathy with the
people ofthe United States, who suffered so grievously
as a result ofthat terrible atrocity.

I express my deepest condolences to the families
ofthe thousands of men and women from more than 90
countries who were murdered that day and whose own
lives have changed utterly. Together, they represented a
United Nations of world citizens, coming together in
one city to seek a better future for themselves and for
their families. Their deaths diminish all mankind, and
all mankind must come together to restore the sanctity
of the values we hold dear - tolerance, pluralism,
peace and respect for every human life.

The United Nations was founded to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war, and
today the nations are united to defend humanity from a
new kind of warfare. We are all called upon to defeat
an enemy that makes no distinction between the weak
and the strong, the high or the low - an enemy who sees
as a target the entire edifice of international
cooperation to which the United Nations is dedicated.

No body has a more central role to play in
meeting this challenge than the Security Council. Over
the last year, it has fulfilled this role with patience,
creativity and determination, showing by its actions
how essential it is to defeat terrorism by building the
broadest possible international coalition.

On the very day after the attacks, the General
Assembly and the Security Council adopted strong
resolutions condemning them and calling on all States
to cooperate in bringing the perpetrators to justice.
Subsequently, the Security Council adopted
unanimously a far-reaching resolution aimed at
targeting terrorists and those who harbour, aid or
support them. Under that resolution, Member States are
cooperating in a wide range of areas - from
suppressing the financing of terrorism to providing
early warning, cooperating in criminal investigations
and exchanging information.

The past year has also given us hope that
terrorism can be defeated if the international
community summons the will to unite in a broad
coalition. As the work of the Council has shown, the
United Nations remains uniquely positioned to serve as
the forum for that coalition, and for the development of
those steps that Governments must now take -
separately and together - to combat terrorism on a
global scale.

The legitimacy that the United Nations conveys
can ensure that the greatest number of States are able
and willing to take the necessary and difficult steps -
diplomatic, legal and political - that are needed to
defeat terrorism. Today, one year after the attacks, the
importance of global legitimacy in the fight against
terrorism has only grown. I call on the Council to strive
even harder to ensure that the struggle ahead wins the
widest possible support.

All humanity has a stake in this fight. The United
Nations must ensure that it is fought in unison and won
in a legitimate way.

