Mr. Zuain (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I would
first of all like to thank the Foreign Minister of Iraq,
Mr. Ibrahim Al-Jaafari, who is with us here today,
for his statement, and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing.
I also wish to extend my appreciation to the presidency
for organizing this debate, which is certainly important
and timely.

We are concerned about the serious security
and humanitarian situation in Iraq, which has in
recent months drastically deteriorated as the terrorist
organization Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
has gained ground. The transnational nature of that
terrorist organization is not only a threat to Iraq, but
it is also a threat to the stability of the region and the
international community as a whole.

This is a welcome opportunity to express our
solidarity with the Government and the people of Iraq,
with people who have been victims of attacks and
their families, and with the huge number of people
who have been driven from their homes and who have
had to flee and seek refuge from the territorial gains
and terrorist persecution. We must take advantage
of today's meeting to reflect on the problems in Iraq
and fundamentally discuss what should be the scope
but also the limits of the effective contribution of the
international community so that the Iraqis themselves
can successfully overcome the difficult circumstances
in which they find themselves. We are convinced that a
perspective that seeks to understand the origins of the
current crisis will allow us to make out the elements of
a collective response that is coherent in its formulation
and effective in its implementation.

From that point of view, without double standards
and based on the principles governing the foreign
policy of my country, I would like to make the
following comments. First, ISIL is a terrorist and
criminal organization. It uses military force, extreme
violence and intimidation to impose terror, attacking
and persecuting individuals and ethnic and religious
minorities. It is also true that it is exploiting sectarian
tensions and frustration which already existed in large
sectors of the Iraqi population and which were never
included in the political system after the fall of the
Baathist regime over a decade ago.

We therefore welcome the recent formation of an
inclusive Government within the terms set forth in the
Constitution. That was a key step, and it offers a new
opportunity for conditions to be created that would
allow Iraq to successfully meet the challenges that lie
ahead. We congratulate Prime Minister Al-Abadi and
offer our full support as he is striving to address the
difficult but essential task of satisfying demands that
have been postponed and rebuilding trust among all
Iraqi communities.

Secondly, there is no doubt that ISIL is a threat to
the security of the region and to international security,
which requires a firm response from the Security
Council. Any coalition that is formed to fight ISIS must
frame its actions in accordance of international law
and uphold the highest standards for the protection of
civilians. ISIL, which finds its origins in the turbulent
years that followed the invasion suffered by the country
in 2003, must not be the pretext for unilateral actions,
which have shown that they generate more problems
than they solved.

Resolution 2170 (2014), adopted by the Council last
month, provides clear criteria and parameters for action
by the international community in its fight against
terrorism. It reaffirms the obligation of all States
to take steps to cut off funding sources, prevent the
movement of fighters and stop the supply of weapons
used by terrorist organizations. That strong expression
of the will of the Council must be applied quickly and
without exceptions.

Thirdly, and due to its deep interconnection, the
crisis that has endangered the territorial integrity of
Iraq is a new and powerful call for attention to the need
to find a solution to the tragedy that is destroying Syria.
Just as in Iraq, where the formation of a new inclusive
Government has been a vital part of the strategy to
stop the spread of extremism, so it is in Syria, where
finding a political solution to the conflict should be at
the core of the international community's priorities.
Also with respect to Syria, we must find a peaceful
solution and renew our efforts, particularly in support
of new Special Envoy De Mistura. We must show
determination to find a way out of this situation and
work with the parties, with the aim of making them to
sit down at the negotiating table.
Fourthly, we recognize the role of the United
Nations in coordinating the vigorous response of the
international community to assist the Government
of Iraq to meet the humanitarian needs of millions
of Iraqis who have been displaced and affected by
violence, especially the most vulnerable sectors. We
are convinced that lasting peace and security in and
the stability of Iraq are inseparable from sustainable
social and economic development. The United Nations,
through the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq,
should continue to play a central role to promote and
channel cooperation of the international community in
order to address the root causes of sectarian divisions,
exclusion and poverty.

Finally, the scale and nature of the crimes
committed by ISIL and associated armed groups that
abuse human rights of innocent citizens cannot go
unpunished. Therefore, the Council must take all
necessary measures and make every possible effort
within the framework of international law to protect
members of ethnic and religious communities that
are particularly vulnerable, including the Christian
minority. It is essential to ensure that the perpetrators
of these heinous crimes accountable for their actions
before the national and international criminal justice,
for without justice there will be no lasting peace.

Iraq is a great nation, immensely rich in history
and in human and natural resources. Learning from the
lessons of past experience, it is up to the international
community to provide all possible assistance so that
the Iraqis themselves can make decisions on the path to
follow, overcome this difficult period and develop their
full potential. Argentina is ready to continue to support
the Iraqi Government while it is building a better future
for all its inhabitants.

