Mr. Captan (Liberia): Let me congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. Liberia
expresses its appreciation for your foresight in
confronting this body with the critical issues of the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and the
phenomenon of mercenaries - threats to peace and
security in West Africa.

The problem of the proliferation of small arms in
West Africa has claimed the attention of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) for
some time now, and as a result of the seriousness
attached to this problem, the Community adopted a
protocol establishing a Moratorium on the importation
of small arms into West Africa. This initiative was
spearheaded by Mali and was supported by many
international partners, in particular the United Nations.
The success of this initiative relies heavily on the
cooperation of arms-producing States, as arms continue
to enter the subregion and conflicts continue to persist.

The problem of mercenaries has also claimed the
attention of ECOWAS. A proposal by Liberia at the
meeting of Foreign Ministers of ECOWAS in
December 2002 in Dakar was adopted. Under its
provisions, ECOWAS would convene a special meeting
on the subject to explore ways and means to address
this problem. The proliferation of mercenaries in West
Africa was in part induced as a result of the
unsuccessful reintegration programmes for ex-
combatants that failed because the international
community did not provide adequate resources for
these programmes. This resulted in a large population
of idle ex-combatants in an economically stagnant
region where ex-combatants' only means of earning a
living was to sell their skills as armed fighters for
money and loot.

The proliferation of arms and mercenaries are
linked in that mercenaries can only operate where there
are continuous military supplies. In many instances,
mercenaries join rebel movements and are ensured
military supplies by State actors who use non-State
actors as proxies in regional conflicts. The proliferation
of mercenaries is of particular concern because
mercenaries in West Africa are more often ex-
combatants from regional conflicts who are recycled
into conflicts and sustain conflict and instability in the
region. Mercenaries survive in environments where
non-State actors are actively engaged in armed
conflicts. We have witnessed this situation in Liberia,
Sierra Leone and now Cote d'Ivoire. A case in point is
the ongoing war in Liberia, where the rebels of the
Liberians United Reconciliation and Democracy
(LURD), fighting to overthrow the democratically
elected Government of Liberia, comprise ex-
combatants from the defunct warring factions in
Liberia, the Sierra Leonean Kamajors and Guinean
nationals. This rebel group of mixed nationals is now
engaged in fighting on all sides of the Ivorian conflict.

In addressing the proliferation of arms and
mercenaries, the international community must focus
on the source of the arms supply to these non-State
actors. Failure to do so will lead to the maintenance of
a large number of mercenaries in West Africa who
could surface in any part of West Africa and beyond,
causing further instability and creating a major
humanitarian crisis, resulting in an increase in already-
alarming levels of refugees and internally displaced
persons within the subregion.

The recent arrest and disarming by French forces
in Cote d'Ivoire of more than 100 Liberian mercenaries
fighting for the Ivorian Government is an indication of
the seriousness of this problem. Those Liberians are a
part of the rebel group Liberians United for
Reconciliation and Democracy (LURD), which went to
fight for the Ivorian Government in order to gain
access to and open a second front in eastern Liberia,
along the Liberian-Ivorian border. A second front was
established with an incursion into Toe Town, Grand
Gedeh County, from Cote d'Ivoire by Liberian
mercenaries. Such a development has the potential to
create a new security crisis between the two
neighbouring States.

In another recent development, the Government
of Ghana raided a Liberian refugee camp in Ghana,
where a recruitment centre and a military training camp
were discovered. Ex-combatants seek refuge and safety
in refugee camps, where they actively carry out
recruitment.

For the past three years, the Liberian Government
has been engaged in a war to defend its territorial
integrity against armed aggression by LURD and its
mercenaries from neighbouring countries. ECOWAS,
in its attempt to curtail such illegal activities, imposed
a sanctions regime on LURD. However, this pressure
on the part of ECOWAS has not received much support
from the international community, which has done little
to show its disapproval for this armed insurgency.

The Security Council mandated a panel of experts
to investigate the flow of arms supplies to rebel
groups - LURD - in Liberia, in violation of the arms
embargo. The panel reported to the Council that the
rebels had direct links to the President of neighbouring
Guinea and that materiel was reaching the rebels from
the territory of Guinea. The panel then recommended
that the Council expand its arms embargo on Liberia to
the other two members of the Mano River Union. That
crucial recommendation was selectively ignored by the
Council.

Today, LURD rebels continue to wage war
against the Liberian people with a robust and sustained
supply of materiel. Last month, the Government of
Liberia presented a formal complaint to the Security
Council - in keeping with Article 35, paragraph 1 of
the Charter of the United Nations - in which Guinea's
involvement in fuelling the war in Liberia was
documented. These Guinean-backed rebels have now
surfaced in Cote d'Ivoire and have recently taken
control of Liberian territory adjacent to Sierra Leone
along the western border of Liberia.

Sustainable peace in West Africa will require an
end to such support for rebel movements and their
mercenaries. Sustainable peace will also require the
provision of adequate resources for the reconstruction
of economic infrastructure in West Africa and for the
reintegration of ex-combatants, the resettlement of
internally displaced persons, the repatriation of
refugees, job creation and the promotion of an enabling
environment for good governance, the rule of law,
respect for human rights and democracy.

When the objective of regime change is promoted
through the expediency of violence and the use of
force, acceptance of the consequences of the
proliferation of small arms and the use of mercenaries
becomes an integral aspect of international attitudes.
Such attitudes then become the source of immeasurable
human suffering and of a degradation of the humanity
of hundreds of thousands of West Africans, with an
accompanying Charade of humanitarian responses. A
change in international attitudes will go a long way
towards bringing an end to human suffering, especially
with regard to political expediency and moral
justification for the use of violence.

Today, those subjects are at the core of the fact of
underdevelopment in our region - especially in the
Mano River subregion, where poverty is so entrenched
and has a dehumanizing effect on its peoples. The
tragedy is even more profound in view of the fact that
the subregion and the region as a whole are rich in
resources. Poverty, hunger and disease are endemic to
our people, while our resources assuage the greed of
countries and of people who already have much.

Through the expropriation of our resources, we
are supplied with swords and instruments created for
our self-immolation. The region has become a Petri
dish for those who manufacture small arms and light
weapons in an experiment on how to degrade nations
and people. The best and most conducive conditions
for the creation of mercenaries are an absence of good
schools, continuous cultural disruptions, economic
deprivation and a lack of economic empowerment.
Young men between the ages of 12 and 19 who are
deprived of the basic sustenance of family life and of
the hope of surviving beyond the age of 28 are apt to
embrace mercenarism as a way of life, and many
countries are prepared to provide them with the
implements of their trade.

