Mr. Neritani (Albania): Let me begin by
welcoming the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Joachim Rucker. During this
challenging phase of transition - a crucial moment for
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) - his proven commitment and
abilities are a good guarantor and indicator that the
successful and resolute work of his predecessor will
continue. The Albanian Government will continue to
support his efforts in pursuing the goal of a democratic
and multi-ethnic Kosovo.

I would like to take this opportunity to extend our
deepest gratitude to the former Special Representative,
Mr. Saren Jessen-Petersen. Our appreciation also goes
to UNMIK, KFOR, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the European Union (EU)
for their continuing dedication and commitment to
Kosovo. We welcome the EU's invaluable efforts and
recent activities on the ground, which will assist in a
coherent transition.
I would also like to recognize the presence of
Prime Minister Ceku here today and to warmly
welcome him to this meeting. We congratulate him for
his continuing leadership and the achievements that
have been noted during the period covered by the
report. We are convinced that, under Mr. Ceku's
leadership, the Government will continue to provide
effective governance to build a viable, multi-ethnic and
prosperous Kosovo for all its citizens.

I would also like to welcome the presence of
Ms. Raskovic-Ivic, representative of the Serbian
delegation.

I thank the Secretary-General for his most recent
report (S/2006/707) and express my delegation's
appreciation for that realistic and substantive
document. We share his overall assessment that further
progress with significant achievements continues to be
the current trend in Kosovo. As the Secretary-General
underlined in paragraph 12 of the report,

"The ongoing political process has had a
noteworthy effect on the commitment of the
Kosovo authorities to standards implementation,
and its results. The Provisional Institutions have
also shown a greater willingness to take
responsibility for both minority concerns and for
improved governance".

It must be emphasized that the security situation
has remained stable and has not been adversely
affected by the ongoing future status process. We note
with satisfaction that progress on standards
implementation has continued during the reporting
period and that to date, as a result of the Government's
priorities and commitment, a good number of priority
standards have been reported as completed, while the
remaining ones are on the right track for completion
within the specified time frame.

The recent adoption of the European Partnership
Action Plan by the Kosovo Government marks a new
phase. It incorporates the standards as requirements for
Kosovo's long-term European perspective. It reflects
the Government's clear vision of this perspective for
Kosovo and its commitment to ensuring that effective
standards implementation remains a high-priority goal
and an important responsibility during and beyond the
final status. We join in the Secretary-General's call,
and we are convinced that Prime Minister Ceku's
Government will sustain the positive momentum that it
has created. Standards implementation, especially the
remaining Contact Group priorities, is crucial in order
to ensure both a multi-ethnic Kosovo and a better
future for all of its citizens.

It is commonly understood and widely accepted
that the main goal remains the building of a multi-
ethnic Kosovo. It is equally essential that Kosovo
Serbs participate fully in the institutions and in public
life as the best - indeed, the only viable - way of
expressing and promoting their legitimate concerns.

The Belgrade authorities should respond to the
coherent policies of the international community by
removing all impediments to Kosovo Serb participation
in the Kosovo institutions. As paragraph 31 of the
report correctly underlined, "Lack of participation is a
disservice to the Kosovo Serb population" and, as
stated in paragraph 9, "remains an obstacle to the
fulfilment of certain standards".

At the same time, we appeal to the Kosovo
Albanians to redouble their efforts in respect of
freedom and the rights of minorities and to increase
their outreach to all communities. We hold the View
that both Albanians and Serbs in Kosovo should leave
the past behind, engage in reconciliation, strengthen
their cooperation and look forward towards their
common future.

The Albanian Government continues to support
dialogue between the representatives of Albanians and
Serbs, and calls upon both sides to take a realistic
approach. We are pleased with the ongoing bilateral
talks in Vienna on issues relating to future status and
other critical issues, including decentralization, the
rights of minorities and religious and cultural heritage.
We encourage both sides to continue this dialogue and
to engage seriously and constructively with
Mr. Ahtisaari and his team.

The political process to determine Kosovo's final
status is continuing, and is now approaching its final
stage. At this very critical juncture, international
community coherence on this matter is very significant
and indispensable. Albania will continue to play an
active role and to take a constructive approach. We
continue to hold the view that the status process should
proceed steadily and swiftly, with a decisive solution
by the end of 2006. As the guiding principles clearly
state, once it has started, the process cannot be
blocked. Further delay would prolong the instability
and uncertainty and would not serve Kosovo, Serbia, or
the surrounding region.
We continue to share in the international support
for Mr. Ahtisaari and his team. We reiterate our strong
support for the Contact Group guiding principles that
there should be no changes of borders, no partition of
Kosovo and no union with any other country or part of
any other country. We support a realistic solution, fully
grounded in today's reality of this sui generis case - a
stable and multi-ethnic solution, one which will respect
the overwhelming and clear will of the people of
Kosovo and be acceptable to them. Such an outcome
should contribute to strengthening the stability and
security of Kosovo and the region as a whole, and be in
tune with the spirit and the trends of regional
cooperation.

We stress our strong conviction that the most
realistic, pragmatic and just solution of the status issue
would be independence, with the civil and security
presence of the international community continuing for
a certain period of time. By that, we mean an
independence that ensures the promotion and
protection of the rights and cultural and religious
heritage of Serbs and all other minorities; an
independence that brings about a society in which all
people in Kosovo can live in dignity and prosperity and
without fear. We are encouraged that the Kosovo
leadership, civil society, the media, the relevant
institutions and the broader community are
demonstrating political and social cohesion, growing
unity and cooperation with the international
community with a view to building such a democratic
and multi-ethnic Kosovo, integrated into the Euro-
Atlantic structures.

We are confident that independence will generate
and guarantee social and economic stability and
security for Kosovo and the whole region, help
establish a sustainable, multi-ethnic and democratic
society there and pave the way for fulfilment of
Kosovo's European perspective. Albania shares the
broader view that an international military and civilian
presence in Kosovo, even after the determination of
status, is going to be essential for the success of all
those endeavours.

In conclusion, let me reassure the Council that
the Albanian Government will continue to offer its
constructive approach by actively playing a helpful,
moderating role in the region and specifically on this
particular matter. The international community and the
negotiating team of Mr. Ahtisaari will continue to have
a reliable partner in Albania throughout the upcoming
process and beyond.

