Mr. Esaw (Togo) (spoke in French): Madam
President, I wish to thank your country for having
convened this high-level debate on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region
and to welcome the presence of the Secretary of State
to preside over it. I welcome also the presence of the
Secretary-General. I thank him for his ongoing efforts
in the quest for a lasting solution to the conflict in the
region and congratulate him on his statement. Finally,
I should like to welcome the participation in this
meeting of the President of the World Bank, high-level
representatives of the African Union, Ministers from
the Great Lakes region and all other Ministers present.

The holding of this debate is tangible proof of the
significance attached by the Council collectively and
other Member States individually to the resolution of
the recurring conflicts in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. In that regard, I welcome the appointment
on 18 June last of Mr. Russ Feingold as Special
Representative of the United States of America to the
Great Lakes Region of Africa.

I begin my remarks on a note of optimism by
echoing the joint statement made by the Secretary-
General of the United Nations and the President of the
World Bank on the theme "Peace within reach", on the
eve of a joint tour in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in other countries of the region.

Togo shares that optimism, because after more
than a decade of suffering, the peoples of the Great
Lakes region deserve to finally see peace restored.
That is why my country wishes to express its gratitude
to the Heads of State of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, the Southern African
Development Community and the African Union, as
well as the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and the Council for their joint determined efforts to
put an end to the massive violations of human rights
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, especially sexual violence and rape, which have
become weapons of war.

I wish most particularly to welcome the Framework
agreement, signed on 24 February 2013 with the support
of the United Nations, through which the 11 Heads of
State of the region have undertaken to act together
to meet common challenges in the areas of security,
governance and socioeconomic development.

It is also important that all signatories to the
agreement make a good-faith effort to implement the
provisions of that important agreement. It goes without
saying that the countries concerned must play a key role
in ensuring the success of this new peace architecture,
which is being built slowly but surely. We congratulate
the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for the actions already undertaken in this direction, as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of that country just
explained.

However, efforts must continue, especially in the
areas of security sector reform and the protection of
civilians, especially women and children, to arrest the
perpetrators and masterminds of crimes, regardless of
who they might be, thereby putting an end to the reign
of impunity.

Moreover, Togo welcomes once again the adoption
by the Council of resolution 2098 (2013), which
authorizes the deployment of the Intervention Brigade,
charged with fighting the armed groups active in
the east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Increased support for the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo should enable that special unit to achieve its
goals.

We commend the remarkable progress achieved
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However,
we must condemn the actions of the Mouvement du
23 mars, which led to the ongoing clashes between the
rebels and the Congolese army.

If the peace process is to be continued without
impediment, it is also important that the armed forces
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Rwandan Defence Forces work together to neutralize
the Forces Democratiques de Liberation du Rwanda,
which are promoting insecurity on the Rwandan-
Congolese border and damaging the good relations
between the two countries.

Over and above domestic and external political
factors, hunger and poverty are the accelerators of
the dynamic of violence. It is hunger and poverty that
recruit idle and desperate young people into armed
groups. Togo therefore welcomes the international
community's inclusion of the development and regional
economic integration parameter into the comprehensive
conflict resolution strategy in the region. In that regard,
the World Bank deserves our gratitude for having
shown the way forward.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Great Lakes region can, like other African countries,
recover from conflict and progress towards the
Millennium Development Goals. Their populations
deserve to be given this opportunity through the
support of the international community.

