Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would to
commend you, Sir, and the delegation of Poland for
having organized this important debate in the Security
Council focused on peace in the Middle East. I would
also like to join others in welcoming His Excellency
Mr. Mike Pompeo, Secretary of State of the United
States, as well as His Excellency Mr. Andreas
Michaelis, State Secretary of the Federal Foreign
Office of Germany. I should also like to thank Chef de
Cabinet, my old friend Her Excellency Ms. Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, for her briefing, which provided insights
into what is happening in the Middle East. Allow me to
make the following points.

First, multilateralism should be our guiding
principle to bring about lasting peace and security in
the region. Any effort that deviate from or, worse, run
counter to, this path would only complicate our joint
attempt to arrive at a lasting solution. We therefore
need to reinvigorate the spirit of multilateralism,
based on the rule of law and the Charter of the United
Nations. All parties, including those trying to mediate
conflicts, must ensure respect for international law and
the principle of multilateralism. That is neither favour
to anyone, nor disfavour to others. For Indonesia, this
is central because, no matter how grand any proposal,
everything will be in vain unless guided by commitment
to multilateralism and international law.

Secondly, let me turn to the importance of investing
for peace in the region. Peace is not something we can
take for granted; it is something in which we have to
invest. Our concept of peace goes beyond the absence
of war. Community empowerment, development,
education, human rights and democracy, as well as
addressing the threat of terrorism, should be part and
parcel of the picture. It should also address the massive
humanitarian problems facing millions of refugees and
internally displaced persons, who are in need ofprompt
and adequate attention. Saving human lives should be
the focus of our action in the Security Council. I am glad
that we agreed on and adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2019/8) on international humanitarian law
under your presidency, Sir.

Investing in peace also means strengthening the
capacities of affected communities to cope with their
situation. In the context of the Security Council,
investing for peace in the region should also be
displayed through our collective actions in addressing
the various root causes of the challenges facing the
region. But that can be achieved only if members of
the Council are willing to put aside their differences,
or at least to narrow the gap of disagreement. Indonesia
will continue to be actively involved in the endeavour
of bridging gaps and finding solutions.

Thirdly, the Palestinian question at the heart of the
problem. Despite the plethora of conflicts in the Middle
East, let us not forget that the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is the core issue that intertwines them all, with
implications for other issues beyond the region. While
we might for years have had responses to the situations
in such places as Yemen, Libya, Syria, Iraq and
Lebanon, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has immense
ramifications for the cycles of violence and mistrust
in those other scenarios. It is a long-term conflict that
generates long-term instability. To that end, Indonesia
reiterates that we must go back to the root causes of the
spaghetti-web ofissues.

For us, an ecosystem of peace, stability and
prosperity in the region remains almost unthinkable
or unattainable until Palestinians have gained their
right to independence, based on the pre-1967 lines. Our
position on this issue is very clear and has been voiced
on many occasions before the Security Council.

In conclusion, I should like to recall that the
violence and atrocious humanitarian conditions in
those conflict areas come down to the ability and
willingness of the Security Council to function. This
is our political challenge and moral obligation. Let
us avoid the temptation to ignore the blood of other
people's children. Let us avoid being characterized
as an institution willing only to issue proclamations,
presidential statements and resolutions just because
they are convenient.

The challenge of achieving peace everywhere on
Earth is in our hands. That holds particularly true for
places such as the Middle East, where conflicts often
lead to greater bloodshed and mutate into further
conflict. The more we delay taking action to find peace
in the Middle East, the more complex, fragile and
dangerous the situation will be. We will sink into the
quicksand of conflict only to find ourselves, one day,
with no more air to breathe.

