Mr. Salam (Lebanon): I would like to thank
Argentina for organizing this timely meeting, and the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing as
well as his efforts to address the situation in the Middle
East.

Three months ago, Israel launched its third major
campaign ofcollective punishment against the 1,800,000
people of Gaza in less than six years. In July and August
Israel's air force launched more than 6,000 attacks,
and its army and navy fired about 50,000 artillery and
tank shells, killing more than 2,100 Palestinians and
wounding more than 11,000. The majority of those
casualties were, as we all know, defenceless civilians,
and it is estimated that more than half of them were
children, women, the disabled and old people. More
than 450,000 inhabitants of Gaza were forced to leave
their homes, and 277 schools, 17 hospitals and clinics
and more than 40,000 other buildings were damaged.

All those who stood against the savage Israeli assault
on Gaza and its dreadful methods of indiscriminate
killing and wanton destruction of homes and property
deserve to be commended. I should also add that it was
particularly heartening to see an open letter published
on 23 August in The New York Times in which 327
signatories from 26 countries, representing four
generations of survivors and descendants of survivors
and victims of the Holocaust, stated:

"As Jewish survivors and descendants of survivors
and victims of the Nazi genocide we unequivocally
condemn the massacre of Palestinians in Gaza and
the ongoing occupation and colonization of historic
Palestine. Nothing can justify bombing United
Nations shelters, homes, hospitals and universities.
Nothing can justify depriving people of electricity
and water."

Realizing the enormity of the destruction, the
international community pledged $5.4 billion at a Cairo
Conference for the reconstruction of Gaza, and that
generosity is indeed to be commended as well. No less
important, however, is the fact that all participants in
the Conference stressed the unavoidable importance
of addressing the root causes of the conflict. The
Secretary-General summed it up by saying that it was
time to chart a course to ajust and final peace between
Israelis and Palestinians, one that addresses all the
outstanding issues.

More than 20 years ago, more than 20 years after
the Oslo Accords and two years after United States
Secretary of State John Kerry's renewed efforts to
relaunch the peace talks, it is heart-wrenching to witness
not only the drastic humanitarian situation in Gaza but
how this body, which is entrusted with the maintenance
of international peace and security, can still stand idle
before the continued and repeated violations by Israel
of its obligations under international law, from the
rampant illegal settlement activities and evictions of
Palestinians from their homes to the provocations and
incitement by Israeli soldiers and settlers, in particular
at Al-Haram Al-Sharif in occupied East Jerusalem. Let
the lessons of Gaza spark a new beginning for the peace
process, to bring a clear end to the Israeli occupation,
help the State of Palestine achieve full independence
and meanwhile ensure that its people have international
protection. In that context, we applaud the decision by
the Government of Sweden to recognize the State of
Palestine, as well as the motion of the Parliament of the
United Kingdom to that effect.

Time and again, my Government has reiterated its
commitment to the full implementation of resolution 1701
(2006) and has called on the international community
to compel Israel to abide by its obligations under that
resolution, withdraw from the remaining occupied
Lebanese territories and end its violations of Lebanese
sovereignty by land, air and sea. Today we would like
to renew that call and to underline that it is only by
reinforcing its capacities that the Lebanese army will
be able to fulfil its tasks in cooperation with the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon in southern Lebanon,
combat terrorism and maintain security and stability
throughout the country. The events in Arsal are only
the latest chapter in the Lebanese army's fight against
terrorism. In that regard, my delegation is very grateful
for the continued support that has been expressed for
our army, particularly during the International Support
Group for Lebanon's meetings in Paris, Rome and here
in New York, on the margins of the General Assembly.

Since the beginning of the conflict in Syria, the
flow of refugees into Lebanon has continued unabated.
The staff of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees register an average of
2,500 new refugees every day. Indeed, with more
than 1,145,000 refugees now registered, the impact
is affecting every aspect of life in my country. For
example, the number of student refugees is expected to
exceed 140,000 this year, amounting to 57 per cent of
public-school students in Lebanon. Clearly, the stability
of my country is being threatened by the fallout from
the Syrian conflict.

As the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees said, preserving Lebanon's stability is
everybody's business. Burden-sharing is a fundamental
prerequisite for the success of our collective endeavours
to address the dire humanitarian situation of Syrian
refugees and their host communities. In that context, and
on the eve of the Berlin conference on Syrian refugees,
let me underline how important it is to include a greater

number of those refugees currently in Lebanon in any
resettlement programmes.

Finally, the dire humanitarian situation of Syrians,
whether displaced in their own country or now refugees
in Lebanon, Jordan or Turkey, should be enough in itself
for the international community to redouble its efforts
to help reach a political settlement to the Syrian crisis.

