Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): May
I first of all thank the Secretary-General for his fourth
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and Mr. Egeland for his presentation.

Beyond the 18-month reference period covered
by the report, this debate offers the Security Council a
good opportunity to undertake a five-year evaluation of
the progress achieved since 1999 in an area that is
closely linked to the maintenance of international
peace and security.

In spite of the gaps that still remain, important
progress has been achieved in the area of protection,
and we deem it appropriate to evaluate these
achievements as part of the follow-up to the
Millennium Declaration and of the major efforts under
way to adapt the Organization's response to the
challenges we face.

We are thinking in particular of the achievements
resulting from the progressive implementation of the
recommendations of the Brahimi report on
peacekeeping operations; of the progress achieved
towards curbing impunity; of better-structured conflict-
prevention efforts, in particular the establishment of
ongoing relationships with regional organizations,
pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter; and overall
progress made in the reform of the Organization.

Hence the first report of the Secretary-General on
protection of civilians, drawn up in September 1999 at
the request of the Security Council, and the interaction
between the two bodies which followed has had a
structuring effect in that field which we feel is
important to emphasize. At various stages, those
exchanges have enabled the Organization to set up
sophisticated inter-institutional mechanisms and
multidisciplinary, better-planned peacekeeping
operations in order to address this very complex issue.

Indeed, major concerns in the area of protection
are more systematically highlighted in the resolutions
of the Security Council, and they are given increased
importance in the mandates of United Nations
operations. They pertain to deliberate attacks against
civilians, the phenomenon of sexual violence against
vulnerable groups, humanitarian access, or even to the
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
rehabilitation process, which remains the key element
of the transition to peace.

Furthermore, the more rapid deployment of
United Nations peacekeeping forces or of United
Nations-authorized forces have concretized the idea of
preventive deployment, which is part and parcel of the
progress achieved in terms of a regional approach to
conflicts, with a View to fully understanding the
regional dimension of the protection of civilians in
many cases. This concern is conspicuously reflected in
decisions taken with regard to disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and rehabilitation and
cross-border movements of refugees, combatants and
small arms and light weapons.

But this undoubted progress should not conceal
the many remaining gaps: the physical and legal
protection of civilian populations caught in the grip of
war remains a long-term undertaking. The very
persistence of conflicts illustrates our collective failure
in meeting the objective of ensuring that a culture of
prevention prevails over a culture of reaction. Indeed,
far from decreasing over the past five years, the
number of persons eligible for protection has risen
from 30 million to 50 million. The high number of
people to be protected, the complex nature of crises
and exacerbating factors - inter alia, arms trafficking,
illegal exploitation of natural resources and the use of
mercenaries - combine to target non-combatants and
have caused a considerable rise in the resources needed
to address this issue.

On a number of occasions in recent years, the
international community has shown its determination to
react to emerging crisis situations quickly and with the
appropriate resources by providing peacekeeping
operations with robust mandates. In our view, it must
be equally determined to provide an appropriate level
of resources when it can be predicted that needs will
increase pending the positive results of preventive
action, for which we all hope. We are particularly
concerned that an appropriate level of resources will
make it possible to maintain what has been achieved
with regard to the regional approach to protection, the
burden of which continues to weigh essentially on
States neighbouring conflict areas and on subregional
organizations whose primary purpose is not the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Moreover, the increasingly compromised
immunity of United Nations and humanitarian
personnel is a disturbing development requiring that
the mandates and capacities of peacekeeping operations
be strengthened. And, above all, that development
raises the issues of respect for international
humanitarian law and of the impunity enjoyed by those
who violate it.

In that connection, my delegation agrees with the
Secretary-General about the crucial importance of
propagating the norms of international law and of
ensuring that belligerent parties respect them. We
support his recommendation that non-State armed
groups be made to comply with them. We also
welcome the balanced approach of the report
(S/2004/431), which recognizes that human rights
violations can be the acts of non-State armed groups -
contrary to the previous fixed view that these could
only be the work of States.

The primary task of United Nations peacekeeping
forces must be to reassure and protect civilians, and it
essential that their behaviour towards civilians -
especially women and children - meet the highest
standards of respect for the law. Here, the Secretary-
General's bulletin must be applied quickly and
effectively.
Finally, my delegation wants to note and deplore
a major gap in the report of the Secretary-General that
could hinder attainment of the objective of respect by
all for international humanitarian law: the protection of
civilians in territories under occupation, which the
report addresses only incidentally, and, in the case of
occupied Palestine, with blameworthy mildness
considering the seriousness of the subject before us.
There is no need to prove that, during the period
covered by the report, massive, frequent and deliberate
violations by Israel of the rights of Palestinian
populations under occupation have at times reached
unprecedented levels - in the full sight of the
international community.

In the view of my delegation, the first line of
defence for international humanitarian law and for the
1949 Geneva Conventions that underpin it is to be
found in occupied territories, particularly in the
occupied Palestinian territories, whose tragic situation
calls on the international community to take measures
to warn the Government of a Member State, Israel,
which has been clearly identified - and which,
moreover, does not even try to deny its responsibility
for the whole gamut of crimes and violations that the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
consistently outlines in its reports, including the
targeted and deliberate killing of humanitarian
personnel. The situation in occupied Palestine is so
serious that it could have a negative effect on the
international community's credibility as it strives to
ensure respect for humanitarian principles everywhere,
to further the protection of civilians.

There is no doubt that, with respect to the
sensitive question of impunity, its credibility and that
of the humanitarian community are being sorely tried
by the double standard employed to Israel's benefit.
Today's debate is a another opportunity for the Security
Council to begin the necessary readjustments, without
which the firm message it wishes to send to recalcitrant
Governments and armed groups will be considerably
softened.

