Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I too would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jean
Arnault, for his briefing, as well as the Vice-President
of the Republic of Colombia, Mr. Oscar Naranjo, for
participating in today's meeting. I also thank them
for the negotiations and the implementation of the
peace agreement reached with the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC).

Despite various obstacles, the Colombian
Government has been able, over a few years, to launch
an historic peace agreement with the FARC that France
also believes to be irreversible. This is an agreement that
the United Nations in general and the Security Council
in particular have supported. After the disarmament
and the political transition of that armed group, we
have, for a few months, been involved in a crucial
phase for the future of the process - the reintegration
of ex-combatants.

In the light ofthe mandate conferred by the Council
on the second United Nations mission to Colombia, I
would insist on three points.

First and above all, we welcome the mobilization
in recent months of the Colombian Government in
order to adopt the necessary legislation to implement
the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, especially with
regard to Special Jurisdiction for peace. We hope that
the jurisdiction will have ways to ensure and authorize
equitable and independent justice, in keeping with the
commitments undertaken when the peace agreement
was signed. Whatever the results of the upcoming
parliamentary and presidential elections, France calls
on all Colombian political actors to embark upon
that path.

My second point concerns security assurances.
Although former FARC combatants are relatively well
protected within the areas of training and reintegration,
France regrets an increase in violence in territories
previously under the control of the guerilla forces,
particularly directed at human rights defenders and
civil society representatives. France welcomes the new
measures announced by the Colombian authorities
prioritizing the fight against that negative trend.

Finally, France wishes to stress a key issue for
reintegration and the future of the peace process
and welcomes the action of President Santos in that
regard - access to land and income sources. We do not
underestimate the difficulty of this question. However,
it clearly constitutes the key to successful economic
and social reintegration of former fighters and to the
pacification and lasting stability of territories plagued
by halfa century of conflict.

In conclusion, I would just like to note that the
peace Agreement between the Government of Colombia
and the FARC has taken place in the arc of history. Its
implementation can encourage other armed groups, led
by the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional (ELN), to follow
suit. In this regard, France hopes that the temporary
ceasefire between the Colombian Government and the
ELN will be promptly renewed and that the negotiations
can help to deliver a historic peace agreement.

Finally, I to would like to commend Ambassador
Rycroft and his dynamism in the Council. I wish him
every success in his new functions at the head of the
Department for International Development.

