The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Italy.

At the outset, I would like to thank all delegations
for their constructive collaboration in adopting
resolution 2382 (2017) today. I am also very grateful
to Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and to the Police
Commissioners of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) for their briefings. They confirmed

the central role that police units currently play in peace
operations throughout the world.

As described by Police Commissioner Yacouba,
United Nations police components in Mali assist the
Malian authorities in the fight against transnational
organized crime, including illegal trafficking in
weapons and in persons. Such activities are very
often connected to terrorist organizations, providing
them with several sources of financing. The support
United Nations police can provide to local authorities
in the fight against those criminal networks and in
the disruption of trafficking networks is crucial for
reducing a major source of instability in the Sahel and
in the entire Mediterranean region.

As Police Commissioner Monchotte explained,
the police component in Haiti is now at the core of the
peacekeeping Mission, strengthening the rule of law
by mentoring local police. The Mission in Haiti can
be an example of how United Nations police capacity-
development efforts can assist in preventing a relapse
into conflict, and leave behind an enduring legacy of
sustainable peace. It is an important test case and a
possible future model for the successful transition and
eventual exit of peacekeeping operations.

I would also like to thank Police Commissioner
Makotose for her meaningful insight into how
the operational effectiveness of UNAMID was
strengthened by making the activities of the United
Nations police components more gender-sensitive. That
is an important step forward.

Today's briefing confirmed that the United Nations
police contribution is the key to achieving our common
objective of smarter and more cost-effective peace
operations that are able to bring about sustainable and
long-lasting peace. That, by the way, is our common
goal in support of reforming the United Nations system
as envisaged by the Secretary-General. We believe it
is therefore necessary to strengthen United Nations
police. In that regard, I would like to recall the critical
role of the United Nations Standing Police Capacity,
located at the Global Service Centre in Brindisi, in
providing peace operations with readily available police
expertise. I would like to suggest four brief points for
further consideration.

First, we must recognize the contribution of the
United Nations police in preventing conflict and
sustaining peace, and, consequently, in including
policing as an integral part of the mandates of peace
operations. That would support the focus on prevention.

Secondly, we should strengthen the role of United
Nations police in protecting civilians and preventing and
addressing sexual and gender conflict-related violence
and violations and abuses against children, including
by providing assistance and support to local authorities.
In that regard, predeployment training for Blue Helmets
is key to providing the necessary assistance and to
preventing sexual exploitation and abuse.

Thirdly, we should provide guidance on what is
required to improve accountability, transparency,
efficiency and effectiveness in the performance of
United Nations police, by defining clear standards
for the provision of personnel, equipment and
assistance to host-State police. In that regard, the
role of police-contributing countries is of paramount
importance. We must enhance triangular consultation
and cooperation between police-contributing countries
and the Secretariat.

Fourthly, we completely share the view that an
increased number of women in police forces will
improve the performance ofUnited Nations police units.
I encourage Member States to do more to contribute to
that objective, starting with recruiting a greater number
of women at the national level.

Finally, I would like to pay tribute to the women and
men serving in United Nations peacekeeping missions,
and in particular those who have lost their lives over
the years. We must spare no effort to improve the safety
and security of our Blue Helmets by providing them
with the necessary equipment and technology that can
save their lives.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

Since there were several questions for the Police
Commissioners and Under-Secretary-General Lacroix,
I would like to turn the floor over them to respond to
the questions posed and to make other remarks.

I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.

