I begin by extending my warm welcome to Mr. Ivica Daci¢, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Glauk Konjufca, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, who joined us this morning. Let me also thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary- General and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his precise and detailed briefing on the activities of the Mission. My delegation welcomes the holding of early parliamentary elections in Kosovo on 6 October 2019, which, according to local and international observers, were held in good conditions despite incidents in some localities. However, we deplore the stalemate in the dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade, despite the tireless efforts of regional and international actors. The resumption of dialogue, with mutual concessions aimed at removing all obstacles to negotiations, would contribute to the normalization of relations between the two parties. The security situation in Kosovo, marked by incidents targeting religious sites and cemeteries and by terrorist activities, some of the perpetrators of which had been repatriated from Syria, deserves special attention. We welcome the efforts of the International Organization for Migration, in cooperation with UNMIK and the Division of Prevention and Reintegration of the Kosovo Ministry of Internal Affairs, to establish guidelines for assessing reintegration needs and building the capacity of local and central authorities. The return of the communities of Kosovo, reconciliation and community relations are dynamics that require the support of the international community - first and foremost the United Nations. In this regard, UNMIK, in partnership with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the Kosovo Ministry for Communities and Return, has initiated a series of coordination meetings with a view to addressing the challenges related to internally displaced persons and the voluntary return process through enhanced cooperation and institutional coordination. This process, which includes local and central authorities as well as civil society organizations, should be encouraged. That is why I call for international solidarity in support of the trust fund, established at the recommendation of the UNMIK Commission on Human Rights, to assist communities suffering from lead poisoning. Efforts to promote security and stability in Kosovo and the region will be in vain if they are not accompanied by measures to consolidate the rule of law and promote human rights. First, with regard to the consolidation of the rule of law, the indictment of persons allegedly guilty of war crimes against the civilian population in some municipalities is commendable in many respects. The same is true of the public consultations involving UNMIK, civil society, academics and local communities to discuss the modalities for the establishment of a truth and reconciliation commission. Secondly, with regard to the promotion of human rights, capacity-building of the Ombudsperson Institution of Kosovo and the Kosovo Agency of Statistics have made it possible to apply a human rights policy in the collection, analysis and use of data. This approach has contributed to improved monitoring and evaluation of human rights progress and implementation of commitments under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in a manner consistent with international human rights law. Furthermore, UNMIK's efforts to increase the capacity of civil society organizations to monitor and report on human rights violations and to support their engagement with United Nations human rights mechanisms should be encouraged. UNMIK's actions in the context of institution-building and the consolidation of the rule of law in Kosovo are worth mentioning. The Niger welcomes the leadership training provided to women by UNMIK, in partnership with UN-Women and the European Union, with a view to strengthening the capacity of women to influence political and peace processes, as part of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. In 2018, the United Nations Kosovo Trust-Building Forum was held in Ljubljana. In accordance with the Forum's recommendations and with the support of UNMIK, the Kosovo Law Institute provided free legal assistance on women's property rights, minority rights, the rights of internally displaced persons, refugees, asylum-seekers and detainees. Also, as part of the implementation of the United Nations framework strategy on youth, peace and security, UNMIK, in partnership with the United Youth Task Force, launched a construction project aimed at promoting the participation of young people from all communities in decision-making processes by strengthening municipal youth councils and introducing youth-sensitive budgeting. In conclusion, my delegation would appreciate if Mr. Tanin could tell us more about the actions taken by UNMIK to support the Government of Kosovo in dealing with the coronavirus disease pandemic.
