Mr. Ayari (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
progress report on the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), and I would
also like to thank Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his useful and complete briefing on the developments
in East Timor. I also thank Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta for
his briefing.

The phase that East Timor is now going through
is an important stage in the history of the East
Timorese people, who are moving inexorably towards
independence. In this regard I would like to pay a
sincere tribute to UNTAET for the effectiveness with
which it has shouldered its responsibilities and is
continuing to do so in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. The upcoming
elections, which are planned for 30 August and are
expected to be pluralist and democratic, are a real
reason for satisfaction and augur well for the future of
the East Timor. We hail the signing by the registered
parties of a national unity pact, by which they have
committed themselves to respect the rules of
democracy and fair competition and the verdict of the
polls. This is a positive step.

The elections will in particular allow the
movement from the Transitional Administration to an
independent East Timorese Government. This
Government will be confronted with numerous
problems and challenges, which it will have to meet.
International community assistance for this effort will
be indispensable.

We welcome the progress that has been made
towards establishing the basis for an effective
administration, which will have the onerous
responsibility of governing the country in a viable
manner and of promoting a climate conducive to the
integral development of East Timor.

The best way to ensure the future of East Timor is
for it to establish good-neighbourly relations with the
countries of the region. In this regard we welcome the
conclusion by East Timor and Australia of the Timor
Sea Arrangement, which was the culmination of 16
months of negotiations. We also would like to
emphasize the importance of confidence-building
between Indonesia and East Timor. The Indonesian
authorities for their part have time and again
demonstrated their readiness to cooperate with
UNTAET and to establish mechanisms for dialogue and
concerted action in order to resolve the outstanding
issues, such as the problems of refugees and displaced
persons.

The importance of the regional context was
emphasized earlier by Mr. Ramos-Horta when he said:

"a strong, dynamic and creative relationship with
the region will be our best defence".

Finally, I would like to say that we support the
major efforts being undertaken by UNTAET, the troop-
contributing countries, the United Nations
Development Programme and the donor countries.
They are playing an important role in providing the
East Timorese a solid basis for governing, in an
atmosphere of peace and stability, once independence
has been achieved.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
reiterate Mr. Ramos-Horta's view stressing that the
peace remains precarious and that any hasty
withdrawal would threaten what has been achieved.
Indeed we believe that a great deal remains to be done,
and the commitment of the international community to
East Timor should be preserved. What is at stake here
is the future of this nascent State.

