Ms. Akallo: I thank the Council for inviting me
to give a small voice to the many voiceless children in
war. My name is Grace Akallo. I am from Uganda, and
I was born in northern Uganda. I am here to talk not
only about my own story but on behalf of all the
children in armed conflict, who have to face and
survive the atrocities of war, who suffer through the
abuses of being used as child soldiers and through rape
and sexual abuse. I am thankful that representatives are
here at the highest level, and, to me, it means that you
care, and that you are decision makers who want to
show their commitment to stopping the suffering of
children in wars.

Allow me to tell you my story. After elementary
school, my parents sent me to St. Mary's College
Aboke, a high school for girls in northern Uganda. I
stayed in a dormitory with dozens of girls from far
away. I was excited because only a few girls from my
village went to high school. I had learned the
advantages of education. I was determined to be the
first person to go to university in my village.

Sadly, my dream of a great future was cut short
when, in October 1996, the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA) stormed into my dorm and abducted 139 girls,
including me. I was among the first five who were tied
and pushed to move out. We were forced by the LRA
soldiers to form four straight lines and were marched
out into the woods. I knew at that moment that there
was no surviving. My spirit died. My body was
constantly wet with urine.
Sister Rachele, the Deputy Headmistress at the
school, followed the rebels. She had no power. The
rebels threatened to kill or rape her in front of us. She
was asked to leave, but she refused to leave without her
children. She stood her ground and, in the end, she was
released with 109 girls. I was not one of the lucky ones
though, as I was among the 30 that were forced to
remain.

After a month of wandering in the northern
Uganda forest, we were divided into two groups to
make it easier to control our march to southern Sudan.
On the way, many children who could not walk were
killed and their bodies abandoned in the forest. The
rebels would use sticks, axes, bayonets or machetes.

When we arrived in Sudan, I and my friends were
given AK-47s. We were taught to dismantle, clean and
assemble the gun. My group was not taught to shoot or
to fight. We were told hunger would actually teach us,
and indeed it did. My friends and I were sent to battle
against the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA)
several times. Hunger and thirst were the order of the
day. During the long march back from battle against
the SPLA, I fainted from thirst and hunger, and the
LRA actually buried me in a shallow grave, thinking
that I was dead.

In addition to being forced to fight, my friends
and I were distributed to rebel commanders. We were
forced to kill those girls who tried to escape or refused
their husbands. I was repeatedly raped by the LRA
commander on countless occasions. I was an innocent
young girl. I had never known a man in my life until
that day. I felt like a rock was being thrust into my
skin. Yet I had to survive.

In April 1997, after seven months in captivity, I
finally got a chance to escape from the rebels. The
LRA was attacked by the rebels from southern Sudan,
giving me the chance to run away. I walked for two
weeks without food, surviving only on wild leaves, soil
and dew in the morning. I was rescued by villagers
from southern Sudan and handed back to the Ugandan
Government soldiers, who then handed me over to
Sister Rachele. I was happy to be back, but my heart
was saddened by the ongoing torture my friends were
still going through. I left too many of them behind.

After a month at home, I went back to St. Mary's
College Aboke and later graduated. I was lucky to
reach the university level. But many of the girls who
manage to escape are not able to return to school or
have their dreams for the future because they are not
helped to deal with their horrible experiences, or
because they now have babies born during their
captivity.
I have told my story, but the stories you have not
heard are thousand-fold. There are dozens of armies
and rebel groups that continue to recruit children in the
same way around the world. I am here to remind you of
the very real suffering of these children, who are
hoping for you to act.

When I read the report in front of us
(S/2009/158), I was amazed with the progress made in
stopping girls and boys from being forcibly taken from
their homes, beaten and forced to kill. Although child
soldiers are still around, many have already been
released. However, when I read further in the report, I
saw little on a subject that means so much to me. What
has been done for those boys and girls who are victims
of rape? Sexual violence is a terrible crime and
perpetrators must be punished. It must stop. I am
saying this out of experience.

I was lucky enough to be able to escape and to be
supported by people who cared for me, like Sister
Rachele. But so many girls are still waiting for their
chance to be rescued, and I think of them every day of
my life.

I heard the Special Representative when she
asked what she should say to victims of sexual
violence like Adila and me. My answer is very simple:
there is hope. There is hope because I too believe that
this Council will act and succeed, as it has for child
soldiers, for those thousands of children out there who
are still waiting. I say this myself, because I am still
waiting for some of my friends to return, and I hope
that everyone here will be committed to bringing
people like my friends back home.

