Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My delegation welcomes the initiative taken
by Ms. Sigrid Kaag, Minister for Foreign Trade and
Development Cooperation of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, to organize a visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in order to learn about the
humanitarian situation on the ground. We also
thank Mr. Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for
HumanitarianAffairsandEmergencyReliefCoordinator,
who also recently visited the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, for his briefing on the humanitarian
situation in the country. Finally, the Ivorian delegation
thanks Ms. Jeanine Bandu Bahati and Abbe Donatien
Nshole for their poignant and informative contributions
on the experience of the populations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It welcomes the presence of the
Permanent Representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo at today's meeting.

Cote d'Ivoire remains concerned about the serious
humanitarian crisis being experienced by its sister
republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
because, in addition to the tragic briefings we have
just heard on the situation in the country, according to
the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/174)
on the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), there are at least 13 million people,
including 4.5 million internally displaced persons
and 670,000 refugees in neighbouring countries, in
particular Burundi, Tanzania, Uganda, Angola and
Zambia, in need of urgent humanitarian assistance and
protection. The report also indicates that 7.7 million
people suffer from severe food insecurity and that more
than 2 million children are acutely malnourished, all of
whom require urgent assistance.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is also
experiencing a major cholera crisis, with nearly 3,000
suspected cases reported. These figures call on us not
only to respond urgently to the continuing deterioration
of the security situation, but also to take into account
the necessary support of the international community
for the efforts of the Congolese authorities.

Cote d'Ivoire believes that it is important to combat
the insecurity prevailing in the country, caused by
attacks by armed groups against civilian populations
and by clashes among these groups. These attacks are
the main cause of forced displacement and mass exodus
of populations to neighbouring countries. Similarly,
the humanitarian crisis situation in the country has
been made more complex by inter-ethnic conflicts
and intercommunity violence in some of the country's
provinces, fuelled by traditional rivalries between
communities and the difficulties of gaining access to or
delivery of humanitarian assistance.

In view of the scale of the humanitarian crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we must act without
delay to provide for the basic needs of the populations
on the ground, which, according to the United Nations,
have grown twofold since the end of last year and are
estimated to be $1.7 billion for this year. In that regard,
Cote D'Ivoire calls on the international community to
support the efforts of the Congolese authorities and
local non-governmental organizations by increasing
assistance to displaced persons and refugees and by
strengthening actions to improve the security situation
in the country.

My country appreciates the efforts of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo's neighbouring States that are
hosting the flow of refugees, and encourages them,
in collaboration with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, to create conditions
conducive to a voluntary and safe return to the countries
of origin.

My delegation welcomes the work undertaken by
international humanitarian organizations in a complex
and difficult environment, and invites them to maintain
their valuable support for refugees and internally
displaced persons, with special emphasis on women
and children, who are most vulnerable in conflict
situations. Cote D'Ivoire also encourages States
signatories to the Framework Agreement for Peace,
Security and Cooperation for the Democratic Republic
of Congo and the Region to put an end to the recurring
cycles of conflict that fuel the humanitarian crisis in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and jeopardize
the stability and development not only of that country
but of the entire Great Lakes region.

In conclusion, my delegation stresses the
importance of mobilizing the resources necessary to
remediate the humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and to that end encourages
the international community and all bilateral and
multilateral partners to increase their support not
only to the Government of that country, but also to the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It invites the donor community
and funding partners to take active part in the very first
high-level international humanitarian conference for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which will be
organized by the United Nations, the European Union
and the United Arab Emirates on 13 April as part of a
rapid and adequate response to the humanitarian crisis
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

