Judge Mose: First of all, let me thank the
members of the Security Council for their expressions
of support and appreciation for the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. We note with pleasure the remarks made
both in relation to the progress made and concerning
the measures we have taken to increase our efficiency.
Furthermore, we strongly appreciate the emphasis
placed by Council members on States' obligations to
cooperate with the Tribunal in terms of both arrest and
transfer. That is a vital area, as stressed by our
Prosecutor and as emphasized by all members of the
Council. Another important form of support expressed
by Security Council members is reflected in the focus
on capacity-building and on the need to ensure the
necessary resources in the recipient countries of trials
to be referred.

The remarks of those representatives who
addressed the question of extending the judges'
mandates, and the fact that a draft text is being
circulated, have been noted with pleasure.

A specific question from the representative of
Qatar related to the situation of Charles Taylor. There
is no formalized cooperation between the Special Court
for Sierra Leone and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR); they are different courts
with separate mandates. But we received an initiative
from the Sierra Leone Court asking us whether we
would be able to share courtroom capacity in
connection with the trial of Charles Taylor. The
Prosecutor and I discussed the matter, and we found
that, although we were very sympathetic to the idea of
assisting a brother - or sister - tribunal, we had to
turn down that possibility, because it would have put
our own completion strategy in jeopardy. We are using
all our courtrooms at full throttle every day, and an
extra case in our Tribunal - that of Charles Taylor -
would have created problems in meeting the 2008
deadline.

As for the question about the acquitted person,
raised by the representative of the Congo, it too was
very pertinent. Let me stress that all our indictees left
Rwanda in 1994, sought refuge in other countries,
brought their families to those countries and refused to
return. The challenge has been to find places where
they can be relocated. I wish to stress that Rwanda has
never refused to receive them.

All the other comments made by members have
been noted, including the precise reference made by
the representative of France to the need to be more
specific concerning the level of cooperation, which was
a useful remark. Her point was that not only the oral
presentations, but also the written reports, should be
more specific in that regard. That has been noted,
together with other remarks.

All of this will serve as an inspiration to the
judges, the Prosecutor and the staff of the ICTR when
we share the results of this meeting with them in
Arusha in a few days' time.

