Mr. Mayoral (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour
for me to brief the Security Council on the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban at a meeting in
which I shall share the floor with the Chairpersons of
the Council Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), Ambassadors
Loj and Motoc, respectively.

I am delivering my 120-day briefing pursuant to
paragraph 12 of resolution 1526 (2004). As this is my
first briefing in my function as Chairman of the
Committee, I should like to thank the members of the
Council for the trust they have shown me in selecting
me to chair that important Committee.

I should also like to thank my predecessor,
Ambassador Heraldo Munoz of Chile, who is with us
here today. Thanks to his diligent leadership, the
Committee has solidified its role as one of the most
active sanctions committees. The past three months
have been a real learning experience for my delegation,
and I would like to express my gratitude to
Ambassador Mufioz and the Chilean mission, who have
generously shared their accumulated experiences with
my delegation. I have been encouraged in my work by
the proactive approach of all members of the
Committee and, in particular, those who are new to it.

I wish first to refer to the Committee's activities.
Let me note that the Al-Qaida and Taliban Committee
was the first of the counter-terrorism committees to be
created by the Security Council. It has, since 1999,
accumulated a broad and fruitful experience in dealing
with its specific mandate: making the operations of Al-
Qaida and the Taliban more difficult worldwide. Today,
its sanctions regime is being implemented throughout
the world and, in particular, thanks to submissions of
Member States, its consolidated list of individuals and
entities associated with Al-Qaida and the Taliban is
updated periodically. During the reporting period, the
Committee delisted one individual at the request of a
Member State and accepted exemptions pursuant to
resolution 1452 (2002).

On the last day of 2004, Ambassador Mufioz
submitted to the President of the Council the
Committee's written assessment of reports submitted
by Member States pursuant to resolution 1455 (2003).
That important assessment, contained in document
S/2004/ 1037 and available on the Committee's website,
details the Committee's substantive evaluation of
reports submitted by Member States and contains the
more specific analysis of Member State reports
provided by the Monitoring Team to the Committee. I
strongly encourage Member States that have not
already done so to read it. I also take this opportunity
to stress the obligation of non-reporting States to
submit their reports as a matter of urgency. As the
written assessment clearly demonstrates, the reports
from Member States provide the Committee with an
important tool in assessing the strengths and
weaknesses of the implementation of sanctions
measures.

During the reporting period, the Committee met
15 times, mostly in informal meetings, which has been
the practice for the work of the Committee for many
years.

On 11 January, the Committee met a senior
delegation from the United States and was briefed by
Mr. Juan Zarate, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for
Terrorist Financing and Financial Crime, and Mr. E.
Anthony Wayne, Assistant Secretary of State for
Economic and Business Affairs. The Committee was
informed in detail of current United States efforts to
implement the sanctions against Al-Qaida and the
Taliban imposed by the Security Council. I consider it
important to note that the Committee was honoured by
the presence of the three Chairmen of the other
counter-terrorism committees and working groups.

I encourage Member States to follow the example
of the United States by making use of the opportunity
to meet with the Committee, since that is a very useful
way for the Committee to evaluate the state of
implementation of the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
regime, its strongest areas and its shortcomings.

During the first months of this year, the
Committee has been considering in great detail the
second report of the Monitoring Team submitted last
December pursuant to resolution 1526 (2004). I thank
the Monitoring Team for the recommendations
contained therein, which proved a useful basis for
discussion in the Committee. The report is, of course,
the work of independent experts and does not
necessarily reflect the views of the Committee. The
Committee has also been analysing the
recommendations contained in the report, mainly with
a View to further improving the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions regime.

I expect that several of those recommendations
will have a great influence on the Council's upcoming
consideration of a draft resolution to be adopted
pursuant to paragraph 3 of resolution 1526 (2004). The
Committee supports increased cooperation with
Interpol, which is among the most important of those
recommendations. I should note that, in the fight
against Al-Qaida and the Taliban, it would be
beneficial for all Member States to become members of
Interpol. The Committee also supported the Team's
recommendation that Interpol members make use of
the Interpol database on stolen travel documents. The
Committee recently held an informal meeting with the
Interpol representative in New York, Mr. Ulrich
Kersten, to discuss potential specific areas of
cooperation between the Committee and Interpol.

With respect to the activities of the Monitoring
Team, I have dealt in some detail with the contribution
made by the Team through its December report
(S/2005/83, annex). The Monitoring Team has
continued to strive to improve the quality of the
consolidated list. By contacting a number of Member
States, in accordance with the Committee's guidelines,
the Monitoring Team has been able to propose more
than 500 additional pieces of identifying information
concerning individuals and entities already on the list
and has actively encouraged Member States to submit
new names for inclusion on the consolidated list.

The Monitoring Team has undertaken 11 trips,
including to Africa, the Middle East and Europe, to
discuss sanctions implementation and how to make the
sanctions regime more effective. Those trips raised the
Committee's profile and have promoted a proper
understanding of the purpose and the importance of the
sanctions regime. Following each trip, the Team has
submitted written reports to the Committee. As well, a
member of the Team will accompany me on my
upcoming visits to the States selected. The Monitoring
Team has established contacts with regional and other
international bodies, including the European Union,
Interpol, the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
The Team has also participated in several important
conferences, helping to increase international
awareness of the Committee's work.

The Monitoring Team continues to hold regular
meetings with the experts supporting the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) and has formed a close
link with the new Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, sharing the information it has
collected and ensuring that, before visiting States and
attending conferences, the Team is aware of the
interests and the concerns of the CTC experts. It has
also held informal discussions with the experts of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), and the Coordinator has
briefed the working group established pursuant to
resolution 1566 (2004). The Committee expresses its
appreciation for the outstanding contribution made by
the Team in that regard and encourages the Team to
maintain its leading role.

With respect to the future activities of the
Committee, I firmly believe that we can achieve further
progress in the coming months: by introducing further
quantitative and qualitative improvements to the lists;
by involving Member States in a fruitful dialogue with
the Committee, encouraging them to meet with the
Committee and share their successes, challenges,
problems and frustrations; by increasing the level of
cooperation with other United Nations bodies involved
in the fight against terrorism, such as the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), as well as with specialized bodies such as
Interpol, in order to enhance the United Nations
capacity for coordination in the fight against terrorism;
and by reviewing the Committee's guidelines for the
conduct of its work.

I intend also to travel soon to a number of
countries, including in Europe and in the Middle East,
to continue to promote the Committee's activities,
gather first-hand impressions in those countries'
capitals of the status of the implementation of the
sanctions regime and receive suggestions on how we
can work to improve it.

Finally, as mandated in paragraph 3 of resolution
1526 (2004), by July this year the Security Council
must adopt a new resolution to assess the
implementation of the sanctions regime against Al-
Qaida and the Taliban and improve it. With that in
mind, the Committee will shortly begin actively to
work on a new draft resolution to be submitted to the
Council.

To conclude, last year in this Chamber, my
predecessor aptly noted that there were no quick or
easy solutions in the fight against terrorism. Rather, the
fight requires systematic and results-oriented work,
persistence and patience and an unyielding
commitment to our mission.

In the coming months, the Committee will
examine how States are implementing sanctions with a
view to identifying those areas that require additional
effort so that current measures can be improved.
Moreover, I am confident that members of the
Committee will genuinely welcome suggestions from
Member States about how the Security Council can
improve the current sanctions regime. After all, who
better than States can tell the Committee whether
established sanctions measures are indeed effective?
The counter-terrorism sanctions regime, first of all,
involves accurately targeting the right individuals and
entities and requires the political will of States to make
that regime effective through the strict implementation
of sanctions.

At the moment, it is difficult to envision a world
completely free from terrorist threats. Nevertheless, we
all share the common mission of effectively preventing
such threats from materializing. Today, all three
Committees have distinct and crucial roles in that
mission. I therefore wish to state that I shall continue
to work closely with Ambassador Loj, Ambassador
Motoc and, of course, Ambassador Baja, Chairman of
the working group established pursuant to resolution
1566 (2004), in order to further enhance the efforts of
the Security Council and the entire United Nations in
this mission.

