Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): First, we would
like to thank the delegation of United Kingdom for
drafting today's very important resolution (resolution 2444 (2018)). We also welcome the representatives of
Somalia, Eritrea and Djibouti in the Chamber.

We would like to highlight that this year has been
marked by unprecedented positive and very welcome
developments in the Horn of Africa. In the last few
months, we have witnessed the historic rapprochement
among countries of the region, led by the great vision
and determined political will of their leaders. Today we
see the fruitful results of courageous choices made by
the States ofthe region to close an era of long-protracted
tensions, conflict and competition, and which have
instead paved the way for a new era of peaceful and
mutually-beneficial cooperation.

Wejoin the international community in recognizing
and commending the efforts of Ethiopia's new
leadership to initiate and promote a constructive and
forward-looking dynamism at the regional level, aimed
at enabling the nations of the region to advance towards
a long-awaited, peaceful and prosperous future. The
countries of the Horn of Africa have demonstrated a
resolute capacity and commitment to finding solutions
to regional problems. While we commend the fast
progress that has been made, we are mindful of the
perils as well as the challenges and impediments that
lie ahead in the work of creating durable peace and
prosperity in the region.

It is important that the United Nations and its States
Members and international organizations meaningfully
support the momentous changes that are rapidly
unfolding. They unquestionably have far-reaching

implications for the security and prosperity of the
broader region, and we must ensure that these gains are
consolidated. In that regard, we welcome the Secretary-
General's decision to expand the mandate of the Special
Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan to cover the Horn of
Africa as well. Closer collaboration between the United
Nations, the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development will enable us to build on the
recent strides that have been made towards peace and
security and enhance subregional strategies to address
security and development issues. Diplomacy, mediation,
confidence-building and dialogue, together with
development investments, are the sure ways to resolve
the existing disputes between countries. We welcome
the engagement between Djibouti and Eritrea and
encourage them to engage in further efforts to resolve
the remaining challenges in their bilateral relationship.

With regard to Somalia, we strongly condemn the
9 November terrorist attack in Mogadishu and express
our deepest sympathy and condolences to the families
of the victims and to the people and the Government
of Somalia. That horrific act of violence reminds us
of the fragility of Somalia's security situation and the
importance of making every effort to preserve its hard-
earned stability. Along with that, we are very pleased
to be able to recognize the Federal Government's
achievements in its efforts to rebuild its conflict-torn
nation. We commend and support the comprehensive
reform agenda and vision for development of Somalia's
leadership. We would like to stress the importance ofthe
sustained and coordinated support of the international
community for the recovery and stabilization processes
in Somalia, including by addressing the root causes of
the crisis.

Kazakhstan has added its voice in support of
today's adoption of resolution 2444 (2018), based on
its own resolve and conviction with regard to peace
and prosperity in Africa. As Chair of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea, Kazakhstan was
privileged to be a part of the positive outcome of today's
Council meeting, and particularly happy to contribute
to the peaceful process in the Horn of Africa. We
strongly believe that the recent progress in the Horn of
Africa could serve as an example regarding conflicts in
other parts of Africa and the rest of the world.

