Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): I should like at the
outset to offer my condolences to our colleague from
Turkey and to the Turkish Government and people,
who have been put to the test by the earthquake that
struck a portion of that country. I also convey our
sympathies to the Saudi people, who have just lost
their Crown Prince.
11-56143

The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People is gratified to see you,
Madame, assume the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. Knowing the commitment of
your country, Nigeria, to promoting the ideals of the
United Nations, I should like to offer you my warm
congratulations.

I also take this opportunity to pay tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Nawaf Salam, Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations, for
the exemplary manner in which he steered the work of
the Council last month. I express my deep thanks to
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his informative briefing.

The Committee remains firmly committed to the
holding of political negotiations with a view to
achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
the Middle East. However, such negotiations must
begin on a sound foundation in order to avoid repeating
the mistakes of the past. To be frank, negotiation is not
an end in itself. In particular connection with the
region under discussion today, negotiation should lead
to a permanent solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict if the protagonists are all willing to reach one.
Our Committee therefore shares the frustration
expressed here today in this forum with regard to the
current stalemate in the peace process.

We are nevertheless encouraged by the renewed
efforts of the Quartet to pave the way to constructive
negotiations. In that connection, the statement of
23 September, in which the Quartet proposed a series
of measures and a time frame that would make it
possible to reach a lasting peace agreement by the end
of next year, contains a number of positive elements,
including a return to the 1967 borders with land swaps,
as well as the minimum requirement of complete
cessation of settlement construction and the
dismantling of outposts. We hope that the Quartet and
the parties will make good use of these principles and
will apply them in practice, clearing the difficult path
to the resumption of credible and productive
negotiations.

While commending the visible efforts of the
Quartet to return to serious talks, the Committee
believes that, at this time of upheaval, it will be
possible to consider a new series of Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations only if the principles and other parameters
7

are generally agreed by the parties and guaranteed by
the Quartet.

Although our Committee strongly supports the
resumption of negotiations, we cannot lose sight of the
considerable gap that exists between the political
process and the situation on the ground. In fact, there
have never been so many Jewish settlements on
Palestinian land. Since the Council's most recent
public debate on this issue (see S/PV.6590), Israel has
approved the construction of 900 housing units in the
Har Homa settlement and 1,100 at Gilo, without
counting the disclosure in October of the plans for
Givat Hamatos, a vast and entirely new settlement of
2,600 housing units in the city of Jerusalem. There are
also 1,600 units at Ramat Shlomo, 277 at the Ariel
settlement and 100 at Beit Aryeh. The Israeli
Government has even created a new committee in order
to legalize illicit settlements under Israeli law, while at
the same time accelerating the demolition of housing
units and the displacement of Palestinians, with 990
persons affected in the month of September alone.

Our Committee has echoed the international
community's unanimous condemnation of the Israeli
settlements. We must tirelessly recall that these
settlements are contrary to the provisions of
international law and the Road Map. They jeopardize
the peace efforts and are a long-term threat to the bases
of a two-State solution. The recent escalation in the
coordinated campaign of provocation, desecration and
violence carried out by extremist settlers must
particularly be condemned. Unfortunately, the Israeli
authorities are not responding to this campaign with
the rigorous penalties appropriate to such incidents.

The Security Council and the high contracting
parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949
should take firm and immediate measures to ensure
that international law is respected and to prevent these
iniquitous acts from further escalating the violence. It
is high time to provide protection for Palestinian
civilians against the twofold threat of the establishment
of settlements on their land and the excessive violence
of the colonists.

I am pleased to note that, since my last statement
to the Council (see S/PV.6590), the Palestinian
Authority has continued to carry out its programme of
institution-building for a functioning State. The
Committee has taken note of the request for the
admission of Palestine to membership of the United

Nations, which the Security Council is currently
considering. We call on the Council and the General
Assembly to grant this request. The Committee also
endorses President Abbas' call on the General
Assembly to ask countries that have not yet done so to
recognize the Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.

Furthermore, we express our serious concern over
the situation of Palestinian political prisoners.
Although the Committee welcomes the recent
exchange of prisoners between Israel and Hamas,
mediated by Egypt, the Committee calls for the release
of all prisoners languishing in Israeli jails.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is an extremely
sensitive issue of great concern to tens of millions of
people in the region and beyond. In the weeks and
months to come, the international community should
make greater efforts to resolve this issue,
demonstrating its political courage and a heightened
awareness of its responsibilities. There is a great deal
at stake, but we cannot allow another failure. We urge
the Council to take action on initiatives to achieve our
common goal: the creation of two States living in
peace and security within safe and internationally
recognized borders. In that regard, I assure the Security
Council of the Committee's full cooperation.

