Mr. Inderfurth (United States of America): First,
may I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of May. You will have our full
cooperation. I also express our great appreciation and
admiration to Ambassador Somavr'a and his delegation for
Chile's stewardship of the Council during the month of
April, often accomplishing a week's worth of work in
three-fifths of the time. Congratulations are in order to
Ambassador Somavr'a and his team.

I also extend our welcome to the Minister of Angola
who has joined the Council's proceedings today.

Throughout the peace process, the United States has
fulfilled its commitment to be Angola's partner for peace.
We have steadfastly condemned all violations of the
Lusaka Protocol, and insisted that both sides honour their
commitments in a comprehensive and transparent fashion.
We have also acknowledged actions, taken by either side,
that advance the cause of peace and national
reconciliation. This course of action, we believe, increases
the credibility of the Lusaka process in the eyes of the
parties, the Angolan people, and the international
community.

In this spirit, we must criticize delays in quartering,
yet at the same time welcome recent progress in the
process of quartering UNITA troops. As of 6 May more
than 30,000 UNITA soldiers had officially registered,
with the total expected to rise to 35,000 by the end of this
week, which would represent more than half of UNITA's
declared troop levels. The last-minute movement of
thousands of troops to quartering areas in the final days
before the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) is typical of
UNITA's pattern of lurching forward in fits and starts
towards its goals. This pattern does not help cement faith
in UNITA's overall commitment to the peace process. It
is essential that UNIT A continue the quartering process
without further delay or interruption. Unless real soldiers
bearing real weapons are quartered, the peace process will
not move forward. It is also essential that the Angolan
Government complete its obligations to pull back its
forces and barrack the anti-riot police, under UNAVEM's
supervision, without delay or subterfuge.

The two sides must work together to finalize
arrangements for military integration, including reaching
agreement on the 18 UNITA generals who are to be a
part of the joint military command. The deadline for their
completion is now 15 May - far beyond the date
initially forecast for the conclusion of the military talks.
The delay has meant that some of the UNITA troops have
now been in quartering areas for several months. They are
eager to be either demobilized or integrated into the joint
army. The two sides must work together to ensure that
UNITA personnel move quickly out of the temporary
quartering areas.

 

This resolution reflects the Security Council's
continuing impatience with the overall slow pace of the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. We expect the
parties to live up to the agreements they reached in
Libreville, and to the May calendar of actions they freely
adopted. During the next two months we expect to see the
formation of a joint military command and the
commencement of the integration of UNITA forces into the
Angolan Armed Forces, which is the essential foundation
for the Government of Unity and National Reconciliation.

During the next two months we also expect to see the
two parties take decisive action on one of the most urgent
problems facing Angola - the threat posed by landmines.
The United Nations estimates that there are between 9
million and 15 million landmines in Angola. It estimates
that 8 million Angolans, of a total population of just under
13 million, live in mine-infested areas of the country. Exact
numbers of mine casualties in Angola are impossible to
obtain, but current estimates of amputees range from 40,000
to 70,000, with an additional 70,000 killed by landmines.
The suffering of Angolans as a result of this plague of
landmines will not end with the coming of peace. These
hidden killers will continue to haunt Angola for years to
come, adding to the number of casualties every week,
destroying lives, hopes and dreams, and slowing economic
recovery. It is for that reason that the Council, in its
presidential statement of 24 April 1996 and in today's
resolution, has called for the Government and UNITA to
destroy their stockpiles of landmines and to begin this
process by joint public action to underscore the
commitment of both parties to get rid of these horrific
weapons.

We are hopeful that such an action, in the form of a
joint public ceremony involving Government and UNITA
officials, can be scheduled in the near future. We would
also like to acknowledge the step taken yesterday by the
Government, in which 300 landmines held in the central
military zone were destroyed, and the commitment made by
the leadership of UNITA to take similar steps.

We wish to commend the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye, the Force
Commander of UNAVEM, and all the personnel of
UNAVEM. III for their dedicated and courageous service in
the cause of peace. We also wish to acknowledge the
generosity of the troop-contributing countries, eight of
which are members of this Council.

In closing, the United States wishes to remind the
parties once again of the urgent need to take advantage of
this window of opportunity to bring peace, reconciliation
and recovery to their country. The Angolan people have
suffered enough.

