The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Patriota for the important information he
has given us.

Following consultations among the members of the
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on their behalf:

"The Security Council recalls its resolutions
and the statements of its President on post-conflict
peacebuilding, in particular S/PRST/2009/23,
S/PRST/2010/20, S/PRST/2011/2, S/PRST/2011/4
and S/PRST/2012/29, and reaffirms the critical
importance of peacebuilding as the foundation for
sustainable peace and development in the aftermath
of conflict.

"The Security Council takes note with
appreciation of the Secretary-General's report
on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict
(S/2014/694) and the country-specific evidence of
impacts and lessons learned it contains.

"The Security Council recognizes that
peacebuilding is an important element of the
United Nations efforts in countries emerging from
conflict, and reaffirms that sustainable peace and
security requires an integrated sustained approach
based on coherence among political, security and
developmental approaches, which are essential for
effectively improving respect for human rights,
advancing gender equality, strengthening the rule
of law and advancing economic development in
countries emerging from conflict, recognizing
the specific needs and situation of the country
concerned.

"The Security Council underlines that the
primary responsibility for successful peacebuilding
lies with national Governments and relevant
local actors, including civil society, in countries
emerging from conflict.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of inclusivity in advancing national
peacebuilding processes and objectives in order to
ensure that the needs of all segments of society are
taken into account.

"The Security Council reaffirms that national
ownership and leadership are key to establishing
sustainable peace and reaffirms also the primary
responsibility of national authorities in identifying
their priorities and strategies for post-conflict
peacebuilding.

"The Security Council underscores that
peacebuilding, in particular institution-building,
the extension of State authority and the
re-establishment of core public administration
functions, requires sustained international and
national attention and financial and technical
support in order to effectively build and sustain
peace in countries emerging from conflict. The
Security Council recognizes that the gaps in the
provision of rapid and sustained financial support
continue to hamper peacebuilding efforts. The
Security Council welcomes the role played by the
United Nations Peacebuilding Fund in filling these
gaps and urges Member States to contribute to the
Fund and other relevant multi-donor trust funds
that support countries emerging from conflict in
order to replenish them.

"The Security Council recognizes the recent
successes in collective peacebuilding efforts of
the United Nations and the wider international
community and also acknowledges the setbacks
and the challenges that the United Nations system,
including the Council and the wider international
community, have faced in preventing or reducing
the risks of relapse into conflict. The Security
Council expresses its determination to continue
to take into consideration the underlying causes of
relapse into conflict.

"The Security Council looks forward to the
outcome of the 2015 review of the peacebuilding
architecture and to the consideration of its
recommendations in order to improve the

peacebuilding capacity of the United Nations
system, inter alia, by strengthening the performance
and impact of the peacebuilding architecture with
a view to realizing its full potential in line with the
agreed terms of reference.

"The Security Council underlines the need
for the review of the peacebuilding architecture
to be undertaken in conjunction and synergy with
the upcoming Secretary General's review of peace
operations.

"The Security Council recognizes the
continuing need to increase women's participation
and the consideration of gender-related issues
in all discussions pertinent to the prevention and
resolution of armed conflict, the maintenance of
peace and security, and post-conflict peacebuilding.

"The Security Council recalls its resolution
1645 (2005) and acknowledges the important
role of the Peacebuilding Commission in the
peacebuilding architecture and stresses its
willingness to strengthen its links with the
Peacebuilding Commission by, inter alia, making
greater use of its advisory role. The Council calls
upon the Commission to make further efforts in
promoting improved coherence and alignment of
partners' policies around national peacebuilding
strategies and priorities, and ensuring regional
and international support and effective responses
through engagement and establishing partnerships
with international financial institutions,
neighbouring countries and regional and
subregional organizations. The Security Council
underscores the importance of the regional aspect
of peacebuilding and the need for engaging and
collaborating with regional actors in policy-related
and country-specific issues in the advice provided
by the Peacebuilding Commission.

"The Security Council notes that the
Peacebuilding Commission's advisory role to the
Council is particularly appreciated in view of its
contribution to the implementation of the Council's
mandates on the ground in countries on its agenda.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General to brief the Council by December 2015
and to submit a report to the Council no later
than December 2016 on further United Nations
peacebuilding efforts in the aftermath of conflict,
including progress towards increasing the

participation of women in peacebuilding, taking
into consideration the views of the Peacebuilding
Commission."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2015/2.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chile.
At the outset, I thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Eliasson - who has been a great friend of
mine for quite some time now, since the Peacebuilding
Commission was established - for introducing the
report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in
the aftermath of conflict (S/2014/694). I also thank
the Permanent Representative of Brazil, Ambassador
Antonio Patriota, in his capacity as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, who led the preparatory
process for the review of the peacebuilding architecture
that will be carried out this year.

When the first report (S/2009/304) was submitted
in 2009, as Ambassador Patriota rightly pointed out,
I was Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Since the Commission's establishment in 2005, as can
be seen from the reports, we have learned to manage
conflicts better and made progress developing criteria
and arrangements to make the work of the United
Nations system more efficient. Cases such as that of
Sierra Leone, which is categorized as a post-conflict
country, show that through the coordinated work
of national, political, economic and social players,
supported by the United Nations system and regional
and subregional bodies, the foundations for lasting
peace and development can be laid.

Despite those efforts, conflict still arises, sometimes
with alarming frequency, intensity and diversity of
players, because its causes - in particular, in our view,
exclusion and inequality - not only endure, but have
intensified in many communities. Therefore the role of
the Commission is as important today as it was a decade
ago. Its core mission is to ensure that conflict-affected
countries achieve lasting peace and do relapse into a
spiral of violence and confrontation. We appreciate its
work done and acknowledge its political nature, which
requires leadership, the multidimensional support of
the international community, and a favourable regional
environment.

National ownership, we believe, is crucial
for the acceptance and viability of post-conflict
processes and the commitment of national players
to its successful outcome in the long-term. That task
requires sustained financial, technical and political
support. The commitment of the World Bank and
other regional and subregional financial institutions
should be enhanced and coordinated, as should the
actions of participating States. That support should be
viewed not as complementary to the national economy,
but as a contribution to the peacebuilding process.
Accordingly, my country, Chile, contributes annually
to the Peacebuilding Fund; in 2014, we contributed the
modest sum of $300,000 to the fight against Ebola, an
epidemic that has affected post-conflict countries in
political transition.

It is noteworthy that the report recognizes the
essential role played by women in peacebuilding
processes, especially since it is girls and women who
are primarily affected by armed conflicts. In that
connection, women should be able to participate on an
equal footing in all matters related to those processes.
Some very positive results have been achieved, and
more could be done if a larger share of the Fund's
resources were devoted to projects designed to promote
the empowerment of women and gender equality.

In addition, we believe that the review of the
peacebuilding architecture to be conducted this year
will provide an opportunity to build on the experience
gained, and to considerably improve the capacity of
the United Nations system to support those processes
and make progress in conflict prevention. We are
also convinced of the need for synergy between that
review and those of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions undertaken by
the Secretary-General; the Council's 2015 high-level
assessment of progress made in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000); and the global study on the
implementation of the said resolution.

Experience shows that it is vital to strengthen
institution-building processes based on political
systems that enjoy civic legitimacy, giving priority to
the essential functions of public administration. The
establishment of security and rule of law institutions,
whose mission is to protect civil society, can promote
the implementation of peace agreements, national
reconciliation processes and transparent and verifiable
elections. In that context, the Secretary-General's
Rights Up Front initiative is an important tool for
evaluating the way in which peacebuilding processes
protect and respect international standards of human
rights and humanitarian law.

The identification of the factors that gave rise
to confrontation is essential to peacebuilding. It is
necessary to understand what happened and why
in order to restore institutional order, legitimized
by inclusive political agreements, and to ensure its
viability. Without such analysis, it is difficult to predict
the outbreak of a conflict or, once it has begun, to
devise and implement long- and medium-term actions
that address the root causes and ensure that there is
no recurrence. Exclusion in all its forms, poverty,
marginality and the lack of education and opportunities
are fertile ground for outbreaks of violence. If
peacebuilding actions acknowledge that reality and are
undertaken in that broader context, the efforts of States
and the United Nations system will achieve their goals
of peace and development.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the other members of the
Security Council.

