Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): My delegation, too, very
much welcomes your initiative, Mr. President, for an open
debate in the Security Council on the maintenance of peace
and security and post-conflict peace-building. The title of
the agenda item for this debate reflects some of the most
important challenges facing the Council and the United
Nations as a whole today.

We know that the absence of war is not the same as
a lasting peace. We know that a ceasefire is seldom the
end of conflict, but should hopefully be the beginning of
peace. We know from all too many situations how
difficult it is to sustain a peace which is kept but not truly
built. And we know that finding durable solutions to
complex conflicts requires cooperation across institutional
boundaries between organizations and States.

A long-term and comprehensive perspective is
necessary to resolve conflicts and to consolidate peace.
This perspective is evident in the Secretary-General's
report entitled "The causes of conflict and the promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa."
It is clear that building lasting peace will require solutions
that encompass development, democracy, human rights,
conflict prevention and resolution, peacekeeping and
humanitarian assistance. All these elements are necessary
in order to prevent war and to ensure human security, and
they are all directly relevant to the responsibility of the
Security Council under the Charter.

The Secretary-General plays a crucial role in the
peace-building efforts of the United Nations. We welcome
the fact that he has attached such importance to the
establishment of post-conflict peace-building structures as
one way of helping countries recover from conflict. The
United Nations Office in Liberia, for example, which I
visited last week, is the latest example of such a peace-
building presence, and we hope that the Secretary-General
will consider establishing a United Nations post-conflict
presence in other situations as well.

Clearly, the Security Council has a responsibility to
ensure that its efforts to prevent conflict and promote
peace are followed by measures aimed at preventing the
resurgence of conflict and the strengthening of peace,
stability and reconciliation. When possible, these long-
term aims should be taken into account at an early stage
of the Council's deliberations on a particular crisis or
conflict. The Council also has a responsibility to ensure
that the transition to the post-conflict phase is as smooth
as possible, whether or not that entails decisions to
change a United Nations presence on the ground or to end
an operation mandated by the Council.

The United Nations role in the peace process in
Guatemala is a particularly clear example of post-conflict

 

peace-building in action, an effort which involved the
Security Council and the General Assembly, as well as
United Nations agencies. It is also an example of the value
of integrating a peace-building perspective in peace
agreements themselves.

The mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
operations must also include the elements needed to help
secure a lasting peace. Multifunctional operations are
playing an increasingly important role, as evidenced by the
successful efforts of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic, and we fully agree with the
Secretary-General that peace-building elements should be
explicitly and clearly integrated into the mandates of
peacekeeping operations. We encourage the Secretary-
General to pursue this approach when making
recommendations to the Council on new peacekeeping
operations. We hope that when planning for a possible
peacekeeping operation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, such an integrated approach will also be considered.
That is a conflict where there can be little doubt that a
lasting solution will require comprehensive long-term
efforts by the international community.

Even when post-conflict peace-building elements are
not included in the original mandate of a peacekeeping
operation, recommendations concerning the transitional
period and the post-conflict phase should be included in the
decision on the final drawdown of the operation, and
multifunctional elements with the aim of ensuring
sustainable peace and security can, of course, also be added
during the conduct of an operation, for instance at the time
of mandate extensions.

Post-conflict peace-building efforts may include
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration into society
of former combatants. Special attention is all too often
called for to address the plight of child soldiers. Other
important peace-building elements are the transformation of
armed movements into civilian parties and support for the
restructuring of police and armed forces. Experience also
shows the importance of strengthening the judicial system,
demining, reconciliation and confidence-building measures,
as well as international support for elections.

We attach particular importance to efforts to deal with
refugees and other displaced persons in the post-conflict
phase. The concentration of such groups in temporary
settlements has obvious implications for the stability of the
host country or area, and the repatriation and return of
refugees and displaced persons is not always a smooth
process.

I began by speaking of challenges. One of the most
difficult is perhaps that of ensuring coherence,
coordination and dialogue between the bodies of the
United Nations system and other actors involved in post-
conflict efforts. We strongly welcome the continued
development of the strategic framework within the United
Nations. We firmly support the idea of the strategic
framework as a tool enabling the United Nations to
respond to crisis situations in a comprehensive, coherent
and effective manner.

From the perspective of the Security Council, it is
obviously important that there not be a vacuum in a
transition between operations mandated by the Council
and other peace-building efforts. For example, we could
foresee cases where Council members and troop
contributors would benefit from meeting with the
Secretariat, United Nations agencies and the Bretton
Woods institutions specifically to discuss a transition from
one kind of United Nations presence to another.

We think that we have a responsibility not to close
an operation unless we have a clear View of the road
ahead, and unless we know that what has been invested
to bring about peace will be followed up and will be
maintained.

Today's open debate is proof in itself of the
importance of post-conflict peace-building in the work of
the Security Council. I hope that it will prove possible to
follow up today's discussion, both in decisions relating to
specific conflicts before the Council and as a thematic
issue of key importance. My delegation, of course, would
be prepared to work with other members of the Council
on such a formal follow-up.

