The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) and
Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda) took seats at the
Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Alan Doss, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Doss to take a seat at the Council
table.

On behalf of the Security Council, I extend a
warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Karel De Gucht,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
2
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
fourth special report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, contained in document S/2008/728.

Members also have before them document
S/2008/703, which contains the text of a letter dated
31 October 2008 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council.

At this meeting the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Alan Doss, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, to whom I give the floor.


