Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
France warmly welcomes the presence in our Council
today of Mr. Jose Maria Aznar, Prime Minister of a
friendly country. We are all the more pleased because
Mr. Aznar has expressed his views on a subject that is
crucial not only to Spain, but to the entire international
community.

Spain, which has long been hard-hit at home by
terrorism, can indeed - and, I would add,
regrettably - usefully share with us its experience,
dearly bought in the fight against the scourge of
terrorism. Its recent accession to the chairmanship of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee is all the more
valuable for it.

Prime Minister Aznar recalled that the States
members of the European Union have not hesitated to
join efforts, especially since 11 September 2001, to
strengthen specific measures in all areas in order to
counter terrorism more effectively. I will cite but a few
telling examples here: the accelerated establishment of
a European legal space and a European police force; a
common definition of the act of terrorism; the creation
of a European arrest warrant to replace the former
extradition system; the strengthening of Europol; and
enhanced measures against the financing of terrorism.
Spain and France, which have cooperated closely in the
campaign against terrorism, have worked together to
promote the adoption of these measures.

I will now turn to the actions of our Council and
the United Nations. I wish briefly to touch upon a few
points.
The first is that the scourge of terrorism, being
global and multifaceted, makes it essential for the
entire international community to mobilize and
cooperate actively and tirelessly. This mobilization
must always be vigilant and operational. Over and
above resolution 1373 (2001), the Security Council has
a key role to play in that respect, as noted in resolution
1456 (2003), adopted on 20 January at the ministerial
meeting of this Council on this issue.

My second point is that such crucial mobilization
can be truly effective only to the extent that all
countries which require enhanced technical assistance
receive it in order to help them to strengthen their
national machinery in the struggle against terrorism. It
is from this perspective that France, through its
Minister for Foreign Affairs, has proposed in this very
Chamber the establishment of a United Nations
cooperation and assistance fund closely linked with the
international financial institutions.

My third point is that the link between terrorism
and other global threats, including the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, must be better taken into
account. In that context, on 20 January my country
announced its intention to make specific proposals,
including on the elaboration of an international
convention strengthening the monitoring of the use and
transfer of radioactive sources.

The Security Council is of course concerned
primarily about these dangerous links threatening
international peace and security. It has certainly begun
to deal with them, but efforts in this regard need to be
enhanced. As key as it may be, its role in this area
cannot be exclusive in nature. International institutions
and agencies with expertise in this field must also be
actively engaged.

In addition, France also attaches great importance
to ensuring that the 12 existing international
instruments intended to counter various types of
terrorist acts - in particular the 1999 International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism - are quickly ratified by all States, as called
for by Security Council resolution 1373 (2001).

In conclusion, I would like to repeat our recent
suggestion that the Counter-Terrorism Committee be
requested to brief the Security Council about the
difficulties or problems most often faced by States in
their implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), as
reflected in the national reports submitted to the
Committee. We believe it is important for the Council
to be able to discuss those aspects and their potential
implications in detail.

