Mr. Cunningham (United States): Let me join
others in saying how much we welcome the briefing by
Under-Secretary-General Gambari on his trip and value
his conclusions and advice. I agree with many of the
comments made around the table and will try not to
repeat all of them.

We also find the report distressing in some
respects that are rather obvious, but there is some
promise in some other respects. The Lusaka Protocol
obviously remains the key to a political process and the
focus for all of us as we look to the future of the peace
process. That undoubtedly will remain the focus and
demand of the Council and of the international
community. I think that the briefing today indicates
that, unfortunately, UNITA still lacks the political will
to begin a serious political dialogue. Therefore all of
us - the Council and its individual nations - need to
keep up the pressure and to continue to support an
effective sanctions regime.

Until political will comes into play, I think that
we should focus on the steps that the United Nations
can take to improve the lives of the Angolan people
and to assist the Government of Angola to improve the
quality of its governance and to foster political trust. I
think that we all agree on the clear need to continue to
insist with both sides that a military solution is
unacceptable and, more importantly, unachievable.

We are glad to see that progress is developing in
the relationship between the United Nations and the
Angola Government, and we would like to encourage
the Under-Secretary-General to follow up in three areas
where the Government of Angola has indicated that
United Nations assistance would be valuable: the Peace
and Reconciliation Fund, election assistance, and the
development of pilot transition projects for
demobilizing soldiers.

We welcome the intention of the United Nations
to begin work early next year on the most promising
area of assistance: the design of transition projects. In
this regard, a United States-funded transition project
for demobilized UNITA troops and their families in
Huambo province may serve as a useful model.

Over the longer term, we think that it would be
helpful for the Under-Secretary-General to use his
influence to encourage forward movement on
confidence-building steps in the humanitarian
assistance sector. This would help the people of Angola
as well as begin to build political trust. It might, for
instance, be useful to focus on a proposal for ceasefire
vaccination days. Under this idea, UNITA and the
Government would agree to ceasefires in specific areas
of the country, during which time children could
receive vaccinations, especially for polio, which
afflicts too many Angolan children.

The Under-Secretary-General's visit to Luanda
underscored that the United Nations stands ready to
step in should there be a prospect for serious political
dialogue on the basis of the Lusaka Protocol. We hope
very much that that could happen. All of us can and
should contribute to promoting national reconciliation
and assist the peace process when the time is right and
the opportunity exists. My Government stands ready to
do all it can to facilitate a political end to the conflict
in Angola.

