Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I wish to welcome
your presence, Sir, as you preside over this highly
relevant and timely meeting suggested by the
delegation of Pakistan. We are certainly grateful to the
Pakistani presidency for that suggestion and for the
valuable accompanying non-paper on this issue. I also
wish to join in your words of farewell to Ambassador
Inocencio Arias, a highly competent, effective and
well-liked colleague.

Ever since their inception in the late 19403,
United Nations peacekeeping operations have been a
symbol of the challenges facing the Organization and
of its resolve to overcome them. That now-crucial
instrument was far from the minds of the men and
women gathered in San Francisco to adopt the Charter.
In fact, peacekeeping operations are the result of
evolving experiments conducted by trial and error
throughout a series of crises. Fortunately,
accomplishments have outnumbered shortcomings and
even occasional failures. From the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization to the United Nations
Multi-Dimensional Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), the process has involved long and
sometimes painstaking attempts to multiply scarce
resources and to meet pressing demands.

Since our presence in the United Nations
Emergency Force, Brazil has participated in
peacekeeping with more than 12,500 soldiers. Almost
50 years of experience in the field has provided us with
the means to assess operations and with the ability to
suggest a few guidelines for the future.

The fact is that, since 1989, the changed nature of
conflicts has led the Security Council to deal with
many internal confrontations and civil wars
constituting threats to international peace and security
or derived from earlier historical experiences. In those
cases, the process of healing has proved to be even
more difficult, as learned from the Missions in Angola
and Mozambique, in which Brazil took part.

The United Nations system gradually became
aware of the need to address complex situations in a
comprehensive manner. Not without difficulty, a whole
new approach was developed for peacekeeping
operations in order to tackle the root causes of
conflicts. Social, economic, historical, ethnic, cultural
and religious factors became part of the stakes in
United Nations peacekeeping, and all of those factors
needed to be addressed at the same time by
peacekeepers. Missions had to work in environments
that no longer ensured the safety of their personnel.
The idea of robust peacekeeping, as a means of
dissuading involved parties from engaging in conflict,
sprang to life and became quite important.

The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO), a whole new department of the United
Nations, was created. New political and institutional
challenges had to be overcome in a step-by-step
process. The Security Council and the General
Assembly were faced with the need to establish new
and expensive missions and to deploy them at short
notice. Member States were called upon to contribute
to missions on an unprecedented scale, and they were
up to the task. These first efforts in a changing
environment culminated in the adoption of the 2000
Brahimi report, whose comprehensive assessment of
the question led to recommendations that are still being
implemented.

Now we face yet another phase in this process. A
new surge in peacekeeping operations has taken place
since last year. The United Nations Mission in Liberia,
the United Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire,
MINUSTAH and the possible missions in Burundi and
Sudan are part of our political reality and inspire both
hope for the end of those conflicts and concern about
emerging difficulties and the ability of the United
Nations and of Member States to overcome them.

I would like to emphasize four structural issues
that seem crucial at this point.

The Organization is at the brink of overstretching
personnel for operations. The number of people in the
field will have almost doubled by the end of this year
compared with 2003. Some traditional contributors
have reached the limit of their possibilities, yet the risk
of leaving missions unmanned must be avoided. In that
respect, a number of lines of action should be pursued.

First, possible contributors should be identified, and
the Secretariat should act decisively to assist them in
overcoming the shortcomings that limit their
contributions. Reforming legislation and enhancing
public awareness about peacekeeping are two principal
areas in that regard. Brazil is currently working on a
new law to allow for a prompt and larger contribution,
which we feel would be welcomed. We are eager to
overcome our current financial and political constraints
with the help of the Organization and of other Member
States.

Secondly, the Organization and its Member States
should continue to enhance regional peacekeeping
capacities, paying particular attention to the need for
legitimate mandates and for proper operational
standards for peacekeeping missions. The criteria for
using Chapter VII to define mandates are a related
issue. Brazil has traditionally advocated the position
that allowances for the use of force should be limited
to what is strictly necessary. Yet we believe that in
recent years, the Council has tended to invoke Chapter
VII far too often. Although that option may be derived
from the intention to ensure that missions have the
means to discharge their mandates and to protect
themselves from violence, it should not infringe upon
the higher need to preserve the spirit of the Charter. A
possible solution could be provided through the
creative use of both Chapters VI and VII to define
mandates in an explicit form. But no solution will be
comprehensive unless we succeed in reaching an
equilibrium between mandates and the needs of robust
operations working in an unfriendly environment.

The swelling of bureaucratic structures is a third
danger now faced by peacekeeping operations. DPKO
needs to be strengthened - that fact is acknowledged
by everyone, since areas such as the police apparatus
and the prevalence of the rule of law are very new and
increasingly important. But any growth that is
conducive to ineffectiveness or inefficiency should be
avoided. Public information is another case in point.
Different approaches on the part of DPKO and the
Department of Public Information (DPI) are frequent,
and the possibility of duplication of work is a matter of
constant concern. Strengthening coordination
mechanisms and defining clearer mandates for United
Nations departments are necessary strategies to
overcome those obstacles.

The fourth - and probably most thorny - issue
is that of exit strategies. In all deployed missions, we
are concerned about how to withdraw at the
appropriate moment without compromising the time
and money spent on the ground.

Some have suggested that chronological
components are necessary from the beginning. I do not
necessarily share this line of thought. When the United
Nations enters a war-torn country, the Council can
hardly foresee a rigid timetable for departure. In some
past situations, haste has proved damaging, as it
induces restlessness and dissatisfaction. A better
alternative could be the establishment of clear,
substantive benchmarks from the beginning of a
mission. These could be reviewed periodically, as
needed. Above all, however, from the start
peacekeeping missions should seek to share ownership
with the peoples and Governments of the countries.
Timor-Leste is an example. The remarkable success of
the United Nations and its newest Member will be
consolidated by the existence of the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor for only one
additional year.

It is important that the limitations of peace
operations be understood and that other resources be
available to complement them. In this sense, the role of
the Economic and Social Council is crucial, as it
promotes efforts and measures towards development.
The ad hoc groups for Guinea-Bissau and Burundi are
excellent instances of the Economic and Social
Council's contribution to peace-building in an
integrated effort with this Council.

Regardless of criticisms concerning the ability of
this Organization to react to crisis situations,
peacekeeping operations work. They save lives, they
discourage conflicts and they help to rebuild peace.
They are not solutions in themselves, but they have
proven to be a powerful instrument in the work
towards peace. They must always be coupled with the
development efforts necessary to ensure long-term
sustainability. Successful peacekeeping operations
have shown the multilateral efforts of the United
Nations at their best - an earnest collective effort,
overcoming barriers of all sorts, to promote national
reconciliation and to achieve the ultimate goal of peace
and stability.

