Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank China, as President of the Security
Council for the month of July, for choosing the subject
of enhancing African capacities in the area of peace
and security for today's open debate. It demonstrates
China's commitment to strengthening peace and
security efforts in Africa. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General and the Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union for their comprehensive
briefings on the evolution of cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union (AU) in the
various areas related to peace and security.

The past few months have seen a number of
developments with regard to the strengthening of peace
and security in Africa. In January, the African Union
Summit adopted a road map reaffirming its decision on
practical steps to silence the guns by 2020, whose effects
can be measured and which divides the burden of the
tasks involved between the African Union and regional
organizations. The month of April saw the signing of
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, which the
Secretary-General and the Commissioner discussed
this morning in their briefings. To that we can add the
Secretary-General's report (S/2017/454) pursuant to
resolution 2320 (2016), on options for providing support
to African Union peace support operations. From now
on, the partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union constitutes one of the pillars of
the two organizations in their efforts to deal with the
challenges facing our continent of Africa, based on
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and
with regard to the specific characteristics of each of the
parties concerned.

In the past few years we have seen joint efforts
meet with success in such peacekeeping operations as
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur and through United Nations support to the
African Union Mission in Somalia. Through its Office
to the African Union, the United Nations has also
helped to strengthen the AU Commission's human
and institutional capacities, in a demonstration of
the increased awareness in both organizations of
the importance of new, innovative working methods
in dealing with today's challenges to peace and
security in Africa, which demand that the cooperation
arrangements between the two be restructured. As the
challenges continue to evolve in unconventional ways,
taking the form of transnational organized crime,
terrorism, piracy and trafficking in small arms and
light weapons, those challenges, whose effects are not
limited to our continent, are driving increased efforts
for cooperation and joint action between Africa and its
partners. Success in combating such challenges is also
closely linked to factors such as the strengthening of
institutional and human capacities in the African Union
and regional organizations, with the goal of achieving
our shared objective of achieving peace and security on
the continent and ensuring that the principle of African
solutions to African problems can become a reality.

The efforts that have been agreed on with a View
to implementing the concept of sustaining peace and
incorporating it into the work of both the United
Nations and the African Union require that we sharpen
our focus on the prevention of conflicts and on early
warning and the peaceful settlement of disputes. That
aspect is a major component of Africa's peace and
security architecture, through its Panel of the Wise and
the Continental Early Warning System. We hope that
cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union will win the support it needs to help strengthen
African capacities in this area so as to implement the
concept of sustaining peace.

Tackling the real, underlying causes of conflicts
is the simplest and least difficult way to settle them,
in both human and economic terms, because economic
development is so closely tiedto respect for human rights,
to strengthening good governance and to preventing
conflicts. We can also not ignore its importance as a
route to resolving conflicts on our continent through a
comprehensive vision based on all the activities that I
have just mentioned. Post-conflict reconstruction and
development is one of the chief pathways enabling us to
strengthen peace and security in our States by ensuring
that countries emerging from conflict do not relapse
into a vicious circle of violence. We must support
efforts to build institutions in those countries, so that
they can provide basic services, as the representative
of Japan so eloquently said. We must support national
reconciliation efforts, particularly those made through
national and conventional mechanisms. The African
Union has launched the African Solidarity Initiative,
which is currently being fine-tuned to create an African
Union Centre for Post-Conflict Reconstruction and
Development in Cairo. We would like to see the United
Nations play an active role in support of that initiative
through assistance in setting it up and in supporting
efforts to establish the Centre.

The African Union has played a decisive role
alongside regional groups in recent years aimed
at strengthening peacekeeping operations on the
African continent, in particular peace operations and
efforts to fight terrorism, as well as action taken in
dangerous circumstances that do not correspond to the
conventional criteria for United Nations peacekeeping
operations. I welcome the role played in that connection
by the African Union as well as by regional groups.
Their actions have been effective in tackling the
challenges, the repercussions of which are not limited
to the continent but spread to other parts of the world.

It is clear that efforts to build the foundations for
peace and security on the African continent will be
successful only with the support of the African Union
and regional groups aimed at carrying out those tasks,
whether in the Lake Chad region, the Sahel, Somalia
or elsewhere.

At African Union summits in recent years,
ambitious resolutions have been adopted to strengthen
self-sufficiency in reinforcing African peace and
security operations and to strengthen the Peace Fund
as a component of the African Peace and Security
Architecture. I would like to remind the Council of
the importance of resolution 2320 (2016), as well as to
direct the Council's attention to alternatives cset out
in the report of the Secretary General (S/2017/454) on
supporting African peacekeeping operations and on the
principle of using assessed contributions with a view
to financing peacekeeping operations in Africa in a
sustainable, flexible and predictable way.

I would also like to refer to the role of women and
young people in peace and security efforts in Africa.
We must strengthen the contributions of those two
groups in order to achieve peace and security on the
continent.

I once again thank the Chinese presidency of the
Council for having given us this opportunity to have an
exchange on this subject.

