Mr. Nahayo (Burundi) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to convey greetings to the Council from
His Excellency Mr. Laurent Kavakure, Burundi's new
Minister for External Relations and International
Cooperation. He would have liked to be here in person
to take part in the presentation of this first report
(S/2011/751) on the United Nations Office in Burundi
(BNUB), but the Government entrusted him with
another mission at the last minute. He asked me to
share the following statement with the Council.

The Government of the Republic of Burundi is
grateful to the Security Council for agreeing to
maintain its political partnership with Burundi through
the United Nations Office in Burundi after the 2010
elections. The Government of Burundi is also grateful
to the Secretary-General for his efforts, and in
particular those of the Department of Political Affairs,
which appointed an effective team for Burundi, led by
Ms. Karin Landgren. The Special Representative and
her team have conducted the transition from the United
Nations Integrated Office in Burundi to BNUB
successfully and on time. We commend them for that.
Nor should we forget to mention the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
which has continued to support us in our efforts to find
solutions to the remaining challenges to peace in
Burundi.

Our thanks are also due to the Assistant
Secretary-General in charge of the Peacebuilding
Support Office, whose commitment to peace in
11-62586
Burundi mobilized more than $9.2 million in additional
funds for consolidating the gains made in reintegrating
conflict-affected populations, particularly in Bubanza,
Cibitoke and Bujumbura Rural provinces, and for
extending reintegration operations to other provinces.

The Secretary-General's report on BNUB
assesses the implementation of resolution 1959 (2010)
by both Burundi and BNUB. In that regard, the
Government is grateful to the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative for their understanding of
the true worth of the progress that has been made in the
various areas addressed by the resolution. Those
include, in particular, the Government's adoption of a
national strategy on good governance and its fight
against corruption; its review of national defence and
security policy; the effective establishment of the
National Independent Human Rights Commission and
of the successful start of the activities of the Office of
the Ombudsman, as well as the preparation of
mechanisms for dealing with transitional justice. The
Government has already informed the High
Commissioner for Human Rights in Geneva that those
mechanisms will begin to be set up in January 2012.

The State Inspector General has already lodged
11 complaints with the Prosecutor in 2011. The
resolution and closure of those cases will enable the
Treasury to recover more than 20 billion Burundi
francs for damages suffered since 2007 - almost
$20 million - a quarter of which has already been
returned to the State's coffers. The Government of
Burundi again expresses its gratitude for the
contribution of the United Nations and its other
partners in obtaining those results and in ensuring that
their ownership has been assumed by other national
stakeholders, in this case by Parliament, civil society
and the media.

At the same time, the Government should be
allowed to explain why some results are yet to be
achieved despite its efforts and goodwill. The report
refers to extrajudicial executions and torture. The
Government would like to recall that the continuing
armed violence in Burundi is the result of several
factors. The first is the presence of illegal firearms.
Despite the efforts to disarm civilians, the Government
realized during the pacification campaign in
Bujumbura Rural province that stocks of arms still
existed in the country - the legacy, unfortunately, of
the last rebel movement to rejoin the peace process.
Moreover, the porousness of our borders exposes the

country to illegally trafficked arms entering from
neighbouring countries because of banditry or
rebellions.

Such armed violence may be related to score-
settling among former combatants, landownership
disagreements, clashes between armed bandits and
police or attacks on innocent civilians by armed
groups. At any rate, when those presumed guilty are
law-enforcement officers, the Minister of Public
Security deals with them severely. The 31 October
report on security in Burundi gives all the details on
that situation and states, in page 24, that 223 police
officers have been arrested for involvement in armed
violence. The Mission of Burundi in New York will
provide that report to all delegations in New York.

Furthermore, the Government has undertaken, on
the basis of the results of peacebuilding, brainstorming
on lasting reform of the defence and security bodies.
Planning for eight years with respect to the National
Defence Force, and for ten years for the national
police, the Government wants to make these agencies
the guarantors of peace, the rule of law and territorial
integrity, but also the driving forces for development.

With respect to justice and the rule of law, the
Government is not the only party responsible for the
slow pace of the judiciary bodies. Today we see
repeated requests for hearings from partners in the
justice system so that they can gather all their
witnesses or build their cases. One also must
acknowledge that due to the failure by certain partners
to meet financial commitments, the Government has
not had sufficient resources to be able to appropriately
complete some of the cases, particularly when the sad
events follow one after another very quickly, such as
the case of Rukoko or that of Gatumba. Let us not lose
sight of the fact that Burundi is a post-conflict country.
Once again, the Government would like to reassure its
partners that the cases pending before the courts will
be brought to a conclusion.

With respect to freedom of expression and of
assembly, the Government of Burundi respects those
principles. But that does not prevent it from
ascertaining compliance with the law by private
associations or the press, particularly when the latter
advocate violence or civil disobedience, or even
outright disinformation. Again, the report of
31 October 2011 on security in Burundi confirms, on
8
pages 27 to 29, that part of civil society and certain
press organs have deviated from those principles.

The report refers to the absence of dialogue
between the Government and the extra-parliamentary
opposition. On this subject, the Council would agree
that lack of dialogue is not due to the Government. His
Excellency the President of the Republic issued an
appeal to opponents in exile to return to the country to
take part in dialogue, and the First Vice-President
invited the opposition to join in dialogue. In both
cases, those partners have rejected the calls outright
and instead have called for negotiations like those of
Arusha - as if there were no legitimate power in
Burundi. It is regrettable to hear certain opposition
leaders justify the paths of violence advocated in
certain statements made under cover of anonymity.

The Government will continue to extend its hand
for political dialogue, but it will not cease it steps
aimed at implementing Vision 2025. Through this
Vision the Government wants to make Burundi a
country of the rule of law, where social cohesion
reigns, a country that is economically prosperous, with
population growth under control. It wants to ensure
effective management of its patrimony in terms of land
and of its urbanization, a nation well integrated into the
East African Community.

In this framework, Burundi is completing the
drafting of the second version of its Strategic
Framework for Growth and the Fight against
Poverty - CSLP II - which is based on four strategic
axes: strengthening the rule of law, consolidating good
governance and promoting gender equality;
transforming the Burundi economy to ensure sustained
growth and job creation; improving the accessibility to
and quality of basic social services and strengthening
the foundation of the social safety net; and
management of the area and the environment in
harmony with sustainable development.

Without waiting for the implementation of CSLP
II, the Government has already reformed the land code
and strengthened the actions of the national
commission on land and other property in order to
manage current land conflicts. It has launched the
village management policy in order to free up some
arable land and has undertaken sustainable
reintegration of populations affected by conflict.
His Excellency the President of the Republic of
Burundi launched the campaign to control population
growth, because the Government recognizes the
constraints that population growth imposes on
development. It is currently updating its national
gender policy to ensure that gender equality will boost
development

During this month of December, Bujumbura will
be the venue for the national forum on food security.

The Government of the Republic of Burundi has
already requested the United Nations and all friendly
countries to support the implementation of these
programmes for recovery now under way and those
11-62586
that will be defined on the basis of the CSLP II to
consolidate the gains that have been set out in the
report of the Secretary-General so that Burundi can
address the continuing challenges it faces. Long live
international cooperation.

