Mr. Pedersen (Norway): There is a strong
international consensus on how the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict should be solved. Let me mention three main
points.

First, a negotiated two-State solution with two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security, is the only way to achieve a durable peace.

Secondly, the parties should restate their
commitments to the two-State solution and take urgent
steps in order to reverse current negative trends on the
ground, including settlement activities and continued
acts of violence.

Thirdly, the outstanding issues between the parties
can be resolved only through direct negotiations.

Norway is actively engaged as the Chair of the so-
called Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of the International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC)
in supporting the parties to make further progress
on strengthening the Palestinian institutions and
sustaining the Palestinian economy. The donors need
to realize that the Palestinian Authority will not be
able to close the current financing gap by itself, partly
due to a significant drop in budget support. The donors
should reconsider their budget support commitments
and disburse their pledges made at the Cairo conference
in 2014.

The AHLC has never been an alternative, of course,
to any peace agreement, but a necessary condition for
it. As a State-building project, it has underpinned the
two-State solution. It is the only existing international
mechanism whereby both parties meet regularly and
engage in a serious dialogue to resolve outstanding
economic issues. Most important, with the assistance
of the AHLC, the parties have made progress and
delivered concrete results. Let me mention just two
examples.

First, an agreement was reached on transferring
the authority of the electricity sector to the Palestinian
Authority last fall. Secondly, an agreement was reached
last Sunday to renew the activity of the Joint Water
Committee to improve water infrastructure and supplies
to the Palestinian people. Both of those agreements
are significant steps in transferring authority to the
Palestinian Authority as outlined in the Oslo Accords.
Palestinian State-building must continue. It is critical to
the Viability of the two-State solution. It is also critical
for delivering basic public services, such as water and
energy, to the Palestinian people.

With regard to Syria, all sides should grasp 2017
as an opportunity to find a way out of the destructive
cycle of escalation and counter-escalation. The conflict
has already resulted in an economic loss of $275 billion,
and the estimated cost needed to reconstruct Syria is
a daunting $180 to $200 billion. The reconstruction
of Syria is intricately linked to the ceasefire and
political negotiations. We are therefore pleased that
the ceasefire is holding, thereby ensuring somewhat
improved humanitarian access. But the numerous
alleged Violations are of great concern. We hope that
the Astana meeting will focus on securing a lasting
ceasefire to further reduce violence. The ceasefire is
also important for confidence-building. It provides an
important framework in which to resume the United
Nations-led negotiations in Geneva on 8 February.
Resolutions 2254 (2015), 2268 (2016) and 2336 (2016)
must be fully implemented. It is time to get back to
work and agree on a peaceful future for Syria.

