The Secretary-General: The global security
landscape continues to change dramatically, but one
grim reality does not - children still pay the highest
price in wartime. Young boys and girls are directly
targeted and conscripted. They are tortured, maimed,
imprisoned, starved, sexually abused and killed. Their
homes and schools are destroyed. In places such as
Iraq, Nigeria, Somalia, South Sudan, Syria and Yemen,
children suffer through a living hell.

And in many cases, it is getting even worse.
Thousands of Syrian children have been killed since
the start of the conflict. Millions more are traumatized.
Last year, Afghanistan recorded its highest rate of child
casualties since 2009. In Somalia, recorded violations
increased by 50 per cent from 2014 to 2015. In South
Sudan, children continue to pay the heaviest price for
leaders' failure to commit to peace. In Yemen, six
times as many children were killed and maimed in 2015
compared tojust one year before, and five times as many
were recruited into fighting. Violence continues to take
a toll on Palestinian and Israeli children. My last report
(S/2015/409) called on Israel to ensure accountability.
That remains critical.

More than half of the world's refugees are frightened
children. We must urgently address the root causes of
displacement. At the same time, we have to confront
this massive crisis. On 19 September, we will hold a
United Nations Summit for Refugees and Migrants. I
urge all Governments to bring ideas and commitments
with a special focus on protecting children.

Violent extremism is forcing people from their
homes and communities. Extremists are torturing,
detaining and killing children, sending them on suicide
missions and selling them as sex slaves. An effective
response must place respect for human rights and
humanitarian law at the centre. That includes protecting
children during and after military operations, regardless
of their affiliation. I am deeply concerned that more
and more children are being arrested, detained or even
killed in counter-terrorism operations.

I am also alarmed by violations of international
humanitarian law caused by aerial bombardments.
Even wars have rules. Hospitals and schools should be
protected. Civilians should be spared. Children should
not be used to fight. Peacekeeping also has rules. We
must end the outrage of sexual exploitation and abuse
by United Nations peacekeepers, staff and non-United
Nations forces. I thank the Council for endorsing my
decision to repatriate units when we have credible
evidence against them, but we all must do more to
secure accountability, enforce standards, provide
training, assist victims and achieve justice.

Once again this year, objections to the annual
report (S/2016/360) forced me to make a difficult
decision. After very careful consideration, the Saudi
Arabia-led coalition was removed from the annexes,
pending the conclusions of a review. I have held talks
with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia at the highest level
possible, including meetings in New York with the
Deputy Crown Prince, the Minister of Defence and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, to express my serious
concerns about the situation on the ground and the
devastating impact on children. My senior advisers
were also intensely engaged. I have since received
information on measures taken by the coalition to
prevent and end grave violations against children. I
still have very strong concerns about the protection of
Yemeni children. They must always come first. The
forward-looking review continues, and the situation on
the ground will be closely monitored. We will continue
our engagement to ensure that concrete measures to
protect children are implemented.

But I want to repeat that the content of the
report stands. Let me be clear - the report and its
annexes may cause discomfort, but that is not a goal
in itself. Our aim is to protect children in danger by
ensuring concrete change. Today I renew my appeal to
every Member State and every party to conflict: If you
want to protect your image, protect children.

This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
office of the Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict. My Special Representative and her
predecessors have made a meaningful difference for
the youngest victims of war. Courageous and hard-
working staff in the field have collected and verified
information, sometimes at great personal risk. I fully
support them. This work and my Special Representative
deserve the full political backing of all Member States.

We need resources, but much more than that, we
need political will. Commitment yields results. In 2015,
more than 8,000 child soldiers were released. They are
getting help to rebuild their lives. Many countries have
also passed laws - with enforcement mechanisms - to
add new safeguards for children against recruitment.
The ultimate goal is to end these grave violations of
the human rights of children. That demands ending
conflicts and establishing peace. I call on the Council
and all countries to do everything possible to back
their words with actions that protect children from
the scourge of armed conflict now and spare others in
the future.

