Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): In
tackling the challenges posed by Iraq's programme of
weapons of mass destruction, the Government of the
Republic of Korea believes that all unanswered
questions concerning Iraq's programme of such
weapons must be fully resolved by Iraq's immediate
and full compliance with all relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 1441 (2002).

We note that, under strong pressure from the
international community, Iraq has offered some degree
of cooperation to the United Nations weapons
inspectors since the resumption of the inspections in
November 2002. However, the Government of the
Republic of Korea remains gravely concerned that Iraq
has not yet shown immediate, unconditional and active
cooperation, as provided for in resolution 1441 (2002),
and that many proscribed weapons and items still
remain unaccounted for.

My Government is of the view that the findings
of the inspection teams, including the most recent
reports given last Friday by Executive Chairman Blix
of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission and Director General
ElBaradei of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
have indicated neither full and voluntary cooperation
on the part of Iraq nor any full resolution of remaining
disarmament issues.

Given Iraq's persistent failure to comply with
successive resolutions of the Security Council during
the past 12 years, the inspections cannot continue
indefinitely. There should be a clear deadline for Iraq's
disarmament. Without a genuine intention to disarm on
the part of Iraq, the continued inspection process will
not lead to a full resolution of the remaining questions
with regard to Iraq's programme of weapons of mass
destruction. The responsibility to disarm clearly
belongs to Iraq. Given the absence of Iraq's genuine
will to disarm, it is essential that the Security Council
send a unified and resolute message to Iraq. It is time
for the Security Council, as the principal organ for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to act
on Iraq's failure to comply fully with its disarmament
obligations.

