Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Sir, for convening this open meeting with
Ambassador Kamel Morjane, allowing him to inform
all delegations about the work being undertaken by the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). I also
note the participation and presence of the Secretary-
General and the appeal he made in his opening
statement.

We thank Ambassador Morjane for his extensive
and, as always, lucid briefing and wish him great
success in his new post, in which he will be able to
continue providing valuable services to the peoples of
Africa and other continents.

Establishing peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is the primary task of the Congolese people
themselves. It is they who must restore coexistence
among themselves and with their neighbours.
Nevertheless, the countries of the region have called
for the presence of the United Nations to help them
overcome the deep difficulties and interests that
separate them. This task falls primarily to MONUC.

The presence of Kamel Morjane in the field has
been a positive factor in the success of the Mission.
However, the most difficult decisions for us in the
Council have, perhaps, yet to come, in particular in
facing the dilemmas of the third phase of deployment.
Following the cessation of hostilities and the separation
of forces, the conflict seems to have focused its
destructive capacities and greatest dangers to the
population on the eastern provinces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Thus, having listened to the
statement of the head of the United Nations Mission at
this meeting, I wish to refer to four aspects that, as we
all know, are of special relevance.

First of all, concerning the demilitarization of
Kisangani, it is true that the phase of the separation of
forces, which began in April, must be concluded as
soon as possible. We insist, as other delegations have
done in different circumstances, on the complete
demilitarization of the city of Kisangani and its
environs. This is a commitment that the
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratie (RCD)
has shown it is willing to fulfil, and we hope that it
does so without further delay. It is also a measure that
will greatly contribute to alleviating the suffering of
the population in the area and to restoring trust. We
hope that this city will become a symbol of peace,
located, as it is, in the heart of the country, and, if the
Congolese themselves so decide, that it can be the seat
of the national dialogue, the first preparatory meeting
for which will take place on 20 August in the capital of
Botswana.

The second item that I would like to mention is
that of navigation on the Congo River. My delegation
would like to highlight the presence of MONUC all
along the Congo River. We welcome the safe arrival in
Kisangani of the Uruguayan river unit, which has given
rise to the expectation, after three years of intense war,
that civil navigation along the river can be
re-established and the economy of the riparian
populations reactivated. The operation "peace boat",
which is soon to set out from Kinshasa, will provide
food and supplies to many people who live along the
banks of the river and will provide important support
for the humanitarian actions in the area. In this
connection, we would like to ask Ambassador Morjane
about the progress in the initiative to set up a
commission for the administration of the Congo River
basin, made up of representatives of parties to the
conflict, the United Nations agencies in the field and
neighbouring countries that will use this waterway.

The third aspect is the activity of the irregular
forces in the east. Here we would like to draw attention
to and condemn the serious violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law that have taken
place persistently and with impunity in the eastern
provinces of the Congo. We have been thus informed,
for example, in a recent and very useful meeting under
the Arria formula. The authorities of Kinshasa and the
countries associated with the conflict must refrain from
providing support, training and shelter to the irregular
forces that operate in this region, including the Mayi-
Mayi militias, and must provide MONUC with the
information that they possess on their number and
location. This is the procedure that was agreed upon to
begin a reliable process of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration resettlement or
repatriation of the so-called negative forces.
Negligence or delay in responding to these concerns
must be considered a serious obstacle on the road to
peace. We would like Ambassador Morjane to describe
the level of cooperation that the Mission has received
in this respect.

Fourthly, as for the humanitarian situation, my
delegation would like to respond to the concern that
prevails among humanitarian organizations as a result
of the current situation in the Democratic Republic of
Congo. We would like to add our voice to the urgent
call of the donors that was made in Geneva on 13 July
by the heads of the four most important humanitarian
assistance agencies of the United Nations system: the
Office for the Coordinator of Humanitarian Affairs, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the United Nations Children's Fund and the
World Food Programme (WFP). Stable and adequate
contributions and ease of access to the populations in
need are the two most urgent elements at the present
time. We praise with great appreciation and admiration
the relief workers who, even in the very hostile
environment that prevails in many provinces of the
Congo, persevere in their humanitarian efforts. We
cannot abandon them at this time.

