Mr. Mulet (spoke in French): I would like to
thank the Security Council for providing me with this
opportunity to present the latest report of the Secretary-
General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2013/22), which
was issued on 10 January, as well as to share with the
Council the most recent developments in the political,
security and humanitarian situation in Darfur.

At the political level, negotiations began on
20 January between the Government of the Sudan and
the faction headed by Mohammad Bashar of the Justice
and Equality Movement (J EM), under the auspices of the
Joint Chief Mediator ad interim, Ai'chatou Mindaoudou
Souleymane, and the State of Qatar. The parties are
expected to Sign in the near future a framework calendar
to guide the negotiations leading to the adoption of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.

From 10 to 14 January, the mediation team
organized a capacity-building workshop for the J EM-
Bashar delegation. The African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur provided experts to support
the mediation efforts, in particular on matters related
to a ceasefire agreement, security arrangements and
gender matters.
On the implementation of the Doha Document
for Peace, following the appointment of 46 of the
67 members of the Council of the Darfur Regional
Authority in October 2012, the Council was formally
inaugurated on 16 January in Nyala, in the province
of South Darfur. The Council of the Darfur Regional
Authority is chiefly responsible for evaluating the
performance of the Authority, guaranteeing that it is
well managed and reviewing laws having to do with the
Authority's responsibilities. During the inauguration of
the Council, the First Vice President of the Republic
of the Sudan, Mr. Ali Osman Taha, renewed the
commitment of the Government to the peace process
and announced a parliamentary budgetary decision to
allocate 800 million Sudanese pounds, the equivalent
of approximately $181 million, to support the peace
process in Darfur.

As outlined in the report of the Secretary-General,
the Darfur Joint Assessment Mission finalized its
evaluation of economic recovery, development and
poverty eradication needs before the Darfur donor
conference. From 13 to 21 December, the Chairman
of the Darfur Regional Authority, Mr. Tigani Seisi,
led a delegation that included representatives of the
Government of the Sudan to Belgium, Italy and Spain,
to seek support for the donor conference.

In addition, on 25 December, President Omer
Al-Bashir issued a decree establishing a committee
to examine the current conditions in which aid
organizations are working in the Sudan. Members of
the committee include representatives of the National
Humanitarian Aid Commission, the Darfur Regional
Authority, the national security and intelligence forces
and the Ministries for Foreign Affairs, Defence and
the Interior. Nevertheless, UNAMID and humanitarian
partners have still not seen improvements in
humanitarian access on the ground.

(spoke in English)

I am seriously concerned about the increase
in hostilities between the Government and armed
movements and by the rising intercommunal violence
taking place in some parts of Darfur, and the associated
impact on the civilian population. Further to the
military clashes described in the report before the
Council, on 31 December local community sources
reported that Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid
forces had ambushed a Government military convoy
near Guido, approximately 23 kilometres north-
east of Nertiti, in western Jebel Marra, resulting in
the capture of Government military vehicles and in
military casualties. Fighting reportedly continued in
the area on 2, 7 and 9 January, including - according
to local sources - bombing by Sudanese Armed Forces
aircraft.

Throughout that period, UNAMID and humanitarian
access to G010 and Guldo remained obstructed by
forces of the Government and armed movements.
Humanitarian agencies thereafter verified the arrival
of 5,000 displaced persons to Nertiti as a result of the
hostilities. UNAMID facilitated humanitarian needs
assessments and transported emergency aid to Nertiti.

Intercommunal violence flared up in early January
when the Beni Hussein tribe and Aballa camel-herding
tribes clashed in Jebel Amer, in El Sereif locality,
40 kilometres north-west of Kabkabiya, North Darfur,
over access to a gold mine administered by the Beni
Hussein group. On 4 January, a group of Aballa
tribesmen reportedly initiated mining activities without
the approval of the local mining committee charged with
overseeing mining operations in the area. An altercation
ensued, resulting in the killing of one Aballa tribesman
and injuries to three members of the committee. Shortly
thereafter, the Aballa mobilized militia and entered the
mining area by force. Up to 100 hundred people are
reported to have been killed, 47 people injured and an
estimated 25 villages destroyed. Some 60,000 civilians
were displaced including 10,000 to Kabkabiya,
8,000 to Saraf Umra and 25,000 to El Sereif. Several
thousand displaced mine workers were transported by
Government authorities back to their places of origin in
other states.

UNAMID transported state authorities, including
the Wali of North Darfur and a delegation from the
Darfur Regional Authority, to the area to intervene and
initiate reconciliation talks between the tribes. It also
provided special flights to airlift civilian casualties.
Beni Hussein militias blocked attempts by UNAMID
to gain access to the area where the fighting began.

On 13 and 14 January UNAMID and humanitarian
agencies conducted a humanitarian needs assessment
in areas of displacement. Thereafter, UNAMID
transported aid and provided security escorts to
humanitarian agencies for the delivery of more than
44 tons of urgently needed non-food items.

Following the intervention by Government
authorities and UNAMID, tribal leaders declared
a ceasefire on 17 January and committed to a
reconciliation conference planned for April. However,
sporadic clashes between the tribes have continued in
the J ebel Amer area and, more recently, on 19 January, in
and around Foro Baranga, in central Darfur. UNAMID
will continue to conduct confidence-building patrols
to affected areas and to engage with traditional leaders
and Government authorities to stabilize the security
situation.

With regard to the safety and security of UNAMID
and humanitarian personnel working in Darfur, I am
pleased to report that, on 2 January, with the support
of the Government of the Sudan, the two UNAMID
formed police unit personnel who were abducted in
Kabkabiya, North Darfur, on 20 August 2012, were
released unharmed, after 136 days in captivity. We
continue to urge the Government of the Sudan to hold
the kidnappers and the perpetrators of other attacks
against UNAMID and humanitarian personnel working
in Darfur accountable. I am equally relieved to report
that the three UNAMID national staff members
who were arrested on 24 and 25 December 2012 by
national security officers in Nyala, South Darfur, were
released on 22 January. All charges against them were
dropped. Despite that positive development, we urge
the Government of the Sudan to respect the immunities
afforded United Nations personnel working in Darfur
in order to enable them to implement the Mission's
mandate in an impartial manner.

(spoke in French)

The security situation in some parts of Darfur,
particularly in the west of Jebel Marra and in North
Darfur, has worsened gradually since my last briefing
to the Council, in October 2012 (see S/PV.6853).
UNAMID has undertaken measures to bolster civilian
protection in those areas, including by strengthening its
early-warning and rapid-response capacities.

The goal of achieving a comprehensive and
sustainable peace in Darfur nevertheless requires of
the Government of the Sudan a holistic settlement of
the issues of political and economic marginalization
affecting not only Darfur but also the Sudan as a
whole. Along the same lines, parties, including all
armed movements and the Government of the Sudan,
must put an end to hostilities and commit to addressing
grievances through peaceful dialogue.

The full implementation of the provisions of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur includes the holding
of consultations and an internal political dialogue in
Darfur, which must provide an opportunity to deal
with the causes of the conflict while contributing to an
improvement of the security situation on the ground.
In that respect, the full support of the international
community remains necessary to keep the attention
of the Sudanese Government, the Darfur Regional
Authority and the signatory and non-signatory armed
movements focused on the need to achieve a peaceful
resolution of the conflict.
