I thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their critical updates. We appreciate their efforts this year to try to end the daily suffering of the Syrian people. As 2020 comes to a close, there is little to celebrate in Syria and much to mourn. More than 9 million Syrians need food assistance, the largest number since the outbreak of the conflict nearly a decade ago. We must not forget that it was Russia and China that forced the Security Council to slash the United Nations cross-border humanitarian access in half amid a global pandemic. The Al-Assad regime's use of barrel bombs, air strikes and shelling in north-western Syria, arbitrary detention and torture have killed and injured thousands of Syrian civilians. The Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) has been weakened but remains a threat. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues its uncontrolled spread, in particular among those already displaced by the regime's violence. Sadly, this month marks the fifth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2254 (2015) and five years with little meaningful progress towards a political solution that would end the conflict and create the foundation for a sustainable and peaceful future. Despite the grim reality, the Al-Assad regime and its enablers seek to convince the Council that the situation is improving. Unfortunately, for the people of Syria that is far from the truth. We have said many times and will say it again - there is no military solution to this conflict. Even if the guns are silenced, the social and political wounds from this decade-long horror story will fester. The only way forward for peace and stability in Syria is for the Al-Assad regime to support the political road map outlined in resolution 2254 (2015). The United States will continue to oppose any attempts by the Al-Assad regime and its allies to bypass resolution 2254 (2015). We take note of the fourth round of the Constitutional Committee earlier this month and welcome the Special Envoy's plans to convene a fifth round in January. But the Al-Assad regime must meaningfully participate in the process and stop putting up new roadblocks. We urge the Al-Assad regime and Russia to ensure that the January round produces immediate progress towards the drafting of a new Syrian constitution. We underscore Special Envoy Pedersen's authority to take the measures that he deems appropriate in facilitating the parties' efforts to begin work on the new constitution itself. Itis increasingly apparent that the Al-Assad regime is delaying the Committee's work to buy time as it prepares to carry out a sham presidential election in 2021 and wash its hands of the United Nations-facilitated political process. Syrian elections will not be recognized as legitimate by the United States and the international community if they are not in line with resolution 2254 (2015). The international community will not allow the Al-Assad regime to impose a military victory on the Syrian people with an illegitimate presidential election and no political reforms. While the Constitutional Committee process is under way, the United Nations and the Council must also redouble efforts to make progress on the other elements of resolution 2254 (2015). The United States supports the Special Envoy's call for a nationwide ceasefire. Moreover, we call on the Special Envoy and the United Nations to press the Al-Assad regime for the immediate release of arbitrarily detained persons and for the regime to provide the families of the more than 100,000 missing Syrians with information on the whereabouts of their loved ones. In the new year, the Syrian people need to see the United Nations-facilitated political process achieve tangible results to implement resolution 2254 (2015). Without that, millions of Syrian refugees and internally displaced persons will not return to Syria; the United States and the international community will withhold reconstruction and development funding to the regime, in keeping with the principles and parameters of the United Nations; and the United States will continue to sanction the regime and its supporters for obstructing the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people for a political solution. One essential element for lasting peace is to promote accountability for those who have committed atrocities in Syria. We express our strong support for the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 as a means to gather evidence of the atrocities that the Al-Assad regime and ISIS have perpetrated, which will pave the way for a legitimate political solution. The International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism should be fully funded by the General Assembly and should not be attacked by those Member States that may be held accountable for the crimes they perpetrated against the Syrian people. Turning to the humanitarian situation, the recent practice of combining the Council's monthly meetings on the political and humanitarian situations is short- sighted and sends a dangerous signal to the Syrian people that the Council does not care and will not act to alleviate their suffering. That tactical manoeuvre, orchestrated by the Russian Federation and followed by its supporters, protects Bashar Al-Assad. Combined meetings further politicize the Council's discussions on Syria and leave little opportunity to truly address Syria's worsening humanitarian situation. Going forward, the United States supports separate monthly briefings to ensure that the Council remains focused on the needs of the Syrian people, not on what best serves the political narratives of Moscow and Damascus. The Al-Assad regime's failed economic policies are also inflicting a worsening toll on the Syrian people. Decades of corruption and mismanagement, coupled with years of waging war against the Syrian people, are responsible for the devastating economic conditions. The United States has imposed sanctions with robust humanitarian exemptions. I repeat - there are humanitarian exemptions designed to address any concerns. The sanctions promote accountability for the Al-Assad regime's violence and destruction, which have killed hundreds of thousands of civilians. The United States will continue to apply economic pressure against those who are robbing the Syrian people of their livelihoods through corruption, intimidation and violence. We would like to commend Belgium and Germany for their principled leadership over the past two years as humanitarian co-penholders. They have worked tirelessly to keep the Council focused on its core responsibility - helping to ensure that life-saving humanitarian aid reaches Syrians in need. The United States is determined to see the Council renew the vital cross-border humanitarian aid mechanism that is sustaining millions of desperate Syrians next year. The reauthorization of resolution 2533 (2020) is necessary to keep civilians alive. Bab Al-Hawa must therefore remain operational. Yet it is clear that one crossing point is insufficient to meet the growing needs, as evidenced by the current shortages of critical supplies, longer delivery times and the higher cost. In the midst of a pandemic, north-eastern Syria continues to face critical shortages of medical equipment due to the closure of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing almost a year ago. Al-Yarubiyah should be reopened, and the United Nations must be allowed full and unhindered access to Syria so that the humanitarian needs of every Syrian can be addressed. The regime's humanitarian blockade of Rukban also demands the attention of the Council. It has been 15 months since the Al-Assad regime allowed the last humanitarian delivery to Rukban, and the people in the camp have been without medical aid for just as long. We demand that the Al-Assad regime and Russia immediately allow unhindered access to the camp, including humanitarian delivery convoys. That kind of politicizing and weaponizing of aid cannot continue without outrage from the Council. Over the past 10 years, the Syrian regime has destroyed much of the country's health infrastructure, killed health-care workers and blocked the ability of civilians in opposition-held areas to seek medical treatment. That has resulted in a health- care system that was unable to meet basic needs even before the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. With COVID-19 now taking hold throughout the country, the regime is prioritizing health care in loyalist areas, leaving regions such as Dar'a, where the Syrian uprising began, with a shortage of medical professionals and supplies and very little humanitarian access. The pandemic has allowed the regime to continue its inhumane siege tactics to break the spirits of the Syrian people. We call on the Syrian regime to provide medical services equitably in all areas under its control and to allow humanitarian actors to deliver the needed supplies. In conclusion, I would like to speak directly to the Syrian people. The United States will never stop supporting their legitimate aspirations for an immediate and just end to this conflict. As the largest humanitarian donor to Syria, the American people have given more than $12 billion in assistance since this tragic conflict began. They can trust that we will continue to do everything in our power to deliver the aid that they need to survive this upcoming winter and keep COVID-19 at bay. Let us renew our hopes and redouble our efforts for peace in this new year.
