Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): In today's global world, the fabric of
international relations is ever more complex. The
primary actors continue to be States; however, non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) and other
elements of civil society are increasingly involved in
international activities. As a result, the challenges
facing the United Nations in the areas of security and
the peaceful settlement of conflicts are becoming more
complex. International peace and security are being
understood ever more broadly and, in particular, are
acquiring an intra-State dimension. I am thinking, for
example, of situations involving massive and blatant
human rights violations.

The comprehensive nature of threats to
international peace and security requires that we
develop a comprehensive strategy for conflict
prevention and for the peaceful settlement of disputes.
In such a strategy, we believe, a useful role could be
played by civil society, together with the efforts of
States and organizations.

Civil society often acts as an important link
between Governments and political groups of various
kinds and helps to establish a dialogue between the
parties to a conflict. The activities of civil society are
closely intertwined with the issue of defending human
rights. In many cases, relevant non-governmental
organizations serve as indicators pointing to dangerous
trends affecting human rights that could potentially
lead to conflict situations. Therefore, those NGOs are
an element of early conflict prevention. At the same
time, we need to take into account the fact that
information coming from NGOs may not be free of
subjectivity.

Without active involvement by civil society in the
extremely important initial phases of post-conflict
peacebuilding, in which there is a particularly high risk
of relapse into conflict, it is not easy to undertake
stable, long-term efforts to restore normal public life,
to ensure the irreversibility of the peace process, to
guarantee the establishment of political institutions and
to establish or restore judicial and law-enforcement
systems. We are closely following the development of
an initiative aimed at a global partnership to prevent
armed conflict. We are confident that that process,
which is being promoted by components of civil
society, will provide good support for conflict
prevention efforts by States.

In conclusion, we believe that the practice that
has been established, of interaction between the
Security Council and non-governmental organizations,
is commendable and in keeping with the Council's real
needs in the area of conflict prevention and settlement.
The Russian delegation will help to ensure that that
useful cooperation continues in its current, tested
formats.

