Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): The
Permanent Representative of Sweden will shortly
deliver a statement on behalf of the European Union,
with which France associates itself.

Allow me to make a few additional remarks.
First, I wish to welcome presence of the Deputy Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste, Mr. Jose Luis Guterres,
among us and to convey to him France's
congratulations on the successful celebration of the
tenth anniversary of the 1999 self-determination
referendum. That anniversary is an opportunity to take
stock of the impressive path taken by the country on
the way towards independence, peace and prosperity.
That success is primarily owed to the Timorese people
and political officials. However, it would not have been
possible Without the commitment of the international
community.

In that regard, I would like to pay tribute to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on the
occasion of his last appearance before our Council. In
the many years that he has spent in East Timor,
Mr. Atul Khare has worked tirelessly beside and for the
people. Through his discreet but effective action to
support the authorities, he played a part in the
emergence of a new State on the international scene.
Allow me to underscore the very positive role also
played by neighbouring countries, in particular
Indonesia, Australia and New Zealand, whose support
has contributed to maintaining stability in the country.

Consolidating the progress achieved will take
time. The events of 2006 demonstrated the
consequences of a hasty withdrawal of the United
Nations. The reassuring presence of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) and the
international security forces will therefore continue to
be essential to stability in the near future. We are
pleased that, as Mr. Khare has just explained,
UNMIT's activity is part of a medium-term strategy
aimed at having the Timorese progressively take over
the tasks currently undertaken by the United Nations.
With respect in particular to the transfer of
responsibility for law and order in the districts, it will
be possible in six months to assess the situation and
draw the appropriate lessons in adapting the Mission's
mandate, format and composition.

In that connection, we welcome the forthcoming
technical assessment mission to Timor-Leste, pursuant
to the demand made by the Security Council and the
Secretary-General for improved follow-up to
peacekeeping operations, particularly with regard to
police activities. The technical assessment mission will
also allow us to update the Mission's planning
documents, pursuant to resolution 1867 (2009).

The Secretary-General quite rightly emphasizes
in his report (S/2009/504) the importance to lasting
reconciliation of combating impunity for past crimes.
We share the concerns expressed by the Special
Representative and reiterate our support for UNMIT's
activities in support of the Prosecutor-General of
Timor-Leste, including with respect to the Serious
Crimes Investigation Team.

