Mr. Al-Sallal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, it gives me pleasure to congratulate your
friendly country, the United Kingdom, on its assumption
of the presidency of the Council this month. We are
confident that you will conduct the work of the Council
with skill and wisdom. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Kodjo Menan, Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Togo to the United Nations, for his
able conduct of the work of the Council last month.
Yemen has come a long way on the path to a political
settlement, based on the Gulf Cooperation Council
initiative and its implementation mechanism, as well as
resolutions 2014 (2011) and 2051 (2012). The National
Dialogue Conference, launched on 18 March, represents
the cornerstone of the settlement and the only way to
addresses all the different and important issues and
to form the new Yemen. The Conference has achieved
great progress over the past few months, in spite of the
difficulties it has faced, thanks to the wise leadership
of His Excellency President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour and his active follow-up to the work of the
Conference. The achievements to date are a source of
optimism and augur well for the future. Transparency,
frankness and understanding prevailed among all the
different parties that met at the same table for the first
time, putting the interests of the country before all else.

The first plenary of the Conference was successfully
held from 18 March to 3 April. The most important
accomplishments were the establishment of the nine
main working groups to address the different issues at
hand, which have prepared work plans and conducted
field visits to meet with various entities and citizens
to learn of their concerns with a view to promoting the
widest possible social participation.

The second plenary began on Saturday, 8 June, under
the presidency of President Mansour, 80 days after the
launch of the Conference in March. This session will
continue for a month and will be devoted to discussing
the preliminary reports prepared by the nine working
groups established by the National Dialogue Conference
in April to address the nine main national issues: the
issue of the South, the Sa'ada issue, transitional justice,
State-building, good governance, the restructuring of
the army and security, the independence of the various
institutions, rights and freedoms, and comprehensive
development.

The results achieved by the nine working groups and
the decisions and the recommendations emanating from
their deliberations will be discussed in the Conference
over a period of two and a half months. Moreover, field
visits are planned to the capital and 17 governorates
all over the country, as are meetings with more than
11,000 personalities representing the different strata
of society and its components, including private and
public institutions and civil society organizations, with
a view to conducting a vote to adopt all the decisions
and recommendations.

President Mansour has taken a series of measures
to establish trust and create an environment conducive
to the success of the Dialogue and to achieving the
desired results. Those steps have been met with
popular and international satisfaction. On 10 April,
President Mansour also took several decisions to
reorganize the military situation in the country, to
restructure and re-establish military zones, to appoint
military commanders and to continue restructuring
and reunifying the army on a genuinely modern and
scientific basis, with a view to protecting constitutional
legitimacy and to preserving the sovereignty of the
State.

President Mansour has also issued presidential
directives to provide all possible support to the two
main committees considering various issues, including
those related to land and idled public servants in the
civil, security and military fields in the southern
governorates, with a View to restoring rights and
rectifying injustices as quickly as possible. In addition,
he has also issued directives to release a certain number
of prisoners accused in a variety of cases with regard to
the southern movement Hiraak.

In spite ofall those accomplishments, Yemen is still
facing great difficulties in various fields, the foremost
of which are security imbalances and combating
terrorism and subversive acts, such as the destruction
of electrical lines and oil and gas pipes, that entail
heavy losses for the national economy, which is already
burdened, and have a negative impact on the lives of
citizens. At the same time, the Government is doing its
utmost to change the situation.

President Mansour has taken many bold and
wise decisions with a View to implementing the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative, its implementation
mechanism and relevant Security Council resolutions.
The political settlement in Yemen has entered an
extremely delicate and pivotal phase, which requires
the international community's continued support for
the efforts of President Mansour and the Government
of National Reconciliation, and its assistance to all
the parties in leading the transitional stage to success
and in preventing any party from obstructing the
implementation of the Gulf initiative.

Political support is essential for Yemen, but it must
also be accompanied by international development
support with a View to implementing the stability and
development transition plan for 2012-2014, thereby
improving the living conditions of citizens. In that
regard, we look forward to the realization of the pledges
made at the donors conference held in Riyadh, and the
meetings of the Group of Friends of Yemen, held in New
York and London, with a view to supporting the efforts
and programmes of the Government, which represent
an extremely important element of stability in Yemen.

We also appeal to the international community
to seriously support the 2013 Yemen Humanitarian
Response Plan, since the humanitarian situation in
Yemen represents a serious challenge to the Yemeni
Government and in view of the fact that reports
of the United Nations and other international and
regional organizations active in the humanitarian field
all indicate a grave humanitarian crisis in Yemen,
particularly among the displaced persons.

In conclusion, we reiterate our commitment to
the Gulf initiative and its implementation mechanism,
particularly the requirements of the second phase of
the transitional process, the foremost of which are the
comprehensive national dialogue, the drafting of the
constitution and submitting it to a referendum, and the
parliamentary and presidential elections, to be held in
February 2014, with a view to realizing the aspirations
of the Yemeni people to change, stability, security and
prosperity.

We would like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-
Moon and his Special Adviser on Yemen, Mr. Jamal
Benomar, for their efforts in support of the transitional
process. We would also like to thank the sponsors of
the Gulf initiative and its implementation mechanism,
including the five permanent members of the Security
Council and the members of the Gulf Cooperation
Council, foremost among which is brotherly Saudi
Arabia, as well as the countries of the European Union
and other brotherly and friendly countries that have
stood by Yemen in these difficult times.

