Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would
like to welcome Ambassador Regis and Special
Representative Honore to the Council today.

Back in April, the Security Council voted
unanimously to withdraw the military component
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). The Mission had been deployed since
2004, and the vote reflected our recognition of the
progress Haiti had made towards stabilization and a
return to democratic order. This week marks a turning
point. MINUSTAH is winding down. In just a few days
a new Mission, the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), will launch, devoting
its efforts where they are most needed - supporting the
rule of law, contributing to the continuing development
of the Haitian National Police and protecting
human rights.

We believe the transition sets a strong example of
how United Nations peacekeeping missions can and
should change as a political situation evolves. The
new Mission embodies the core principles of success
that we have developed as part of our peacekeeping
review, including making sure that the Mission's
mandated tasks and overall concept are consistent with
the political realities on the ground. We believe that
MINUJUSTH's staffing, including formed police units,
individual police officers and corrections officers,
as well as civilian experts in the rule of law, human
rights, political affairs, gender, conduct and discipline
and other key areas, will contribute significantly
to the justice-sector priorities that the international
community and the Government of Haiti have
identified. The mentoring and advising by the United
Nations of the Haitian National Police will continue to
be a key factor in the Haitian National Police's ability to
ensure public order and provide security for the Haitian
people. MINUJUSTH's focus on addressing pretrial
detention and other corrections-related issues will also
be important.

When peacekeeping works well we see countries
develop their own capacities to protect their citizens
and we see countries re-establish domestic political
processes. MINUSTAH has contributed to both those
goals in Haiti, and for that we salute the leadership
of Special Representative Honore, who has served in
Port-au-Prince since 2013. We know that the Secretary-
General's next Special Representative will be just as
committed to working closely with the Government of
Haiti and the Haitian people to achieve the important
mandate of the MINUJUSTH successor Mission. I
would also like to take a moment to recognize the troop-
and police-contributing countries and the thousands of
men and women who have served in MINUSTAH over
the years for their commitment to the Mission.

Finally, the support of MINUSTAH to the
Government and the people of Haiti has resulted in
the strengthening of State institutions - and their
establishment, in some cases - that are key to ensuring
the conduct of Haiti's constitutional and political
processes. Haiti's security, political and development
agenda can be shaped only by Haitians themselves.
It will therefore be critical to ensure that Haiti takes
this window of opportunity to advance dialogue
on the additional measures and reforms required to
consolidate the security and stabilization gains of the
past few years in order to strengthen its institutions so
that they can continue to meet the people's needs.

Together with the international community, the
United States looks forward to maintaining its close
partnership with the Haitian Government and people
in order to ensure the country's continued stability,
democratic development and future prosperity.

