Mr. Reyes Rodriguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Secretary-General for having submitted
his tenth report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2013/689). We agree with his conclusion that
the current situation leaves little room for optimism.

Cuba supports the need to protect civilians in
armed conflict in accordance with international law, in
particular, international humanitarian law, enshrined in
the Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols.

We are nearing the seventieth anniversary of the
Organization's establishment as a result of the resolute
decision of its peoples to protect future generations
from the scourge of war. We have been successful in
preventing a third world war but not in avoiding wars
altogether. That is still unfinished business of the
Organization and is the responsibility of all its States
Members. Nothing justifies the killing of innocent
people, and Cuba strongly condemns such action
wherever it may occur. Nor do we accept genocide in
the name ofpeace or the spurious justification to protect
civilians to conceal the real objective of overthrowing
a political, economic and social order that the people
subject to the aggression have decided to build in the
exercise of its soveriegn powers, in accordance with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and their
self-determination.

As States Members of the United Nations, we
must act decisively to prevent conflicts. Preventing
their outbreak is the safest and cheapest way to protect
civilians. As Member States, we must strictly uphold
the Charter of the United Nations, in particular respect
for its principles and purposes. We must not foment or
fuel conflicts when they unavoidably occur. The pursuit
ofpeace, and its strengthening once it is achieved, must
be the main objective when a conflict flares up. United
Nations peace forces must devote their efforts and
resources to achieving those objectives.

There is no justification for world military spending
continuing to reach astronomical figures. Today, it
amounts to $1.75 trillion, which is equivalent to 2.5 per
cent of the world's gross domestic product. The arms
race is not slowing down. On the contrary, every day
we see the appearance of new and more sophisticated
kinds ofweapons. Against whom will those weapons be
used? Are they intended to protect civilians? The wars
in Afghanistan, Iraq and Libya, to mention but a few
examples, show that that is not the case. The civilian
deaths in those wars were more than 90 per cent of the
casualties.

United Nations peacekeeping operations, in
particular those that have a mandate to protect civilians,
must be guided by the principles of the Charter and
under no circumstance become a means to change
Governments or to engage in military aggression. The
protection of civilians is the primary responsibility of
the host State of the peacekeeping operation. United
Nations peace force mandates must therefore be
implemented without prejudice to the responsibility of
the host State.

It is important to recall that the General Assembly
has the primary responsibility in the United Nations for
developing concepts and polices and for dealing with
the budgetary aspects of peacekeeping operations. In
that context, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations is the only forum in the United Nations with
a mandate to broadly review all aspects of peacekeeping
operations. Its recommendations cover the question of
the protection of civilians and are very relevant for
today's debate.

Coordination among the host countries of United
Nations peacekeeping operations and troop- and
police-contributing countries is essential. In his report,
the Secretary-General also highlights the modifications
made to the mandates of some field operations so as
to authorize offensive actions. That is a delicate and
contentious point, in the light of the basic principles
governing the operation of peacekeeping missions of
the Organization since its inception: respect for the
sovereign equality, the political independence and the
territorial integrity of all States, and non-interference
in their internal affairs. Member States must ensure
that those principles are strictly upheld and remove any
barriers to their application.

We share the concern of the Secretary-General
regarding the use of new technologies, in particular
of remote-controlled unmanned aircraft and so-called
autonomous weapons systems. If we truly want to take
action to protect civilians in armed conflicts, we cannot
leave such developments out of our deliberations. The
General Assembly should consider them with a view
to preventing such technologies from being used to
commit extrajudicial killings and other crimes against
innocent civilians. In addition, those responsible must
face justice and be held accountable for their crimes.
The Security Council should not stand on the sidelines
of those issues.

The report of the Secretary-General remains
silent once again on the dangers posed by nuclear
weapons, despite the fact that some nuclear-weapon
States stand ready to use them, even in conventional
conflicts. The international community is redoubling
its efforts to finally achieve the goal of a world free
of nuclear weapons, which is the only sustainable
solution in response to the immense threat they pose.
On 26 September, we will mark the first International
Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons,
as declared by the General Assembly in its resolution
68/32. The humanitarian consequences of such weapons
are part of the problem, and Cuba advocates that they
be addressed with the same approach.

It is impossible to advocate for the effective
protection of civilians in conflicts while at the same
time defending the use of nuclear weapons as part of
military doctrines. It is impossible to advocate for the
effective protection ofcivilians in armed conflicts while
at the same time stoking armed clashes and supplying
weapons to non-State actors, as is occurring at present
in Syria. It is impossible to advocate for the effective
protection of civilians in conflicts while at the same
time being complicit in the crimes being committed
against the Palestinian people and other Arab peoples
under occupation.

The region of Latin America and the Caribbean
has taken a leading role in promoting peace and the
peaceful resolution of disputes. Just a few days ago,
on 29 January, the leaders of theStates members of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States,
meeting at the second Summit of the Community in
Havana, declared Latin America and the Caribbean
as a zone of peace, as part of a comprehensive process
that seeks to end forever the threat or use of force as a
means of resolving conflicts, social inequality, poverty,
illiteracy and the lack of free and universal access to
basic services such as health and education - a world
guided by solidarity and cooperation among our peoples
to achieve prosperity and a region where human rights
are promoted and protected, including the rights to
development and to live in full freedom and dignity.

