Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me, at the outset, to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
to thank your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Italy, for his successful presidency
last month. I would also like to welcome Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Iraq, who is present at this meeting for the
first time to present the Secretary-General's report
(S/2008/19) on the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI). We commend his efforts to help
Iraq and the Iraqi people. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Khalilzad for his briefing on behalf of the
multinational forces, which are not occupying forces
but friendly forces helping Iraq and the Iraqi people to
maintain security and to protect the borders, in
accordance with resolutions 1546 (2004), 1637 (2005),
1723 (2006) and 1790 (2007).

My Government has considered the Secretary-
General's report contained in document S/2008/ 19. We
would like to present our comments in the light of
developments and progress in the situation in Iraq.

With regard to the evaluation of the political
situation, the Iraqi Government is determined to
continue its efforts to achieve national reconciliation,
to reinforce social cohesion and to avoid a civil war.
The Iraqi political arena is currently witnessing active
political interaction among political figures and leaders
to advance the political process and reach agreement in
favour of the Iraqi people. Moreover, the Iraqi Council
of Representatives recently adopted the Justice and
Accountability Law, which is considered to be a very
positive step towards achieving national reconciliation
and healing past wounds. The Council of
Representatives is currently considering the ratification
of the hydrocarbons law, the 2008 budget and the law
on governorates.

With regard to Iraq's efforts to normalize its
situation in the international arena and establish
relations based on mutual respect, cooperation and
friendship, the Iraqi Government has signed a
declaration of principles for a long-term relationship of
cooperation and friendship between the Republic of
Iraq and the United States of America, which will be a
framework for future political, economic, security and
diplomatic relations between the two countries.

My Government looks forward to regaining Iraq's
normal position in the international community and to
overcoming the heavy burden inherited from the
previous dictatorship, which subjected Iraq to special
measures stipulated under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations. My Government also looks
forward to the Security Council addressing Iraqi issues
beyond Chapter VII and in line with the significant
changes that have taken place in Iraq, and to starting a
new chapter of friendly and normal relations with the
international community.

The efforts led by the Iraqi Government in
cooperation with the United Nations during the second
expanded meeting of foreign ministers of neighbouring
States of Iraq, held in Istanbul in November 2007, led
to the endorsement of an ad hoc Baghdad-based
support mechanism. We expect that mechanism to
contribute to achieving security and stability in Iraq
and the whole region and to implementing what is to be
agreed upon by the ministers.

With regard to Iraqi refugees abroad and
internally displaced persons as a result of sectarian
violence, the Iraqi Government is keen to follow up on
this issue with the Governments of brotherly countries
hosting Iraqi refugees, especially neighbouring
countries, and to provide for the refugees' needs,
facilitate their voluntary return to Iraq, coordinate with
international organizations and support host countries.
In that regard, the Iraqi Government would like to
express its gratitude to host countries and international
organizations for their contributions to ease that
humanitarian crisis. My Government would also like to
express its appreciation for the efforts of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the recent appeal issued to support its efforts in
assisting Iraqi refugees. We would like to reaffirm the
continuous need for the support of the international
community until this crisis comes to an end.

As for the security situation, the Iraqi
Government is determined to confront and defeat
terrorism and to restore security and stability in all
parts of Iraq. Last year, the Government began a law
enforcement plan in the framework of its efforts to
enforce the rule of law, promote and protect human
rights and confront criminal and terrorist activities
targeting innocent civilians. That plan has brought
about results, and the Iraqi people are witnessing those
positive results. Dozens of members of the Al-Qaida
leadership have been killed, and many others in that
terrorist organization, which has sought to provoke
sectarian strife in Iraq, have been detained. In addition,
the efforts of the Iraqi political and religious leadership
have led to a ceasefire among the militias, including
the Mahdi Army.

The Iraqi Government has also made efforts to
cleanse the security organs of corrupt elements that had
infiltrated them. That step has led to the rebuilding of
confidence between the people and the security organs.
We should also mention the fact that the increase in the
number of the multinational forces and the role that
they have played in cooperating with the Iraqi forces
have helped in restoring security and stability in Iraq
and in reducing the number of terrorist activities and
the amount of violence, in addition to implementation
of the law enforcement plan and the deployment of the
Awakening forces in troubled areas. The Iraqi
Government is keen to invest in those improvements in
the security situation by taking over responsibility for
security in the Iraqi provinces, which it has done in
nine provinces thus far. The Government is working to
increase the preparedness of the Iraqi security forces to
assume their responsibilities throughout the country.

In the light of the significant improvements in the
security situation in Iraq, my Government would like
to invite, from this rostrum, all brotherly and friendly
countries to reopen their embassies in Iraq. We are also
looking forward to support from the international
community for our efforts to restore stability and
security in Iraq. In addition, we welcome the recent
steps taken by the United Nations to resume operations
in Basra. We look forward to the reopening of its office
in that city to provide needed assistance to the Iraqi
people, in accordance with resolution 1770 (2007).

My Government is keen to reform the Iraqi
economy, which was damaged by the wars launched by
the previous regime against its neighbours - wars that
exhausted and wasted Iraqi wealth. The Iraqi
Government is determined to utilize its revenues to
improve the standard of living and to increase the
prosperity of the Iraqi people. The Iraqi Council of
Representatives has adopted a series of measures,
including pension and salary increases for the retired
and civil servants. It has also approved social security
for the poor, orphans and the disabled.

Furthermore, the Government is seeking to make
full use of its 2008 national budget to carry out
projects and development plans, and it has declared
2008 a year for investment and development in Iraq.
The Government is also determined to take decisive
measures to combat corruption and to work to establish
effective and transparent national institutions. It
recently organized a conference, under the auspices of
the Prime Minister, His Excellency Mr. Nuri al-Maliki,
to discuss ways to combat the dangerous phenomenon
of corruption.

The Government and the people of Iraq, while
working to rebuild their country and its infrastructure
in order to fulfil the people's aspirations to
development and prosperity, are requesting that the
percentage of compensation paid from Iraqi oil
revenues be reduced, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, from 5 per cent to 1 per
cent. In that regard, the Iraqi Government is working
with our brothers in the State of Kuwait to find suitable
solutions that will serve the interests of both brotherly
countries. The Iraqi Government is also working with
other countries to resolve the issue of Iraqi debt in
accordance with the Paris Club measures. We would
like to express our gratitude to all the countries -
including, most recently, the Republic of Serbia - that
recently cancelled Iraqi debt, and we would like to ask
our brotherly countries to support the Iraqi people's
efforts to rebuild their country by cancelling Iraqi debt.
We look forward to the international community's
continued support for the economic and development
processes taking place in Iraq, through continued
support for and contributions to the International
Compact with Iraq. We also ask that the international
community support the Iraqi Government's efforts to
provide the basic services of electricity, clean water,
fuel and health care and to develop the service sector.

In conclusion, the Iraqi Government would like to
express its appreciation to all brotherly and friendly
countries that have supported the Iraqi people during a
difficult period. We would also like to express our
appreciation for the efforts of Mr. De Mistura and his
team in Iraq and New York. The Iraqi Government
reaffirms its ardent hope that the United Nations will
strengthen its role in Iraq by increasing its field
presence. We also reaffirm our cooperation with
UNAMI in Iraq.

In that regard, we would like to mention the
invitation addressed to UNAMI's Human Rights Office
from the Ministries of Justice, Defence, Interior, and
Labour and Social Affairs in Baghdad and Kurdistan to
visit detention facilities and prisons to look into the
situation of prisoners and detainees. The invitation
clearly attests to the keen desire of the Iraqi
Government to maintain its relations with UNAMI on
the basis of cooperation and coordination in the various
areas of its mandate, without prejudice to sovereign
Iraqi decisions. I would also like to express my
Government's willingness to contribute to the building
of UNAMI's new headquarters in Iraq in order to
facilitate the fulfilment of its mandate under resolution
1770 (2007).

