Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, and the German
delegation for organizing this important and timely
debate. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and Mr. Achim Steiner, Executive
Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme, for their briefings today.

In an increasingly interdependent and
interconnected world, changes due to growing
populations or increasing demands for natural
resources have the potential to aggravate social
tensions, political unrest and conflict. The Council's
main responsibility, namely, the maintenance of
international peace and security, clearly entails the
prevention of conflict. Recognizing the imperative of
security, we cannot neglect to address possible climate
change security risks, whose implications are certainly
a factor that should be taken into consideration.

Moreover, it is likely that the negative effects of
climate change will adversely affect the most
vulnerable regions and populations. It is possible that
additional pressures caused by climate change will
increase the risk of fragile States lapsing into conflict

or will disrupt efforts towards conflict prevention,
peacebuilding or post-conflict stabilization.

In certain circumstances the adverse impact of
climate change may contribute to aggravating existing
threats to international peace and security. In that
regard, the Security Council must be aware of the
potential security implications that climate change may
entail, including possible humanitarian crises,
migration pressures or external shocks for States most
heavily affected by climate change. As well, the
mandates and responsibilities of relevant United
Nations bodies addressing the issue of climate change
must be respected, specifically of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.

The importance of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) as a key
instrument for addressing climate change cannot be
overemphasized. In the same vein, the global nature of
climate change calls for the widest possible
cooperation by all countries on an effective and
appropriate international response based on the
principle of common but differentiated responsibility
while respecting existing institutional arrangements.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is of the view that a
coherent, integrated and holistic response by the
United Nations is the only way to meaningfully
contribute towards a response to this issue. In the same
vein, we believe that the Secretary-General, when
appropriate, should alert the Security Council to
climate-related crisis situations that may imperil peace
and security. It is crucial that relevant United Nations
bodies strengthen their capacities to deal with different
crises, including those resulting from climate change.
Their efforts should be focused on predicting,
preventing or handling climate change-related issues.
In that context, assisting countries to manage external
stresses and low adaptive capacity is Vital.

We consider that stronger support for climate
change adaptation in developing countries, including
through investment in capacity-building at all levels, is
necessary. When national capacities are insufficient,
underdeveloped or overstretched by natural disasters or
other hazardous events, the international community's
response must be unwavering and adequately
supported. Developed countries must also do more to
meet their international commitments to development
assistance. We believe that mainstreaming climate
change within the relevant bodies of the United

Nations and their activities should be continued and
strengthened. Furthermore, improving the flow of
information, sharing early warning assessments and
exchanging data between regional and international
organizations are essential.

In conclusion, climate change is a global
challenge that can be tackled only at the global level.
No country can deal with this problem alone. All actors
must therefore work in a concerted manner and fully
implement their commitments and responsibilities.
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a party to the UNFCCC
and as a country that has ratified the Kyoto Protocol,
stands ready to contribute to that endeavour.

