Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic): It is perhaps unprecedented in the history of the
deliberations of the Security Council that the Council
should be convened twice in one day to debate two
different subjects with the complaint being against the
same party in both cases. As was discussed in the Council
this morning, Israel's inhuman retaliatory measures
undermine the foundations of peace in the West Bank and
the Gaza Strip. The Council is now discussing the Israeli
aggression that began five days ago against Lebanon, an
independent country and a Member of the United Nations.
This aggression is directed against its sovereignty, its
territorial integrity and its people - a people with a great
history and civilization, a people that has been sincere in
its efforts to achieve peace, security, prosperity and
progress for itself and for the peoples of the region.

The common denominator in both complaints is the
approach adopted by Israel in dealing with developments
in the area, an approach that knows nothing except the
logic of brute force, oppression and collective punishment
as a means of resolving disputes. It does not believe that
peace and security are also based upon the
implementation of demands of international legitimacy,
foremost among which are the resolutions of the Security
Council.

Israel, more than any other country, should learn the
lessons of the tragic experiences that it has brought upon
its neighbouring countries. Having tasted their bitterness,
Israel should heed those lessons and not adopt again the
method of revenge, which has brought to the region only
instability, destruction, misery, frustration and extremism,
all at the expense of the desired peace and economic
development. The path to peace has never been and never
will be easy. It requires great care, effort and sacrifices.

Peace will not die. It will not be made into a mirage
unless military logic prevails and military power is used
excessively to deal with every little incident.

For the past five days Lebanon has faced blatant
aggression and is still facing it. Security and peace are
threatened not only in Lebanon, but in the Middle East as
a whole. This will lead to uncontrollable consequences
unless the roots of the problem - Israel's continued
occupation and its refusal to accept Lebanon's legitimate
right to rid itself of that occupation - can be dealt with.

 

Israel has ignored Security Council resolution 425
(1978), and all appeals made by the Council and by
regional and international organizations have fallen on deaf
ears. It has paid absolutely no heed to the tragedy and pain
left by its aggressive and oppressive policy against the
Lebanese people. It has never respected the central concept
of the Madrid Peace Conference - based on the principle
of land for peace - which was supposed to be a historic
turning point in the Arab-Israeli conflict. Israel wants to
maintain its occupation of the territories through brute
military force, under the pretext of ensuring security for
some of its territories. At the same time, it wants peace
with all, but a peace that takes no account whatsoever of
the legitimate rights of others, or of their political,
economic or social stability.

We have seen in the media pictures of the destruction
wrought on Lebanon: the killing of innocent women,
children and elderly people; the displacement of some
800,000 Lebanese in the south, which His Excellency the
Ambassador of Lebanon described earlier; and the
destruction of Lebanon's infrastructure, which was recently
rebuilt by the Lebanese Government after difficult years of
instability. Kuwait feels the pain of the brotherly Lebanese
people and shares its feelings during this painful
experience.

Kuwait condemns this aggression; expresses its full
solidarity with the brotherly Lebanese people and its
Government. It calls upon the Security Council to adopt all
necessary measures to stop the aggression immediately and
bring pressure to bear on Israel, by all the means that the
Charter provides, to withdraw from occupied Lebanese
territories and in implementation of resolution 425 (1978).
Furthermore, it urges the Council to provide all the
assistance, including political and financial support, that
Lebanon needs to cope with its plight and to pay great
attention to the human tragedy of forced displacement of
people brought about by Israel's military might.

The Council of Ministers at a meeting in Kuwait last
Sunday adopted a statement to this effect, and the
Government of Kuwait has extended urgent assistance to
face this tragedy.

The only way open to the Council is to commit Israel
to implement resolution 425 (1978), by withdrawing
completely and unconditionally from all occupied Lebanese
territory, and not to interfere in Lebanon's internal affairs,
thereby giving the flowers of peace an opportunity to
bloom. It should set out on the path of peace, using
wisdom, reason and self-control.

We support the peace process in the Middle East.
This process, which was started at the Madrid
Conference, will not achieve success unless peace is
comprehensive and just, not limited to one track while the
other is ignored; peace in which half-baked solutions are
not accepted; peace of partners aiming to achieve
equality, security, stability and economic development,
without diktat, selectivity or the granting of favours.

We appeal to the co-sponsors of the peace process
not to let hope - the hope of the Conference - dissipate
and to advocate the essence of the Conference, namely,
land for peace.

