Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Permit me at the outset to thank Ambassador Pascoe
for introducing the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2007/608). Belgium agrees with its analysis and its
recommendations.

A little less than a year ago, the United Nations
sent a double warning to Iraq and the international
community as a whole: first, that there was a risk that
the continued waves of terrorist attacks and sectarian
violence could lead to a widespread civil war; and,
secondly, that there was a danger that such a
destabilization would affect not only Iraq, but the
entire region.

A year later, that risk and that danger are far from
having disappeared from Iraq. Certainly, we can
cautiously welcome the fact that, for the first time, the
number of victims seems to be on the decline,
particularly in Baghdad. But, whether in Baghdad,
Mosul or Basra, Iraqis - particularly civilians -
belonging to all faiths and ethnic groups continue to
suffer an intolerable level of violence. Today more than
yesterday, that security challenge cannot be overcome
through an exclusively military approach.

With regard to its population, the Iraqi
Government now has the obligation to redouble its
efforts to achieve reconciliation among all parties,
based on the notions of the rule of law and respect for
fundamental rights. To that end, the tools available to
the Iraqis are well known: revising the Constitution to
restore Iraqis' confidence in a State that guarantees that
all communities can enjoy their right to participate in a
common future; continuing the legislative work on
sensitive issues such as the management of
hydrocarbon resources, the Baathist legacy and the
implementation of article 140 of the Constitution; and,
finally, strengthening institutions - particularly the
law enforcement forces - based on the democratic
rule of law and respect for fundamental rights. For our
country, the efforts of Iraq's Government and
parliament over the past few months confirm the
relevance of that assessment. However, a long road still
lies ahead, and greater efforts are needed to attain the
aforementioned objectives.

The other lesson of the past few months is the
twofold realization of the international community: on
the one hand, that the challenges facing Iraq do not end
at its borders, but also affect neighbouring countries
and the international community as a whole; and, on
the other, that it is our duty and in our interests to help
the Iraqi authorities in their efforts to find a response.

That realization has led to several initiatives,
which Belgium welcomes and in which we have
participated, directly or through the intermediary of the
European Union: the conference of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on
displaced persons, held in April at Geneva; the
launching, in May at Sharm el-Sheikh, of the
International Compact with Iraq, aimed at its
reconstruction and development; the regional
consultation organized at the ministerial level by the
World Health Organization, held in late July at
Damascus; the forthcoming meeting at Bari to discuss
the future of the International Reconstruction Fund
Facility for Iraq; and, in early November at Istanbul,
the continuation of Iraq's discussions with its
neighbours and with major actors in the international
community.

Belgium supports the process begun by the Iraqi
Government in March in Baghdad. That
systematization of a political and technical dialogue
should permit increased stabilization of the region,
with mutual respect for the strengthened sovereignty of
Iraq and of its neighbouring States.

However, in addition to increasing the number of
these initiatives, we should ensure that we maximize
the benefits of the partnership thus created between
Iraq and the international community, by empowering
the Iraqi Government and regional actors and by
guaranteeing, in addition to their unique
characteristics, the complementarity and coherence of
these initiatives so that we can have a real impact on
the daily life of the populations concerned.

It is out of this concern for coherence that
Belgium welcomes the renewed mandate that
resolution 1770 (2007) gave to the United Nations in
Iraq this summer. Although we are aware of the limits
imposed by the persistent lack of security, we express
our full support to the Secretary-General in his
determination to have the United Nations play a
strengthened role of coordinator and catalyst of
everyone's efforts to help Iraqi people to build the
country that they deserve.

