Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): At the outset, allow me
to join previous speakers in thanking Mr. Schwarz-
Schilling for his comprehensive briefing on current
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina. On behalf of
my delegation, I would also like to welcome
Mr. Terzic, current Prime Minister of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Slovakia aligns itself with the statement that will
be made later this morning by Finland on behalf of the
European Union (EU).

I would like to express our continued support for
the High Representative and the European Union's
Special Representative and his Office's engagement in
their ongoing efforts to promote intercommunity trust
and confidence-building, as well as deepening
responsibility through gradual strengthening of local
ownership. We welcome Mr. Schwarz-Schilling's
proclaimed intention to be an advisor rather than an
executor, although we assume that the current
constitutional set-up does not make possible the
immediate abandonment of the Bonn powers of the
international community. We therefore believe that the
implementation of constitutional amendments is vital
to the phasing in of further positive developments in
this regard. In this context, Slovakia supports the Peace
Implementation Council's decision to close down the
Office of the High Representative by the end of June
2007, and we believe that the forthcoming review will
confirm that decision in February 2007.
In this connection, we think it necessary to reject
any speculation that might attempt to establish a link
between the current situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the outcome of the Kosovo future
status process.

We share the assessment by the European Union
and the High Representative of the peaceful and

orderly conduct of the October general elections. We
look forward to timely formation of the new
Government and encourage all stakeholders to engage
in internal political discussions in a spirit that
contributes to strengthening the Euro-Atlantic
perspective of the country. We emphasize the need and
the advantages of direct dialogue among public
representatives of entities, which could demonstrate a
level of maturity of democratic institutions of the
country, which is still overcoming issues deriving from
its violent historical development. Nevertheless, we
believe that political will and an understanding of the
need to undertake reforms that are equally vital for a
European perspective will prevail.

The precondition for the successful conclusion of
negotiations with the European Union on the
Stabilization and Association Agreement is well
known: full cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. Slovakia
has taken note of a recent statement by some officials,
as well as some international representatives, that there
is no information to the effect that some well-known
persons accused of war crimes are on the territory of
the Republika Srpska.

We would like to acknowledge the need to move
ahead with police reform. On the other hand, we also
understand that this issue bears on the most precious
achievement of peacetime in Bosnia and
Herzegovina- that is, the question of the personal
security of populations belonging to different entities.
Therefore, we advocate a sensitive and step-by-step
approach, in parallel with measures aimed at
intercommunity trust and confidence-building.

Last but not least, we regret that the
decertification issue still remains unresolved after
almost a year of discussions. We certainly appreciate
the further joint efforts of the Office of the High
Representative and the relevant bodies of the United
Nations Secretariat to seek a mutually acceptable
solution. We continue to share and support the High
Representative's view that such a solution should
reflect all aspects of the issue, including its human
rights perspective, in order to preserve the legacy of
the International Police Task Force and the credibility
of the United Nations in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In conclusion, allow me to express our belief that
the western Balkans region is in need of good news.
Not less than 10 years ago, the Dayton Accords were
signed. I notice that the Russian abbreviation for
Bosnia and Herzegovina is "BIG", so let us hope that
the story of Bosnia and Herzegovina will indeed be a
big success story for the country and for the entire
region.

Slovakia, as a country historically linked to the
region, wishes to confirm its readiness and willingness
to continue to be a supportive partner.

