Mr. Lewicki (Poland): First of all, let me join other
colleagues in warmly welcoming Foreign Minister
Gustavo Meza-Cuadra to the Security Council and
in expressing our deep appreciation for his and his
team's positive contribution to the work of the Council.
Allow me also to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, for
his very informative briefing. I would also like to join
Ambassador Djani in expressing our appreciation for
the handout, which, on the one hand, reflects all the
achievements made over the past 15 years, and, on the
other hand, demonstrates the challenges faced by the
new United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH),
starting with the ongoing development of Haitian
National Police despite the progress already made, the
rule of law, and, last but not least, safeguarding human
rights and basic freedoms. Furthermore, we pay tribute
to the almost 200 brave men and women peacekeepers
who have lost their lives while serving the Haitian
people in Haiti over the past 15 years on behalf of the
United Nations.

To say that Haiti's situation is grim seems like a
major understatement today. The situation in almost
every area, including the social, political and financial
areas, has gone from bad to worse. Regrettably, during
the past couple of weeks, we have witnessed yet another
outbreak of violence as the security situation saw
another dramatic deterioration. We hope that President
Moise and the opposition parties will show goodwill
and explore every route towards breaking the current
stalemate by engaging in a deep, inclusive and sincere
political dialogue. This is, first of all, what the Haitian
people expect from their political leaders.

It is seriously worrisome that the elections scheduled
for 27 October have been postponed indefinitely as a
result of the persistent failure to adopt a new electoral
law and the lack of funds. In this situation, another
breakdown on the political track can be expected as
the terms of one third of the Senators and all local
elected officials will expire in January 2020, as Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix mentioned earlier.

Today, we are ending a lS-year-long peacekeeping
presence in Haiti as the new political mission, BINUH,
takes over. In this special moment, we have to
acknowledge the positive role that was played by the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH), which contributed in particular to
the transformation of the national police force and the
significant growth of its role and capabilities.

However, we are concerned that the Haitian
National Police has not been able to fully respond to
the latest outbreak of violence and conduct effective
operations against gang members, who, according to
the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/805),
are now effectively in charge in certain parts of Port-
au-Prince. We may lose everything we have gained
in the blink of an eye without the proper funding and
continued support of the international community.

We have to bear in mind that a number of the
objectives set out in the two-year exit strategy of
MINUJUSTH, including those relating to the rule of
law and human rights, have not been fully achieved.
It is creating a very demanding environment in which
BINUH has no time to lose.

Turning to the humanitarian situation, we hope
that the Government will work closely with United
Nations agencies and all relevant international actors
to bring humanitarian aid to millions of people who
are still in dire need of humanitarian food assistance.
It is worrisome that this crisis remains constantly
underfunded. To tell the truth, this remains one of the
most underfunded humanitarian crises in the world,
and we still need to resolve it.

In conclusion, the first review of BINUH in the
form of a Security Council discussion should take place
in February 2020. However, with this level of political
disengagement in Haiti, we have to be realistic about
the Security Council's capabilities. If neither side is
ready to make significant concessions, we might not
have much to review.

