Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Taye-Brook
Zerihoun for his detailed information on the recent
events in Iran. We are following the situation on the
ground attentively, and on behalf of France I have two
main points to make today.

First, we are meeting this afternoon on the subject
of the Middle East, more specifically the question of
Iran. We all know that there are items on the Security
Council's agenda that enable us to tackle and treat the
various dossiers related to international peace and
security in the region, whether their subject is the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) or whether
it is Lebanon, Syria, Yemen or Iraq. In that regard,
our role and responsibility is to be fully engaged in
working to find solutions to the challenges and crises
of the Middle East. It is in that spirit that it is essential
to ensure that we can maintain the nuclear agreement
with Iran, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action,
and enable it to be fully implemented. That approach
obtained consensus at the Council's meeting on
19 December (see S/PV.8143). The agreement commits
all of us, and the challenge we face is in implementing
it rigorously. The nuclear agreement is a cornerstone
of the stability of the entire region. The reverse side of
that coin is that its loss would represent a serious step
backwards, with potentially dire consequences, notjust
for the region but for the international community and
the nuclear-non-proliferation regime.

We must also be sure to maintain a demanding and
realistic dialogue with Iran on containing and limiting
its ballistic activity in order to ensure that it does not
become a destabilizing factor in the region. Besides
that, we must continue to conduct close exchanges with
Iran to enable us to confront Tehran frankly about the
concerns created by its influence in the Middle East
and its role in regional crises, particularly through
its actions in Iraq, Syria, Lebanon and Yemen. In
all of those countries we must find ways and means
to respond to external attempts to assert hegemony,
which can lead only to the failure of every effort to
stabilize the situation. That is the only way to make
progress towards peace and towards inclusive political
solutions to the conflicts that have roiled the Middle
East in recent years. Despite our sometimes serious
differences, which we acknowledge, all of us need that
dialogue. France remains more than ever committed to
that, while continuing to be watchful, clear-thinking
and candid.

The second point I want to make is about the issue
that has led the Council to meet today. I would like to
voice our concerns about the violence that has followed
the demonstrations in Iran in the past few days and about
the numerous victims and arrests that have resulted
among the protesters. We call on the Iranian authorities
to show restraint and calm and to respect fundamental
freedoms, including freedom of conscience, expression
and communication and the right to peaceful protest.
Iranians must be able to demonstrate peacefully and
have their views heard. We must remain vigilant in
order to ensure that those rights and freedoms are not
flouted, as President Macron of France told his Iranian
counterpart, President Rouhani, when they spoke on
2 January.

It is up to the Iranians and the Iranians alone to
pursue the path of peaceful dialogue, a dialogue that
is based on full respect for the fundamental rights and
freedoms of the Iranian people. However worrying the
events of the past two days in Iran may be, they do not
constitute per se a threat to international peace and
security. We must react appropriately, in other words,
be vigilant as to the threat of violence against peaceful
protesters, but be wary of any attempt to exploit this
crisis, which would only strengthen extremists and have
an outcome diametrically opposed to the one desired.

To conclude, let me say that change in Iran will
not come from without; it will come from the Iranian
people themselves.

