Mr. Wan Chat Kwong (Mauritius): I would like to
join previous speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council and to
commend you for your very able leadership. My
delegation's appreciation also goes to your predecessor,
Ambassador Wisnumurti, for his excellent stewardship of
the Council last month.

The Secretary-General has noted in his report that
substantial progress has recently been made in the
implementation of resolution 1075 (1996). Angola

 

continues to enjoy relative peace since the signing of the
Lusaka Protocol. All of this should have been welcome
news, but unfortunately implementation of the Protocol has
proceeded quite laboriously and any notable progress has
been recorded only when pressure has been brought to bear
on the parties.

There is no doubt who is the main responsible party
in this protracted process. UNITA can only be induced to
take some significant measures when the situation is due to
be reviewed by the Security Council. The report of the
Secretary-General makes this clear when it is states that,
after several weeks of procrastination, UNITA finally
allowed the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) to remove weapons discovered in an arms
cache in Negage.

At last count, more than 69,000 UNITA troops had
been registered in quartering areas, up from 63,000 last
September. The Council may recall that UNITA had
initially declared only 62,500 troops. At the same time,
some 13,000 of these troops subsequently deserted, up from
less than 11,500 last September. Two steps forward and one
step backward. This appears to be another tactic employed
by UNITA to delay or evade the complete respect of its
commitments.
While my delegation welcomes the adoption a few
moments ago of the resolution by the Council, my
delegation holds the view that the Council should perhaps,
at some point, seriously consider applying some of the
measures against UNITA envisaged in its resolution 1075
(1996), notwithstanding UNITA's declaration today -
which needs to be verified - to the effect that it has
quartered all its troops and surrendered all the weapons and
military equipment in its possession. True, UNITA has
made some positive gestures, but we have to ask ourselves
if its efforts are genuine. The past does not seem,
unfortunately, to vindicate UNITA's apparent sincerity.

Angola will continue to need the firm support of the
international community during its peace process and long
after it finally achieves normalcy. The tasks enumerated in
the Secretary-General's report are daunting, including such
challenges as the demobilization of tens of thousands of
troops and their reintegration into civilian society, the
rehabilitation of rural communities and assistance to large
numbers of refugees, displaced persons and ex-soldiers in
resettlement areas. My delegation earnestly hopes that the
donor community will respond generously to the appeal for
continued assistance, in accordance with the pledges made
at the 1995 Brussels Round Table Conference.

Finally, my delegation would like to pay a warm
tribute to Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye for his dedication
and tireless efforts in the peace process. I would like to
associate this homage to all the members - military,
police and civilian components - of UNAVEM. III for
their tremendous devotion to the cause of peace in
Angola.

