Ms. Bird (Australia): Mr. President, we greatly
value the partnership Australia has had with Uruguay
over the past seven years on the protection of civilians,
and we welcome your leadership on this issue in your
first month on the Council.

As the human cost for civilians caught up in conflict
continues to climb, we must take every opportunity to
press for stronger action, both armed and unarmed,
to protect civilians. There is no one solution for the
protection of civilians. The United Nations must use all
of the tools at its disposal to ensure a comprehensive
approach to protection across its security, political and
aid efforts. Australia is deeply concerned by the blatant
lack of compliance with international humanitarian law
by many parties to conflict. Existing mechanisms for
ensuring compliance are insufficient.

Australia was deeply disappointed that States failed
to agree on a mechanism to strengthen compliance at
the 32nd International Conference of the Red Cross and
Red Crescent in December. There is an obvious need
for a dedicated forum for an exchange between States
on compliance with international humanitarian law. We
urge all States to work towards this end in good faith.

Central to protecting civilians is the obligation
to provide for their needs, including by ensuring
the provision of humanitarian aid. Systematic and
widespread efforts to impede the delivery of life-saving
aid through the denial of humanitarian access has
become a deplorable feature of today's conflicts. We
welcome the provision of essential health and food
supplies to four besieged areas in Syria last week as
a positive step. However, full, unconditional and
sustained access to all people in need must be granted
immediately by all parties throughout the country,
in particular the Syrian Government. The practice of
besieging civilians to induce starvation is inhumane
and unlawful. All such sieges must end immediately.

Where peacekeeping missions have an explicit
mandate to protect civilians, uniformed personnel must
play their part, including, where necessary, through
the use of force. Robust peacekeeping is an essential
tool at the Council's disposal to protect civilians. The
Council must receive timely conflict trend analysis and
real-time analysis on the protection needs in country
situations. Unarmed civilian capacities ofpeacekeeping
operations must be reinforced to support this effort.

As highlighted by the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations, information-sharing is essential
for developing tailored peace operations mandates,
improving force generation and ensuring that those who
commit serious violations are held accountable. The
international community must also do more to support
effective political processes that promote peaceful and
inclusive societies and enable Governments to fulfil
their responsibility to protect their civilian populations.

Finally, ahead of the World Humanitarian Summit,
we call on the Secretary-General to detail clear, precise
actions for all actors to take to enhance the protection
of civilians and compliance with international law.
Action to protect civilians is at the heart of the work
of the United Nations. We must use all the tools at
our disposal - political, humanitarian, security and
economic development - to reinforce the sanctity and
centrality of protecting civilians in conflict.

