Mr. Messahel (Algeria) (spoke in French): I
would like to express my thanks to you, Mr. President,
for having convened this meeting on the situation in
Libya. My thanks also go to all the members of the
Security Council for allowing us to share with them
the assessment and view of Algeria on the crucial
and paramount issue for the security and stability of a
brotherly and neighbourly country, but also for peace
within the region and beyond.

I would also like to thank and express our full
appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya, Mr. Bernardino Leon, for
his selflessness and commitment and for the briefing
that he gave us at the beginning of this meeting on
the situation in that country, which is our immediate
neighbour. I also want to commend the presence of my
brothers, the Foreign Ministers of Egypt and Libya,
Mr. Sameh Hassan Shokry Selim and Mr. Mohamed
El Hadi Dayri.

I cannot begin my statement without recalling our
horror at the cowardly assassination of 21 Egyptian
citizens by a terrorist group and reiterating that my
country condemned with the greatest vigour this
abject criminal act. I take this opportunity to reiterate
Algeria's condolences to the Egyptian authorities and
once again to express our full sympathy and compassion
to the families of the victims.

Algeria, which has suffered and confronted the ills
of terrorism, including coming from Libyan territory,
as was the case with the attack against the oil facility in
Tigantourine, which the Algerian security forces were
able to neutralize by freeing more than 800 hostages and
preserving the facilities within the complex. We know
how much international solidarity and cooperation are
essential in such circumstances.

This latest development clearly illustrates how the
situation has deteriorated, and that is a source of major
concern, both for the speedy restoration of the country's
stability but also for regional and international peace
and security. More than ever, these developments are
appealing to our conscience and pushing us to to ramp
up our efforts to help and encourage Libyans to engage
in dialogue while rebuilding unity and national cohesion
and generating national consensus on their shared
goals, with the help of the international community.

We remain utterly convinced that only through
dialogue and national reconciliation can the various
parties overcome the serious crisis they find themselves
in, with all the consequences that could have for the
entire region. I can only say once again that a solution
that is so hoped for - and I do not think there can be
the slightest disagreement about it - can come only
from Libyans themselves, for Libya. The international
community's duty is to bring all possible political and
diplomatic means to bear in supporting, encouraging
and promoting that unique right. That is why my country
will continue to work, particularly through the efforts
and action undertaken on behalf of the United Nations
by Mr. Bernardino Leon, to help to create consensus on a
political solution that preserves the unity and territorial
integrity of Libya and the cohesion of its people, a
solution that will pave the way for the establishment
of the national institutions that Libyans want. Algeria,
duty bound by its solidarity with the Libyan people, but
also because Libya's stability concerns it directly, as it
does all the neighbouring countries, has initiated and
fully and wholeheartedly endorsed the efforts of those
neighbours, the African Union and the international
community to support our Libyan brothers on the path
of dialogue and reconciliation.

I would also like to recall that it is also at Libya's
request that my country has continued to deploy efforts,
with the discretion that this kind of situation requires,
to bring different viewpoints closer together and pave
the way for an inclusive dialogue that will, of course, be
open only to those who reject violence and terrorism.
That approach reflects a willingness to support the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in the
search for a political solution to the crisis affecting our
neighbour and brother country.

We commend the work that has been done by the
group of Libya's neighbouring countries. Algeria,
which is taking on the responsibility for coordinating
the group's security affairs committee, will fulfil its
task faithfully and with determination. We will of
course continue to support Mr. Leen, with whom we are
maintaining a dialogue at every level in order to ensure
that he can pursue his efforts and approach with a view
to reuniting all the parties. The negotiations conducted
at Ghadames I and II and in Geneva are emblematic of
the existence, ultimately, of a willingness on the part of
those parties, which we believe to be sincere, to seek
a political solution among themselves. We are pleased
that during the last round of inter-Libyan dialogue at
Ghadames II, the various parties in the Libyan crisis
committed to establishing an agenda for forming a
Government of national unity.

In our view that is a crucial and necessary step. We
believe that the formation of a Government of national
unity will affirm in the eyes of Libyans themselves
their full national sovereignty and allow it to receive
every kind of legitimate help and support from the
international community and the Security Council.
Establishing such a Government of national unity
would, in our view, constitute the best guarantee in
the fight against terrorism, which, as everyone - or at
least those who have experienced it - knows, feeds on
chaos and weak State institutions.

For its part, Algeria will make a full contribution
to that effort. We solemnly reaffirm our commitment
to continuing our efforts with our neighbours and
international stakeholders to arrive at a political
solution that will ensure the restoration of security
and stability in our brother country and promote the
building of a State with strong institutions capable of
meeting every challenge, including the priorities of
eradicating terrorism and every form of extremism. My
country also reiterates its commitment to providing all
the help necessary for establishing and strengthening
Libya's united public institutions, and we will do it with
all possible international good will, as agreed on with
the Libyan authorities. Algeria hopes fervently that the
Libyan nation can unite as soon as possible. The Libyan
people are demanding it, its neighbours are waiting for
it, and I think I can say that the entire international
community, as evidenced at today's meeting, is hoping
for it.

We do not have the right to fail in this mission, and
we have a duty to be sincere, to be clear and to learn the
lessons of the past. Every Libyan citizen, every refugee
and every displaced person, the memory of every victim
of terrorism and blind violence demands it of us. And
every people of the region demands it, demands that
we do not fail and that we work together for a united
Libya, living in peace with all its citizens and all its
neighbours. Algeria will do all it can to contribute, with
all possible tenacity and determination.

