Ms. Wensley (Australia): Thank you, Mr.
President, for arranging this open meeting of the
Council. Non-members of the Council are always
appreciative of such opportunities, but particularly
when they enable countries with direct interests in and
close knowledge of a particular issue or situation to
participate in a purposeful way - not just to have their
say or to put something on record, but actually to help
shape Council decisions and actions.

For my own Government, East Timor's transition
to independence, the ongoing challenges faced by the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) and East Timor's future prospects as
an independent nation remain very high priorities.
Australia wishes to see the emergence of a future
independent East Timor that is stable, democratic,
secure and has good relations with Indonesia and with
its neighbouring region. All of these outcomes can be
achieved only with the continuing active support of the
international community for the transition process.

It is also particularly appropriate that this
meeting, on the eve of the anniversary of the
population consultation, should be open to all
Members.

One year ago the international community
watched as the people of East Timor prepared to
express their will on the future of their territory,
ignoring the threats and the intimidation which they
had faced in the months leading up to the ballot. A
matter of days later, representatives of many, many
United Nations Member States gathered in this
Chamber to voice their concern at the awful turn of
events in East Timor and to urge - and indeed, to
bring about - a rapid and effective international
response to those events.

After an extraordinary year the people of East
Timor can, we believe, mark the anniversary of that
ballot, confident that their democratically expressed
wish for independence is well on the way to being
realized. The efforts of UNTAET and the East
Timorese to prepare for independence have certainly
been considerable and have been carried out in the face
of substantial challenges and obstacles.

The anniversary of the ballot is in many respects
an occasion for satisfaction, one in which all United
Nations Members should rightly have the opportunity
to share. It is also a timely opportunity to review the
progress achieved and to appreciate what remains to be
done. In that context, certainly my Government
welcomed the Secretary-General's latest report on
developments in the transition to independence, as well
as the update that we were given today by Assistant
Secretary-General Annabi. Under the able leadership of
the Secretary-General's Special Representative,
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, UNTAET has continued to
carry out its mandate in a thoroughly professional and
committed manner and to tackle the many challenges it
has confronted with commendable decisiveness.

We would also like to pay tribute not just to the
people on the ground in East Timor, in UNTAET, but to
the people here at United Nations Headquarters, the
Secretariat, who have an enormous workload but who
have continued to anchor UNTAET operations at this
end in an extremely effective way.

Despite some of the positive things we heard this
morning, it is also clear that very serious problems
remain. Australia is deeply concerned by, and
condemns, the attacks on United Nations peacekeepers
on the Indonesia-East Timor border, which have risen
in number and in frequency in recent weeks. The tragic
deaths of peacekeepers from Bangladesh, Nepal, New
Zealand and my own country in recent weeks, and the
attacks on humanitarian personnel, all point to
continuing dangers. My Government has conveyed its
sincere condolences to the Governments and families
so sadly affected.

We are particularly concerned by continuing
militia intimidation, especially militia harassment and
threats in West Timor refugee camps, which forced
UNHCR temporarily to suspend its operations in West
Timor. Also we are concerned by the very disturbing
suggestions we heard this morning of a change in the
pattern of activity by the militia, of increased
sophistication and a sense of greater organization.

Ultimately, it is the Government of Indonesia
which is responsible for ending militia incursions into
East Timor and for providing effective security to
ensure that there is no militia intimidation, that there is
unimpeded access to the camps for UNHCR, and that
there is a credible registration process for refugees in
West Timor.

It was for this reason that my Government
welcomed the Indonesian Government's recognition
that dealing effectively with the West Timor refugee
camps is fundamental to solving the problem of militia
activity. We consider that the Indonesian Government's
proposal to close the camps is a step in the right
direction, and we very much welcome Indonesian
discussions with UNTAET on taking this forward. My
Government, along with a number of other members of
the international community and the United Nations, is
working closely with the Indonesian Government to
explore the practical steps that are needed to implement
Indonesia's proposal.

Over the last 12 months Australia has provided
assistance of over 7 million Australian dollars to the
refugees in these camps. We are prepared to offer
further constructive, practical assistance to help people
in the camps and to facilitate the repatriation of those
wishing to return to East Timor. I want to emphasize
that it is of fundamental importance that repatriation
and resettlement of the remaining refugees be based on
free choice.

Australia urges the Indonesian Government and
TNI to redouble their efforts and to take all necessary
steps to end militia activity in West Timor by
disarming and disbanding the militia once and for all,
by removing them from the refugee camps and by
helping to bring to justice those who have committed
crimes.

It is our earnest hope that this first anniversary of
the popular consultation, this timely open Council
meeting, and the concerns that we have listened to this
morning as expressed by Council members and those
that we will be hearing from other Member States
today about ongoing problems will all help to bring the
situation in East Timor into sharper focus for all
Member States.

In particular, international attention and effort
need to be engaged, directly and urgently, in the
worrying security situation and in the serious problems
in the refugee camps. We cannot allow - especially at
this time and on the eve of the Millennium Summit,
when the report on United Nations peace operations
has just been released - the success of so many
aspects of the effort by the United Nations and
UNTAET in East Timor to be jeopardized by these
problems. Nor, I would suggest, can we allow the
profound promise sanctioned by this Council of a
smooth transition to independence for East Timor and
for the East Timorese people to be broken.

