Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in this meeting
of the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Spirie. We are grateful to the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Lajcak, for his report to the Council on
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We note the agreements achieved by the Bosnian
sides, on the basis of the Dayton Agreement, on the
parameters for police reform and the subsequent
adoption by the country's parliament of the two
relevant laws. The major tasks stemming from the
Dayton Peace Agreement have, on the whole, been
implemented. A convincing argument for this, we
believe, is the planned signing in the coming days of
the Stabilization and Association Agreement between
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the European Union.

The major imperative for the coming period must
remain a policy to transfer responsibility for the fate of
the country from international structures to the legally
elected Bosnian authorities. The long-awaited
fulfillment of the specific criteria outlined in February
of this year by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council is necessary. Their major
purpose is to ensure conditions for reducing the Office
of the High Representative and its transition into the
Office of a European Union Special Representative.

We will further lend comprehensive support to
the efforts of Mr. Lajeak in the reduction of the
activities of the Office of the High Representative. We
hope that the participants in the Steering Board will
show political wisdom and will not artificially drag out
the reduction of the Office by making the adoption of
such a decision dependant on an expanded
interpretation of the positive assessment of the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is quite clear
that the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is no
worse than in a number of other States in the Balkan
region, where there are no high representatives.

In this context, we advocate the earliest possible
conclusion of the legal procedures for the
implementation of Brcko arbitration verdict. As this
municipality is defined as being under the joint
authority of the Republika Srpska and the federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina; the idea being floated of
withdrawing it from joint governance and turning it de
facto into a third Bosnian entity is in contradiction with
the country's Dayton constitution.

We are counting on the positive role of the
European Union in supporting stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We are convinced that it should be
carried out on the basis of strict compliance with peace
agreements and the basic principle of consensus on the
part of the Bosnian sides. We favour a decision that is
designed to allow municipal elections in Srebrenica in
a calm atmosphere. We find any arbitrary actions
designed to violate the territorial jurisdiction of entities
unacceptable.

On the whole, we believe that the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has improved since the
serious political crisis in the autumn of 2007. This
constitutes grounds for continuing the international
community's policy for the transition of its presence in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

