Mr. Vrailas: I am speaking on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and its member States. The
acceding country Croatia; the candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Iceland and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.

At the outset, I thank the Committee Chairs for their
comprehensive updates and summaries of actions and
initiatives taken within the past six months. We remain
convinced that the work of all three Committees is of
pivotal importance to countering and preventing the
evolving threat of terrorism. We also remain committed
to their full implementation.

We are of the view that protecting human rights
and ensuring respect for the rule of law are of critical
importance in achieving the ultimate goal of countering
and preventing terrorism. We therefore welcome the
fact that the Security Council has taken significant
steps to further reinforce fair and clear procedures in
the Al-Qaida sanctions regime, particularly through the
enhanced mandate of the Ombudsperson introduced by
resolution 1989 (2011). We commend and highly value the

Ombudsperson's work. The Office ofthe Ombudsperson
provides listed individuals and entities seeking removal
from the consolidated list the guarantee that they can
put their case for delisting before the United Nations
authorities through an administrative review process
that includes an independent and impartial body.
We look forward to the forthcoming renewal of the
mandate of the Ombudsperson in December. We support
the further enhancement of the Ombudsperson's Office
and underline the importance of fully equipping it with
all the resources necessary. We call upon all Member
States to continue full cooperation with the Office of
the Ombudsperson in each and every case.

The third biennial review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy puts on a solid
footing all United Nations efforts towards countering
and preventing terrorism. We welcome the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001). With regard, in particular, to the Committee's
work on enhancing State capacity, we would like to
commend the seminars organized in Kuala Lumpur
and Algiers, as well as the workshop for Maghreb and
Sahel States. We are looking forward to the special
event devoted to the pertinent issue of the financing of
terrorism scheduled to take place on 20 November.

I would like to make a few remarks on the
non-proliferation regime under resolution 1540 (2004).
The risk of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
to non-State actors continues to pose a serious threat
to international peace and security. No single Member
State can handle the threat alone and therefore
continuous cooperation, exchange of information and
outreach activities and assistance play an important
role in building capacity to counter the threat of
weapons of mass destruction being used by terrorists.
The workload of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) is increasing significantly,
and for that reason we commend efforts to reinforce the
group of experts.

The EU member States engage actively in the
promotion of the objectives of resolution 1540
(2004), and to that end in June Lithuania hosted a
workshop for countries bordering the Baltic Sea and
for representatives from a number of international,
regional and subregional organizations. In July 2012,
Poland organized a workshop on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), with a focus on innovative
approaches to capacity-building and assistance.
Countries representing Eastern Europe, the Caucasus
and Central Asia, as well as representatives of the
EU, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, NATO, the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, took part in the workshop.

I would like to conclude by stressing that,
while we have witnessed significant progress in
the fight against terrorism, we should not lower
our guard. We should continue our joint efforts as
terrorist threats systematically adapt to the changing
environment. Therefore, unwavering commitment and
a comprehensive and global response are continually
needed.

