The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank all
speakers for their very kind words addressed to the
delegation of Peru in its capacity as the presidency of
the Security Council this month.

I also wish to note my sense that we all agree that
today's debate has been very interesting and fruitful.
The experiences described and the various
recommendations and proposals will contribute
positively to the Security Council's work on this item
in the future. Among the contributions, I would also
highlight the Arria formula meeting held yesterday
with the participation of representatives of
non-governmental organizations.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I am authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council takes note with
appreciation of the sixth report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict and the
positive developments in the implementation of
its resolution 1612 (2005), in particular in the
five following areas:

"(a) The Security Council takes note with
appreciation of the first reports of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism on children and armed
conflict and welcomes the increasing awareness
by some parties to armed conflicts of its relevant
decisions as well as the development by those
parties of action plans to end recruitment and use
of child soldiers in violation of applicable
international law.

"(b) The Security Council commends the
work carried out to that effect by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, including her field activities in
situations of armed conflict.

"(c) The Security Council also commends
the work carried out by UNICEF and the child
protection advisers of peacekeeping operations in
cooperation with other relevant United Nations
entities.

"(d) The Security Council welcomes the
cooperation extended to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General,
UNICEF and child protection advisers by some
parties to armed conflicts in the preparation and
implementation of action plans to halt
recruitment and use of children in violation of
applicable international law.
"(e) The Security Council welcomes the
sustained activity of its Working Group on
children and armed conflict and its
recommendations, and invites it to continue
proposing effective recommendations based on
timely, objective, accurate and reliable
information for consideration and, where
appropriate, implementation by the Council.

"The Security Council welcomes the steps
taken by national, international and 'mixed'
criminal courts and tribunals against those who
are alleged to have committed grave violations
against children in situations of armed conflict in
violation of applicable international law.

"However, the Security Council strongly
condemns the continuing recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict in violation of
applicable international law, killing and maiming
of children, rape and other sexual violence,
abductions, denial of humanitarian access to
children and attacks against schools and hospitals
by parties to armed conflict.

"On those bases, the Security Council
reiterates its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security
and, in this connection, its commitment to
address the widespread impact of armed conflict
on children and its determination to ensure
respect for and continued implementation of its
resolution 1612 (2005) and all its previous
resolutions on children and armed conflict,
including its intention to act if needed in
accordance with paragraph 9 of its resolution
1612 (2005).

"The Security Council takes note of the
report of the Independent Review of the
Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism for
Children and Armed Conflict, as called for in
Security Council resolution 1612 (2005).

"The Security Council reiterates its
invitation to relevant States affected by armed
conflict that are not yet involved in the
implementation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism to join it on a voluntary basis, in
cooperation with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and UNICEF.
06-63153

"The Security Council also reiterates its call
on relevant parties to armed conflict that have not
already done so to prepare and implement, as a
matter of priority, concrete time-bound action
plans to halt recruitment and use of children in
violation of applicable international law, as called
for in Security Council resolution 1539 (2005).

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to submit by February 2008 a
report on further progress in implementation of
Security Council resolution 1612 (2005) and its
previous resolutions on children and armed
conflict which would include, inter alia:

"Information on compliance by parties
to armed conflicts in ending the recruitment
or use of children in armed conflict in
violation of applicable international law and
other violations being committed against
children affected by armed conflict;

"Information on progress made in the
implementation of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism;

"Information on progress made in the
development and implementation of the
action plans referred to in paragraph 7 of
Security Council resolution 1612 (2005);

"Information on mainstreaming of
child protection in United Nations
peacekeeping operations."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2006/48.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6pm.
