I am delivering this statement on behalf of His Excellency Mr. Fuad Hussein, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Iraq. Iraq congratulates the delegation of the Russian Federation on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the current month and wishes it every success. It also thanks the Russian Federation for its good-faith efforts to find common ground and reach understandings on the sensitive situation in the Gulf region. Iraq takes this important occasion to reiterate its deep commitment to the basic rules that govern international relations and its unshakeable faith in the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, which include respect for the independence, territorial integrity and sovereign equality of countries; non-interference in internal affairs; good-neighbourliness; the peaceful settlement of conflicts; refraining from the threat or use of force; and the elimination of security threats through cooperation, all in the service of the higher interests of the peoples of the world. The fight waged by Iraq against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) terrorist entity from 2014 until victory was declared in 2017 has been one of the positive developments in the region. It constituted a practical application of an important principle of the Charter of the United Nations, namely, international cooperation to deter threats to international peace and security. Victory was achieved through the blood and sacrifice of all the various branches of our security forces, with the support of the Iraqi people and the assistance of the international coalition and all our friends, brothers and neighbours. Iraq has become a crossroads for all those with a stake in eradicating this threat to international peace and security. All our friends and brothers agreed to commit themselves to implementing the basic purposes and principles of the United Nations by supporting Iraq in fighting terrorism, restoring security and stability, and starting to rebuild what the ISIL terrorist gangs destroyed. Ever since 2003, Iraq has been working to repair the great rift in its relations with its geographic neighbours caused by the former regime. We have adopted a policy of dialogue, reconciliation and the gradual resolution of problems. Iraqi relations with both the sister State of Kuwait and the friendly Islamic Republic of Iran have been a major bright spot in the northern Gulf region. I should also like to note that currently, one of the most important priorities of Iraqi foreign policy is to expand cooperation with the Gulf States and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) to create a broad and common Gulf arena. The current policy of Iraq is based on the principle of dialogue, communication and building good and balanced relations to solve all outstanding problems. It steers clear of the use of force, which only blocks solutions and threatens regional security. To some, it appears that the Gulf region is suffering from security problems that are insurmountable. But the options for building security and establishing stability seem realistic if we adopt practical approaches to resolving problems instead of kicking them down the road and neglecting to manage conflicts. Iraq is receptive to all initiatives conducive to establishing security and stability in the Gulf. That is why Iraq calls for the adoption of a realistic perspective that regards the security of the Gulf as the responsibility of all the States that line its shores. At the same time, we urge all States of the region to cooperate with one another in earnest. A lack of dialogue and the hurling of accusations are not in anyone's interest. After all, there have been dialogues among the Gulf States in the past. There should be no hostilities whatsoever between the States and peoples of the region, who all must occupy the same geographic space. Ultimately, we have no choice but to come up with a formula for mutual understanding and dialogue among the region's States. We believe that it is necessary at a minimum for any initiative or security proposal to exclude no one, so that all States can engage with proposals put forward by any of them. We again affirm that Iraq will adhere to neutrality. The Gulf region must remain a safe, balanced and stable region, and we support all efforts to achieve calm there. Our standpoint is that the security of Iraq and the security of the region are one and the same, and that the best security is the kind that all States share responsibility for and cannot be fragmented under any conditions.
