Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank Under-Secretaries-General Lynn
Pascoe and Susana Malcorra for their briefings today
and Ambassador Elmi Ahmed Duale, the Permanent
Representative of Somalia, for his statement. We
welcome the presence here among us of the Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations.

Mexico recognizes the important efforts made by
the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia
in its struggle to stabilize the country. We also
welcome the work of Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, in the difficult circumstances he is facing.
Similarly, we would like to recognize the efforts of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to
achieve peace and stability in the country and the
commitment showed by the Governments of Uganda
and Burundi. We hope that the financial situation, the
stable situation on the ground and the support pledged
by other African countries through the provision of
troops will, together, bring about the complete
deployment of AMISOM. and enable the Mission to
fully meet the political, security and humanitarian
objectives of its mandate.

Mexico has noted the agreements and statements
made by the African Union as a result of the Sirte
summit in recent days, as well as the efforts of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development for
regional security.

We believe that it is vital that the Security
Council discuss the appeal of the Assembly of the
African Union that the Council impose a no-fly zone
and a blockade on Somali ports to halt the entry of
mercenaries and weapons, as well as issue sanctions
against Eritrea for providing support to insurgents. We
believe that the Council has a responsibility to take
action, given the worsening situation on the ground in
all areas and the challenges the country is facing in
increasingly critical conditions.

Instability and increased fighting in recent weeks
underscore the fragile nature of the situation in the
country. The violent deaths of the Minister for National
Security and the Chief of Police of Mogadishu are also
proof of the disturbing reach that Al-Shabaab and
related groups have in terms of the indiscriminate use
of violence. Raids by foreign fighters, insurgents' links
to Al-Qaida and the radicalization of their forms of
combat are also disturbing.

As result of violence and fear, there continues to
be a growing number of deaths among civilians, forced
displacements of the population, renewed shortages
and an increase in illnesses, in particular in camps for
internally displaced persons and refugees. It goes
without saying that the substantial political and
economic costs of this crisis are unsustainable. The
United Nations must provide assistance to the
Transitional Federal Government in order to promote
national reconciliation between the Government itself
and opposition groups within the framework of the
Djibouti peace process. We call for a rapid
implementation of the support shown at the donor
conference held in Brussels in April, in accordance
with national priorities.

My delegation is convinced that only by
reinforcing the capacity of the Government in the
security sector and the rule of law and ensuring full
compliance with international law will long-term
stability in the country and secure living conditions for
the Somali population be assured. Mexico believes that
the gradual approach that we adopted in resolution
1872 (2009) is the best way to coordinate the work of
the Government of Somalia, agencies of this
Organization and the support of AMISOM. We need to
ensure the successful implementation of that
resolution, with the objective of determining, at the
right time, the possible deployment of a peacekeeping
operation, in the best possible conditions.

However, given the current difficult conditions
and the history of chronic crisis and instability,
minimal security conditions on the ground must be
urgently established in order to ensure an ongoing
climate of stability. We believe we must continue to
explore options for finding the most appropriate
approach and strengthening the authority of the
Transitional Federal Government and promoting its
consolidation in terms of its ability to govern and
protect the civilian population. The implementation of
resolution 1872 (2009) depends on this primary task. It
is essential for safeguarding the survival of government
functions and the life and dignity of the population by
meeting their basic security, health and food needs.

The forced displacement of approximately
200,000 individuals as a result of the most recent wave
of violence has worsened the already critical
humanitarian situation and affected the survival of
some hundreds of thousands of Somali people, some of
them for entire generations. My delegation is deeply
concerned about the humanitarian situation, including
the situation of hundreds of thousands of internally
displaced persons and refugees, and we regret the
deaths, primarily of children, brought about by
malnutrition. Another crucial aspect is the situation of
insecurity in which humanitarian staff find themselves
and which has made it impossible to gain access and
entry into some areas. That has led to greater loss of
life.

Moreover, we condemn all actions against
AMISOM. staff and attacks that threaten the safety of
civilians and international staff, and the forced
recruitment of children. We endorse an appeal for full
respect for international humanitarian law, human
rights and the rights of refugees by all actors in the
conflict. We also call for respect for resolution 1738
(2006) on the protection of the media reporters and
associated personnel, and for resolution 1502 (2003)
on the protection of United Nations personnel,
associated personnel and humanitarian personnel in
conflict zones. Similarly, we reaffirm the importance of
combating impunity through the most appropriate
mechanisms, be they at the national or international
level.

We firmly believe that only through a
comprehensive approach to the conflict will it be

possible to achieve conditions that will allow for peace
in Somalia, the end of the generalized violence and the
return of hundreds of thousands of internally displaced
persons and refugees to their homes. On that premise
we must conceive any effort to combat the
phenomenon of piracy, armed robbery and acts of
violence against the safety of navigation in the Gulf of
Aden, as well as the need for those responsible for
those acts to be tried in accordance with the applicable
legal regime.

We support the work of the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, established in
accordance with resolution 1851 (2008), and we
recognize the importance of multinational operations
along the coast to combat piracy. That continues to be
an essential element for guaranteeing the entry of
humanitarian assistance to the population.

Mexico, as Chair of the sanctions Committee on
Somalia, is convinced that the sanctions regime has
had a direct impact on security conditions in the
country and has strengthened the peace process. We
have paid particular attention to the work of the
Committee's Monitoring Group with regard to
investigations on the illicit flow of arms from Eritrea in
support of insurgents. Similarly, in the coming days,
within the framework of resolution 1844 (2008), the
committee will be in a position to consider a first draft
of the list of individuals and entities that are acting
against peace and security in the country and that may
be subject to sanctions such as travel restrictions and
assets freezes.

We urge the countries of the region and the
international community as a whole to cooperate with
the committee's efforts to combat the illicit trafficking
of arms to armed groups in Somalia. Only through a
coordinated regional approach will it be possible to
establish the minimum conditions required for
generating the stability so needed in that country.

