The President: I thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Chile, whom we are very glad to see, for the
kind words she addressed to the United Kingdom.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.

I have listened today with very great interest to
the interventions and suggestions of colleagues
assembled here today. I think that we all understand
very clearly that free and prosperous societies need
order, security, stability and the rule of law. Without
the proper protection of human rights, post-conflict
societies can easily lapse again into a cycle of violence.

In its history, the Security Council has expended
a great deal of effort in trying to secure peace around
the globe. But in too many cases which have come
before the Security Council, conflict has soon re-
ignited, and this is wasteful not only, obviously, of
United Nations resources, but of the hopes and lives of
those who suffer.

I think that we therefore need to look hard at the
reasons why conflicts so often re-ignite and apply the
lessons from this to future United Nations
interventions. I suggest that we need a more strategic,
more coordinated and more consistent approach.

The United Nations obviously has much to
contribute to this increasingly pressing priority of the
international community of managing post-conflict
situations. The United Nations has the relevant
experience, ranging from international criminal
tribunals to training, policing and justice. The
contributions today from colleagues around the table
and from the Secretary-General bear that out. I believe
that the Council therefore has many lessons to learn
and to synthesize from this experience.

The tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda have broken new ground in international law.
They have shown that no one - no head of
Government or State - is above the law. But we also
need to recognize that those tribunals are slow and very
costly as a form ofjustice.
We have tried to apply some of those lessons with
the establishment of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone. It is set up in the country where the crimes took
place and within a time limit of three years. It will deal
only with those most responsible for war crimes. It has
avoided the top-heavy bureaucracies of the tribunals
for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. Both those
tribunals are costing well over $100 million a year. We
need to think about whether that has turned out to be
the most efficient expenditure of money.

In contrast, the Sierra Leone court has made a
good start. In little over a year, it has indicted 12
individuals, and it should begin trials in January of
next year. But its continued existence is threatened by
the failure of the international community to provide
the necessary resources. Bluntly, if we do not receive
$4 million before November, the court will be bankrupt
before those trials begin. I think it will be a very odd
situation when the international community is able to
find $100 million for the tribunal in Rwanda for a very
limited number of indictees but cannot find $4 million
to enable this very important tribunal contributing to
reconciliation in Sierra Leone to operate. I hope that
we can show our commitment to that process.

We also hope from our point of view that the
International Criminal Court will eventually remove
the need for separate international tribunals. As a party
to the Statute, the United Kingdom is fully committed
to the Court, and we have fully accepted its
jurisdiction. That said, we all know that justice is
always best delivered at a national level. Therefore,
international mechanisms should be a last resort. But
the problem is that conflict often breaks out in exactly
those societies where democratic structures, including
an independent judiciary, are weak. The international
community must therefore provide better resources and
expert assistance to help rebuild or establish robust
democratic structures, including courts.

The United Nations experience from its
operations in Kosovo, Afghanistan and East Timor
underline the fundamental importance not just of
judicial systems but of what has to go alongside those
systems: police reform, good governance and a
functioning and accountable system of public
administration. To achieve that and to help societies
break out of persistent poverty by creating the right
climate for economic aid and investment in which the
rule of law plays a crucial role, we have to harness
better the skills and expertise within the United
Nations and within other international organizations
such as the International Monetary Fund and the World
Bank. We need expertise that can be delivered speedily
and efficiently.

I have noticed that a consistent theme of
contributions today is the way in which the United
Nations could help by establishing a standing data base
of experts, nominated by Member States, who would
be available if called upon by the Security Council or
by States to assist in these areas. How many times have
I been asked in a United Nations forum or, for
example, in a European Union forum, for suggestions
of such experts. Each time we go back to scratching
our heads about who could make a contribution,
whereas, frankly, with modern data base systems and
the kind of cooperation that is essential, those names
and their expertise ought to be available on a standing
basis. I hope that the Secretary-General will be able to
offer his thoughts on the feasibility of those proposals.

The Council should also look at mainstreaming
rule of law issues into our work. I say this as a lawyer
who has often been the butt of jokes that lawyers are
somehow parasitic on society. Whatever people's views
may be about lawyers, the rule of law is absolutely
fundamental to the operation of societies. People can
carry on with their barroom jokes about lawyers, and
those of us who, as lawyers, earned an honest pound or
dollar in the past will have to bear them. But those
barroom jokes should not extend to undermining faith
in the rule of law because faith in the rule of law is
absolutely fundamental to the way our societies operate
and to the operation of the international community.

When peacekeeping mandates are under
discussion, the Council should be offered advice on
securing the necessary expertise. Those responsible for
ensuring the rule of law in the absence of effective
civilian authorities should follow codes of conduct.
That approach should be expanded throughout all
relevant United Nations operations and agencies.

I believe that today we have made a start by
focusing attention on the importance of the rule of law
in post-conflict societies, and I hope that we can
continue the debate in the future. We look forward to
hearing more from the wider United Nations family on
30 September. As President, I encourage the United
Nations agencies and the United Nations membership
to offer their fullest contributions. We look forward in
particular to the Secretary-General's report and to the
analysis that we trust it will offer on the way forward
on these issues.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council. After consultations among members
of the Security Council, I have been authorized to
make the following statement on behalf of the Council.

the

"The Security Council met at ministerial
level on 24 September 2003 to consider 'Justice
and the Rule of Law: the United Nations Role'.
Ministers expressed their respective views and
understandings on, and reaffirmed the vital
importance of these issues, recalling the repeated
emphasis given to them in the work of the
Council, for example in the context of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, in
relation to peacekeeping operations and in
connection with international criminal justice.

"The statements made on 24 September
demonstrated the abundant wealth of relevant
experience and expertise that exists within the
United Nations system and in Member States.
Ministers considered that it would be appropriate
to examine further how to harness and direct this
expertise and experience so that it was more
readily accessible to the Council, to the wider
United Nations membership and to the
international community as a whole, so that the
lessons and experience of the past could be, as
appropriate, learned and built on. The Council
welcomed in particular the offer by the Secretary-
General to provide a report which could guide
and inform further consideration of these matters.

"The Council invites all Members of the
United Nations, and other parts of the United
Nations system with relevant expertise, to
contribute to this process of reflection and
analysis on these matters, beginning with the
further meeting on this subject which will be
convened on 30 September 2003."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2003/15.

As there are no further speakers inscribed on my

list, the Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.
