The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

I thank Under-Secretaries-General Ms. Valerie
Amos and Mr. Alain Le Roy for their informative
briefings. We welcome the participation of the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Haiti.

Last year was one of the harshest in recent
Haitian history. Nature showed no mercy to the
country, as one disaster followed another. A devastating
earthquake, hurricane and cholera outbreak took their
toll and left deep scars on that proud nation. This
meeting of the Security Council offers the opportunity
to send the Haitian people a message of support and
encouragement and to assure them that the United
Nations and the international community will not let
them down.

Now, let me address some issues related to the
current situation in Haiti. We believe that the Haitian
people, with the support of the international
community, will be able to bring the electoral process
to a successful end. Concluding the electoral process in
a peaceful and credible manner is a critical component
of Haiti's ongoing recovery and reconstruction efforts.
The establishment of a legitimate Government is a
basic precondition for long-term stability and
development.

At this politically sensitive moment, it is vital
that the population and all political actors show
maximum restraint in order to avoid any deterioration
of the security situation in the country. We call upon
the Haitian authorities to ensure a calm and secure
environment for the second round of presidential
elections. It is imperative that the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) extend its
indispensable support to national authorities.

We welcome the assistance of the Organization of
American States (OAS) in the voting verification
process. This should be seen as a significant element in
ensuring the credibility of the electoral process. The
OAS recommendations should be taken into account by
the electoral authorities and Haitian political parties.

The new Government in Haiti will not have an
easy task before it. Along with reconstruction, the
Government will have to address outstanding
challenges in the areas of security, the rule of law and
institutional reform. Special attention should be given
to security sector reform. Enhancing the capacity of the
Haitian National Police must be a priority. The
international community and MINUSTAH must
continue to assist national authorities in that regard.

Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches great
importance to the social and economic conditions of
internally displaced persons in Haiti. It is crucial that
the ad hoc Presidential Commission on Resettlement
closely monitor and coordinate activities related to the
relocation and resettlement of internally displaced
persons. All activities related to those delicate issues
must be carried out with due sensitivity.

ll-21162
We welcome the roles of the Interim Haiti
Recovery Commission and the Haiti Reconstruction
Fund and their pivotal role in long-term reconstruction.
It is essential that donors continue to fulfil their
commitments to Haiti and provide the resources
necessary for reconstruction and development.
International donors must closely coordinate their
activities with the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission
in order to make international assistance more
efficient.

We commend former President of the United
States William Clinton for his efforts as the United
Nations Special Envoy for Haiti to enhance
international support to Haiti and to improve
cooperation with the Haitian authorities in facilitating
and coordinating assistance.

During these painful times for Haiti, the United
Nations and MINUSTAH have played a critical role. It
is important that partnership between the Haitian
people and the United Nations be further strengthened
to maintain positive developments and meet the
remaining challenges.

Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports the efforts
of MINUSTAH and its assistance to the national
authorities in the protection of civilians, in particular
internally displaced persons and other vulnerable
groups. We underscore the importance for MINUSTAH
to continue to work towards its full deployment as
outlined in resolution 1944 (2010).
In conclusion, on behalf of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, I would like to commend the United
Nations and MINUSTAH staff for their tireless efforts
and the important work they are carrying out in Haiti.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Ms. Valerie Amos to make a
further statement.

