Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me to welcome you, Sir, in assuming the delicate role
in the Council chair today. I would like to thank you
for organizing this debate to discuss the important
issue of support for African Union peacekeeping
operations authorized by United Nations mandate. We
are grateful to the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, and the African Union Commissioner,
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, for their comprehensive
briefings. It is also an honour to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Henry Odein Ajumogobia and thank
him for his contribution. We also welcome the
Secretary-General's report (S/2010/514) before us,
noting the progress that has been achieved thus far.

Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches great
importance to enhanced cooperation between regional
and subregional organizations and the United Nations.
Strengthening cooperation and strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union

(AU) is of key importance for conflict prevention,
crisis management and achieving lasting peace and
security on the African continent.

Further enhancement of cooperation between the
Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council is vital for reaching those objectives. It should
result in concrete action on the modalities and means
for the development of strategic partnerships when
addressing issues of mutual interest and concern.

The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and the African Union Mission in
Somalia are illustrative examples of cooperation based
on flexibility and making best use of the comparative
advantages of the African Union and United Nations in
the area of effective peacekeeping and peacebuilding
strategies.

The United Nations Secretariat and African
Union Commission need to ensure the
complementarities of their efforts, as well as realistic
benchmarks and timelines. Strengthening the efforts of
African Union and its institutional capacity to
effectively plan, deploy and manage peacekeeping
operations is a key prerequisite for their success. It is
also of high importance that the African Union ensure
leadership and ownership of the process. Bosnia and
Herzegovina furthermore considers that closer
cooperation between the United Nations Secretariat
and African Union Commission will, in addition,
minimize duplication of efforts. The establishment of
the United Nations Office to the African Union is a
practical step in that direction.

We commend the progress made in the past years
in the area of implementing the 10-year capacity-
building programme. We also welcome the launching
of the United Nations-African Union Joint Task Force
on Peace and Security on 25 September 2010. Such
initiatives and increasing United Nations engagement
in Africa will provide adequate ways forward to make
the African peace and security architecture fully
operational as soon as possible.

As stated in the Secretary-General's report,
focusing on developing the capacities of the peace and
security architecture, particularly in the areas of
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, is
crucial. In that regard, the operationalization of the
African Standby Force and the continental early
warning system should continue to be priority areas of
joint engagement. We welcome the idea of utilizing
more efficiently the Security Council's Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa as a forum for discussing substantive issues
related to peace and security in Africa.

Despite many positive developments, the
challenge of predictable, flexible and timely financing
remains an issue of concern. Therefore, it is vital that
all parties concerned continue their engagements in
activities aimed at reaching feasible solutions to that
important element of comprehensive and effective
implementation of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
mandates in Africa.

We are encouraged by the fact that African Union
Commission has implemented significant reforms
targeting the areas of staffing, budgeting, financial
management and accountability, which have resulted in
improved and effective financial management,
accountability and reporting.

The decision of the African Union and its
member States to broaden the resource base and extend
resource mobilization by 12 per cent of its regular
budget to financing the African Union's Peace Fund
reflects the political commitment to take responsibility
for peacekeeping operations. Bosnia and Herzegovina
warmly welcomes this decision.

Finally, the cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations, including the
African Union, becomes more and more important in
addressing the challenges of the contemporary world.
Bosnia and Herzegovina expresses its full support for
the efforts of the African Union as the regional factor
in resolving conflicts and upholding peace and security
in the region.

In conclusion, allow me to express our support
for the draft presidential statement prepared by the
delegation of Uganda.

