Mr. Jingree (Mauritius): My delegation joins
previous speakers in thanking the Secretary-General,
Special Representative Otunnu and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), Ms. Bellamy, for the important statements
they made this morning.

We commend the Special Representative for his
relentless efforts and commitment in dealing with
children affected by armed conflict. We welcome his
perseverance in trying to elicit specific commitments
from Governments and from representatives of armed
groups in several zones of conflict where children have
suffered immensely. He deserves our full
encouragement in his important endeavour.
This morning we were deeply touched by the
extremely revealing testimony of Alhaji Babah
Sawaneh, who gave us an unimaginable insight into the
despicable conditions of a child soldier's day-to-day
life. He is among the few lucky ones; he has been able
to demobilize and reintegrate into society. The Council
should realize that there are still more than 300,000 of
these child soldiers, mostly in Africa, who are still,
even as we speak, holding weapons and being forced to
fight.

The report of the Secretary-General has clearly
shown that existing normative standards can contribute
positively to the development of standards of
acceptable conduct for parties to armed conflict in
respect of children. While we note the efforts made by
Member States, the United Nations and regional
organizations in protecting and promoting the rights of
children in armed conflict, it is clear that a lot more
needs to be done to ensure that children are fully
protected in conflict situations. This meeting gives us
the opportunity to assess the implementation of
resolution 1314 (2000) and to come forward with
innovative ideas.

Children and women represent one of the most, if
not the most, vulnerable segment of society in any
conflict situation. All kinds of atrocities are committed
against them, especially in time of war. It is indeed
regrettable that not enough attention is paid to the
plight of this category of the population.

Conflicts and wars are not new events in our
world. Two world wars have been fought, yet in the
past children and women were always protected in one
way or another. Children were not allowed to become
directly involved in the fighting. This may have been
due to the fact that children were not physically strong
enough or mentally prepared to fight wars.

Today the situation has changed dramatically.
Children have, in fact, become one of most exploited
groups. There are various reasons for this, one of
which is the accessibility of small arms and light
weapons, which are extremely easy to manipulate.

While we welcome the important commitments
made by some countries in addressing the scourge of
the recruitment of child soldiers, we note with concern
that the Secretary-General continues to receive credible
reports of the recruitment of child soldiers by parties to
some of the ongoing conflicts.

The statistics are alarming. The primary
responsibility of protecting children in armed conflict
undeniably falls upon States. Greater efforts are
required by countries in conflict to provide protection
to children, so that they are not subjected to any kind
of atrocity and do not become easy prey for the
belligerents.

It is equally important that all parties respect
fully the norms of international law for the protection
of children in armed conflict. We strongly condemn the
recruitment of child soldiers and consider such acts to
be crimes against humanity, for which those
responsible should be brought to justice.

We note with satisfaction that the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict will
soon enter into force. We call on all Member States to
ratify the Protocol as early as possible.

My delegation believes that once dialogue starts
with parties to armed conflicts, one of the first
questions that needs to be tackled should concern the
plight of children and the elaboration of specific
programmes which would help monitor their protection
and eventual rehabilitation. The Secretary-General
should ensure that his envoys, peace emissaries and
special representatives take all aspects of the question
of children and armed conflict into consideration while
negotiating peace agreements and implementing their
mandates.

We welcome the decision of the Secretary-
General to ensure that all reports to the Council contain
specific information on the situation of children in the
country concerned.

Efforts to demobilize child soldiers in the midst
of conflicts and their rehabilitation and reintegration
into society are complex tasks, but they are crucial for
the prevention of re-recruitment or re-enlistment. It is
important that individual centres be given adequate and
sustained resources for long-term reintegration. In this
respect, we commend such agencies as UNICEF and its
partners that are involved in the rehabilitation of
children, particularly with respect to the counselling
and non-formal education that they are providing to
former child soldiers.

The Secretary-General had identified the lack of
basic information, one of the key characteristics of the
situation of children to be demobilized, as one of the
challenges for the agencies and donors attempting to
plan an appropriate child-soldier demobilization and
reintegration programme. We appeal to the
international community to extend its full cooperation
in the rehabilitation and reintegration process in order
to break the cycle of violence for children.

The linkages that exist between HIV, conflict and
children must also be addressed seriously. It is
inadmissible that children are the victims of sexual
Violence perpetrated not only by the rebel forces, but
also by militias supported by government forces. These
inhuman acts widen the spread of HIV and put the
future of coming generations at risk. The rape of
women and children as young as 12 years of age is
often used, by both security and rebel forces, as a
weapon of terror among the civilian population. If
urgent steps are not taken to address this problem
today, the burden on countries emerging from conflict
will be even greater tomorrow.

In this respect, we fully concur with the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that sexual
violence against women and children should continue
to be prosecuted as a war crime.

The use of children by organized drug traffickers
and by those engaged in the illegal exploitation of the
natural resources of countries is reported to have
gained prominence. The forcible dragging of children
into the drug-trafficking business and into involvement
in the illegal exploitation of natural resources must be
seriously addressed, and ways must be found to put an
end to such practices.

The rate at which children are being involved, in
one way or another, in armed conflict by organized
gangs is deplorable. The fact that a network is being
used to trade children to conflicts across borders makes
imperative cooperation at the regional and subregional
levels. We believe that regional and subregional
organizations, as well as Interpol, could play an
important role in tracking down this network. We
therefore appeal for greater cooperation by all of the
actors concerned in dismantling such networks.

Children are the custodians of the future and of
our world heritage. It is important that they be taught
the notions of peace, tolerance and respect for one
another. They should not be used to fight, nor should
they have forced upon them a culture of hatred,
violence and fighting as their only means of survival.

As members of the Security Council, we have an
important responsibility towards children and towards
ensuring a peaceful future for them.

