Mr. Calovski (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia): I would like to make a brief statement with
regard to the draft resolution on the United Nations
Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) that the
Council will adopt at this meeting. Before doing so, let
me say how pleased I am to see you, the representative of
the Republic of Korea - a friendly country to the
Republic of Macedonia - presiding over the Security
Council for this month.

At the same time, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank all the members of the Security
Council for their positive attitude towards the present and
future role of UNPREDEP in our region; to all the troop
contributing countries for their continuous readiness to
help; to the Secretary-General and his staff for their
efforts to make UNPREDEP an important success story
of our Organization; and, of course, to all the members of
UNPREDEP for their dedication and high level of
performance.

The decision of the Security Council to extend the
mandate of UNPREDEP for a further six months due to
the present situation in the Balkans will make it clear that
the Council and the international community continue to
support the preventive activities needed in our region and
are thus supporting the forces of peace which are
struggling against the forces of destruction - something
that requires international support.

From the start of the deployment of this preventive
United Nations mission for peace, the Republic of
Macedonia did its best to enable it to perform its duty
successfully. I am happy to note the broad recognition of
the fact that the activities of UNPREDEP and its clear
message greatly helped prevent the spillover of the
Balkan war towards the south, and also the fact that it has
been an important factor for stabilization in the region.

In spite of the success of UNPREDEP and the
stability of my country, the present negative developments
in the region, particularly in Albania, have made the
extension of UNPREDEP' s mandate an obvious necessity.
We are pleased that the position of my Government

 

coincided with the recommendation of the Secretary-
General to extend the mission's mandate and that this
position was supported by all members of the Security
Council. I am sure that this common attitude will give
strength to UNPREDEP's mission.

The preventive tasks of the mission in the coming
period will not be easier than what has been the case so far.
The complex situation in our region and the difficulties in
predicting precisely coming developments require the
continuous and able coordination of all peace efforts in our
region. In this regard, the capacity of the mission and its
ability to perform the tasks it is best qualified for should be
utilized thoughtfully and effectively. The mission should
continue to act as an important United Nations preventive
deployment force for peace in the region.

Let me end this brief statement by expressing the
satisfaction of my Government at the Council's decision to
extend the mandate of the mission. My Government will, of
course, continue to support it, and will cooperate closely
with UNPREDEP, as it has up to now.

