Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, as well
as Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and his Special
Envoy, the Chair of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee and all of the relevant departments
of the Secretariat for their efforts to support the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, which
was endorsed by the Council in resolution 2451 (2018),
adopted unanimously.

The Government of Yemen welcomes the adoption
of today's resolution 2452 (2019), which reaffirms the
international community's support for Yemen's unity,
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
My Government stresses once again the need for
comprehensive and lasting peace in a manner that
meets the aspirations of the Yemeni people to build
a new federal Yemen that enjoys peace, stability and
development while playing an active role in ensuring
regional and international security and stability. Such
a peace would be based on the agreed-upon terms
of reference, mainly the Gulf Cooperation Council
initiative and its implementation mechanism, the
outcome of the comprehensive National Dialogue
Conference and relevant Council resolutions, especially
resolution 2216 (2015).

The Government of Yemen has expressed its full
determination and commitment to supporting and
implementing the Stockholm Agreement without any
detraction. We call upon the Security Council and the
international community to monitor the violations that
Houthi militias continue to commit in an attempt to
create obstacles to what was agreed upon in Sweden.

During the past four weeks since the entry into
force of the ceasefire agreement on 18 December
2018, violations by the Houthi militias, supported by
Iran, numbered 573 up until 14 January, claiming the
lives of 41 martyrs and resulting in 396 persons being
injured. The Government of Yemen calls upon the
Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities and
condemn such violations in the strongest terms, as
they jeopardize the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement. We also call upon the Council to bring
pressure to bear on those militias to implement the
Security Council resolutions on Yemen, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015). We draw the Council's attention
to the cowardly terrorist act by Houthi militias that
targeted the Al-Anad military base last Thursday using
an Iranian-made drone. We call upon the Council to
condemn that criminal act.

In conclusion, we look forward to the United ordcrto guarantccthcimplementationofthcagrccmcnt
Nations mission to support the implementation of thc according m the established fimcmblc

Al-l-Iudaydah agreement, in line with its mandate as
set forth in the Council resolution adopted today, in The meeting rnse at 9.40 a.m.
