Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I thank you for organizing this public
debate on a very topical issue. Our Council dealt with
this issue last year also. Today's meeting enables us to
continue our reflections so as to constantly improve the
work of the international community in providing
assistance to post-conflict countries for the promotion
of justice and the rule of law.

For these countries, it is not only a question of
establishing functional national institutions; it is also a
question of learning healthy practices so as to
strengthen the very foundations of the State. Apart
from these two aspects of the question, I would also
like to comment on the relationship between the rule of
law, justice and development and, in particular, on the
potential impact of poverty and the wrong kind of
development on the rule of law and Vice versa.
Establishing or restoring the rule of law is absolutely
essential for post-conflict societies. In order to achieve
that goal, measures must be taken to legitimize the
exercise of institutionalized power and to ensure that it
promotes the general interests of society as a whole.
That presupposes a common social vision that reflects
a national consensus, which, in turn, can result only
from inclusive dialogue.

The establishment of democratic national
institutions requires that qualified persons be found to
lead them. Leader support for the democratic ideal and
for its implementation is an important factor which the
international community and the United Nations can
help to consolidate by providing a suitable framework
for the mobilization of international cooperation, in
order to ensure that new institutions learn the good
practices that they need to survive. The United Nations
can thereby contribute to the emergence of a true,
revitalized culture of democracy, which is the best way
of ensuring the rule of law on a lasting basis.
The rule of law does not depend only on a State's
leaders. It requires also the participation of all sectors
of society. The administration of justice in post-conflict
societies is crucial to restoration of the rule of law,
because it means that rights can be claimed,
compensation for damages can be paid, and human
rights violations that occur in conflict periods can be
punished. It therefore plays an key role in national
integration.

Post-conflict societies can meet the crucial need
to re-establish stability and to prevent another outbreak
of fighting by creating conditions whereby their
citizens can make their interests known and pursue
them peacefully and legally, a right guaranteed by a
democratic State.

In that respect, the administration of justice
through national structures is far preferable and less
expensive. Resort to alternative judicial measures that
are based on moral values is sometimes fully justified.
However, we have to recognize that shortages in the
area of human resources and of infrastructure - a
situation that often faces post-conflict countries -
means that it is not possible to ensure an adequate and
credible justice system.

In every case, priority must be given, in the
framework of international cooperation, to rebuilding
national capacities in the area of the administration of
justice and to considering alternative judicial methods
that take account of the cultural environment of the
country concerned.

Using international forums - for example, for
very serious crimes that violate international law - is
also fully justified. In that respect, we would stress the
need for ad hoc tribunals to continue to help
strengthen, where necessary, national capacity in the
area of the administration of justice. I would also stress
the need for such structures to have sufficient and
predictable resources, so that the message being sent
by the international community can be a truly
consistent one.

Benin welcomes the entry into force of the Rome
Statute establishing the International Criminal Court,
which is an essential instrument in combating
impunity.

In addition to the issues taken up in the report of
the Secretary-General, special attention should be
given to the dialectical correlation between the rule of
law and economic and social development. While the
rule of law and a functioning justice system are
essential to ensuring the sustainable development of
post-conflict countries, the rule of law, however, can
seem to be an unattainable luxury for countries that are
so poor that most of their people are just managing to
survive one day at a time.

That is the reason for excessive deforestation and
the other negative trends that can be seen in very poor
countries. It is clearly impossible for justice and the
rule of law to prevail in areas of extreme poverty,
which has very serious consequences for the affected
countries. That represents a real threat to international
peace and security.

Let us consider the extent of the devastation in
Haiti after the recent hurricanes and the implications
for the item under consideration today. Those tragic
events, and the reactions to them, make clear the
importance of promoting economic and social rights as
an integral part of the rule of law, not only in post-
conflict countries but also in countries whose economy
is clearly vulnerable.

