Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I wish to thank Sweden
for convening today's open debate on the situation in
the Middle East, including the question of Palestine.
I also express my Government's steadfast support to
Security Council members and the Secretary-General
for their relentless efforts in preparing the first written
report (S/2018/614) on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016).

The situation in the Middle East continues to
worsen because the rule of law is being ignored, the
fundamental rights of the people are being violated
and the relevant resolutions of the Council are being
disregarded. The blockade of Gaza is illegal and
inhumane. The attacks on Gaza, which have escalated
in recent days, are illegal. The Government of Maldives
condemns those acts of aggression and calls on Israel to
lift the blockade and cease attacks.

The United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, needs to take urgent measures to protect
civilians and ensure the safe delivery of humanitarian
assistance. The Council's historic resolution 2334
(2016) is very clear in reaffirming the illegality
of Israeli occupation and settlements in occupied
Palestine. The report mandated by that resolution also
finds that Israeli settlements in the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, have no
validity and constitute a clear violation of international
law and a major obstacle to the achievement of the two-
State solution.

Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures have continued across the West Bank, where
demolitions have increased overall across Area C by
94 per cent. Schools and even donor-funded housing are
being dismantled. The Council needs to take immediate
action to ensure that the occupying Power fulfils its
obligations under international law. The Council long
ago declared null and void, through resolutions 476
(1980) and 478 (1980), the Israeli occupation of the
State of Palestine, the annexation of the Holy City
of Jerusalem, the shifting of the Israeli capital to
Jerusalem, the decision by any country to recognize
Jerusalem as Israel's capital and the transfer of its
embassy to Jerusalem.

Through resolution 2334 (2016), the Council calls
upon States to distinguish, in their relevant dealings,
between the territory of the State of Israel and the
territories occupied since 1967. Yet we do not observe
any meaningful efforts by some Member States in
respecting those resolutions. The Maldives has always
believed that an independent State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its Capital, established within the
1967 borders and living side by side and in peace and
harmony with Israel is the best and the only solution to
the conflict.

More than half a million people have been killed
since the outbreak of the Syrian conflict. All that
remains in the conflict zones is the rubble of homes,
livelihoods, hospitals, schools and basic infrastructure.
In every corner, we see fear and uncertainty in the
hearts and minds of the Syrian people. The international
community must reinvigorate talks to reach a peaceful
settlement to the conflict. Terrorist groups are running
rampant in conflict zones in the Middle East. They do
not respect borders, distinguish between the young
and old or women and men, or respect any religion
or culture. We must tackle the enabling factors of
terrorism through international cooperation, while
sharing information and coherent strategies.

The Security Council, while considering approaches
to conflict resolution, must use the tools and frameworks
that already exist within the United Nations system, not
just military options. A key approach would be to focus
on State-building and strengthening State institutions
to resolve conflict and sustain peace. The Government
and the people of the Maldives remain in solidarity
with the people in the Middle East, in particular the
Government and the people of Palestine.

