Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): Mr. President,
I join my colleagues in expressing my delegation's
appreciation to you personally and to your team for your
efficient presidency of the Council during this month.
A good part of the work of the Council in January
was carried out in the form of open debates and open
briefings, including an open briefing by the Chairs of
the sanctions committees. We also appreciate your use
of Arria formula and interactive dialogues during the
presidency, and we appreciate the kind words of our
Malaysian colleague with regard to the Arria formula
meeting that was organized by my delegation.

Although start-of-the-month horizon-scanning
seems to have fallen out of grace in the Council,
yesterday's initiative of the Department of Political
Affairs to brief the Council on the situation in Nepal
was a useful reminder, in our view, of why that format
is important. As the Council continues to cope with ever
more numerous crises and wider conflict geography, in
the face of the largest numbers of persons displaced
and in urgent need of humanitarian assistance since the
Second World War, a renewed focus on prevention is
urgent. It is increasingly difficult to muster pledging
funds and troops for peacekeeping operations, and if
we do not improve the United Nations early warning
and conflict-prevention capacities, the gap between the
urgent needs and our ability to address those needs will
continue to widen, with tragic consequences.

In this respect, we welcome the Department of
Political Affairs" continued use of informal briefings,
"Any other business" briefings, or any other formats
that may serve the purpose of drawing the Council's
attention at an early stage to potential crises and
conflicts before they erupt, in order to work out
early preventive responses. Being discussed by the
Council should not be seen by countries as some sort
of stigma to be avoided at all costs until it is too late.
On the contrary, it should be seen as a preventive and
helpful remedy that significantly reduces the losses,
particularly human losses, and provides gains in the
longer term.

In Yemen, things this month have taken a dramatic
turn. The country, viewed as a success story only a
year ago, has suffered a significant setback, with both
the President and the Prime Minister resigning from
their offices and the country itself on the brink of
fragmentation. The Council has been warned about the
continuous spoiler activities of ex-president Saleh and
the consequences of the further violent advances of the
Houthis, including a growth in violent sectarianism,
terrorists strengthening their foothold, and even the
split of the State itself.

The national dialogue outcomes were the result of
a legitimate and inclusive process and cannot simply
be brushed aside if we are ever to achieve sustainable
peace and development in Yemen. We need to push all
political actors in Yemen to agree and, most importantly,
to strictly comply with a new, clear timeframe for
the implementation of key stages in the transition.
Whatever road map is agreed, it must be backed by
credible means to ensure implementation. Otherwise,
the Council's pronouncements will continue to be
perceived as no more than empty threats.

Some of my colleagues have referred to the issue
of credibility or relevance of the Council, as my
colleague from New Zealand has said. We find it very
unfortunate that, at this critical stage, the Council
failed a few days ago to come up with a statement on
the latest developments in Yemen, and was unable to
muster unity when it was most needed. Next month, the
Council is to review the Yemen sanctions regime, which
was created to help prevent exactly what has happened
in that country - to stop spoilers from undermining
the transition process. That is what we have failed to
do. We believe that a serious discussion is in order
about where we go from here in order not to lose the
Council's credibility and impact on this very fragile
and potentially explosive situation.

This month, the Council extended the sanctions
regime against the Central African Republic. I wish to
commend the excellent work of the Panel of Experts,
which has produced an impressive report and submitted
19 statements of cases. Although some positive signals
have been seen emanating from the Central African
Republic in the past days, the situation remains
extremely fragile, as seen from the recent kidnappings
of ministers and continuous human rights violations.
Our inaction at this stage would send a bad signal to
all those who are still engaged in perpetrating abuse
and fomenting violence, undercutting our ability to
impact on the further developments of the situation in
the country, and also raising doubts about how serious
we are about tackling impunity.

While we note ongoing discussions between the
warring groups of the Central African Republic, we
believe that general amnesty or Government posts
should not be a reward for those committing war crimes,
crimes against humanity and gross violations of human
rights. We also hope that the sanctions committee will
be able to take necessary action within the context of
the recent report of the Panel of Experts.

Finally, let me turn briefly to the issue of Ukraine.
A few days ago, we held our thirtieth open briefing on
the situation in that country (see S/PV.7368). If only
open briefings translated into changes on the ground.
While the Council has managed to maintain a focus
on the continuous deterioration of the situation in
eastern Ukraine and occupied Crimea, we have no
real impact on the ground, alas. In spite of Ukraine's
efforts to keep the ceasefire alive, the militants have
unilaterally abandoned the ceasefire and continue their
attacks, with a growing number of civilian casualties.
Russian weaponry and mercenaries, without which the
conflict would have expired long ago, continue to flow
freely across the border. In the meantime, while the
events in Mariupol were exploding, Russia concluded
a comprehensive agreement on alliance and strategic
partnership with Georgia's breakaway Abkhazia region,
which means a de facto annexation of that territory in
all but name. We remain profoundly concerned by the
pattern of expansionist behaviour of Russia vis-a-vis
its neighbours. The Council's ability to respond to such
situations is once again being tested, as is its credibility.

Let me conclude by joining my colleagues in
wishing the best success to the Chinese presidency
during the month of February. They can count on our
support and cooperation.

