Mr. Caballeros (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin my statement on a personal note. I
represent the Government of President Otto Perez
Molina, who took office barely two weeks ago. My
presence here today reflects our commitment to the
United Nations and our intention to responsibly carry
out our role as a recently elected member of the
Council. We have come here fully committed to
building consensus for the maintenance of international
peace and security. We appreciate the convening of this
important meeting in response to the request made by
the League of Arab States in its letter dated 22 January
addressed to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
(S/2012/71).

We are especially pleased at the presence of and
information provided by Mr. Nabil Elaraby, Secretary-
General of the League of Arab States, as well His
Excellency Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin J abr Al-Thani,
Chair of the current session of the Arab League
Council at the ministerial level. We also listened
attentively to the statement made by Ambassador
Bashar J a'afari of the Syrian Arab Republic.

In addition to the information provided today, we
have previously had access to the decisions adopted in
recent weeks by the Council of Ministers, the protocol
concluded between the League of Arab States and the
Government of Syria on 19 December 2011, and the
text of the report prepared by the head of the observer
mission, General Mustafa Al-Dabi. All of this has
improved our capacity to understand what is happening
on the ground, and has at the same time contributed to
our growing alarm at a clearly deteriorating situation.
The events of the past few days, and the decision of the
League of Arab States to suspend its mission, have
only served to heighten our apprehensions.

Once again, the Council is addressing the
possible management on the part of the community of
nations of the amazing changes occurring in the Middle
East and North Africa. As with all change, especially
when it arises from the grass roots of society, its final
outcome tends to be unpredictable. We commonly
affirm that those changes are the sole and exclusive
purview of the citizens of each country, but it is
undeniable - and events confirm this to be the case -
that the wave of change does not recognize borders,
and that whatever happens in one nation has an impact
on the rest. This explains the presence of the League of
Arab States in the case we are addressing today - the
situation in Syria.

We have listened attentively to the different
narratives offered on the matter, which, among other
aspects, try to assign quotas of responsibility to
different actors, domestic and foreign. While the facts
of what actually is happening are sorted out - a task
made more difficult by the lack of access to the media,
and in spite of the presence until a few days ago of the
mission of observers - two realities overshadow the
rest. First, the toll of human life and the general
suffering imposed on the population are on the rise.
Secondly, the spiral of violence points at the real

possibility of a civil war between Syrians. The
immediate task at hand, then, is to put an end to
violence and to reverse the trend towards even greater
misery.

The League of Arab States must be commended
for occupying the front lines that pursue these two
objectives. We also sympathize with that organization's
initiative to seek what is termed an "Arab solution" to
the crisis. Our delegation is prepared to accompany the
League of Arab States in the fulfilment of said
solution, whose prime objective is humanitarian in
nature, but whose broader goal is viewed in the
framework of a firm and longer-term political solution.
Some question whether this initiative is realistic, given
the immediate rejection it provoked from the
Government of the Arab Republic of Syria, but for our
part we are willing to give the League of Arab States
the opportunity to pursue its initiative within a
predetermined time frame.

Should this initiative not bear fruit, we believe
that, whether we like it or not, we would be failing in
our obligation if we were to permit an already grave
situation to deteriorate even further, with the foreseeable
domestic and international repercussions on peace and
security. We are more than aware of the serious
dilemmas to which this gives rise. Non-intervention in
the internal affairs of sovereign States and respect for
their territorial integrity are cardinal principles of our
foreign policy, but we also acknowledge the obligation
of all States to observe certain norms of conduct in
relations to their own populations.

We understand that peacefully expressed popular
demands cannot be equated with a Government that
uses force to address those demands. That is why, in an
era when the principle of the responsibility to protect is
being called into question, we are not ashamed to
affirm that, with some nuances that we have explained
in other forums, we support that principle. Our position
is far from inviting interventions; what we demand is
the strict observation of the norms of conduct to which
I have referred. In its absence, Governments that
flagrantly violate those norms naturally expose
themselves to the consequences, whose precise shape
and scope are susceptible to a wide spectrum of
possibilities.

In summary, we appeal to all parties to make a
last effort to find a way out of the Syrian crisis. The
initiative of the League of Arab States, or variants
thereof, offer the potential for such a way out. Should
it fail, the escalation of violence, which has assumed
dramatic proportions in recent days, has not left many
options to this Council to carry out its own
responsibility in accordance with the Charter.

