Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the Tribunals for their
very comprehensive briefings. I would also wish to
thank Ambassador Rosenthal and his team for the
efficient leadership they have shown at the head of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.

The Tribunals face today a significant challenge.
They have to complete their trial activity as planned
and contribute to the development of the International
Residual Mechanism, while facing, at the same time,
an increasing problem of staff attrition. Under those
difficult conditions, we must recognize the efforts by
the Judges, Prosecutors and all the staff of the Tribunals
in trying to keep on track the overall implementation of
the completion strategies of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), as endorsed by
the Security Council.

We appreciate the information provided by the
President of the ICTY on the projected trial activity
and the reasons for its adjustment. It is indeed very
important that the Council remain fully apprised of
relevant developments so as to allow it to promptly help
overcome the difficulties encountered and ensure a
smooth implementation of the completion strategy. We
also welcome the fact that the ICTR trial work remains
on track, that the last trial will be concluded before
the end of 2012 and that all appeals are projected to
be concluded by the end of 2014. On the other hand,
while the ICTY still has to face significant work ahead,
as clearly set forth in the report (see S/2012/592), it
is important to note that all arrest warrants issued by
the Tribunal have been executed and that the Tribunal
and Prosecutor may now concentrate on the main trial
activities.

As the reports of the Tribunals highlight, some
other challenges remain. Let me underline four ofthem.
First, on management and resources, both Tribunals
share a grave concern resulting from staff attrition and
its effect on the daily management and overall capacity
to fulfil the completion strategies endorsed by the
Security Council. Despite a number of recently adopted
Council resolutions referring to that issue, problems
seem to persist in some cases. While commending the
efforts that they have made in that regard, we encourage
the Presidents of the Tribunals, together with the United
Nations Secretariat, to continue to identify possible
ways of further promoting better use of resources with a
view to improving the management of the time devoted
to the cases, while conforming in full, naturally, with
the principles ofjustice.

Secondly, on outreach and capacity building
activities, as the Tribunals enter the final stages of their
work, the issue of national and regional ownership of the
fight against impunity for the war crimes committed in
Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia gains in relevance
and importance. In that context, we welcome the
continuing outreach efforts by the Tribunals as well as
their capacity-building activities aimed at strengthening
local judicial institutions and raising awareness among
civil societies.

Thirdly, on cooperation both among States in
the region and with the Office of the Prosecutor, an
essential element of regional ownership is indeed the
extent to which States in the region cooperate among
themselves in criminal matters, including war crimes
investigations and prosecutions. We should not forget
that a significant number of cases concerning such
crimes remain to be pursued domestically and that
questions of the capacity of national institutions to
conduct effective criminal prosecutions and the level
of cooperation among States in the region are crucial in
that regard. We encourage further necessary efforts to
ensure a better cooperation in that area among relevant
States. The cooperation of the States of the region with
the Office ofthe Prosecutor is also crucial for the prompt
and full implementation of the ICTY mandate. In that
regard, we are very pleased to note the statement by the
ICTY Prosecutor expressing his satisfaction in general
with the cooperation provided by Serbia, Croatia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Fourthly, let me mention the situation of convicted
and acquitted persons, as some previous speakers have
done. As we approach the end of the Tribunals' work
and project a number of convictions, we have to be
prepared for an increasing number of Tribunal requests
to be addressed to States to host convicted persons to
serve their sentences and the need to find appropriate
and prompt responses to those requests. In particular,
we reiterate, in that respect, the need to encourage
definitive solutions to address the situation of those
persons acquitted by the ICTR and those released after
serving their sentences. Still today, they remain under
protective measures in safe houses in Arusha because
they can neither return safely to their communities
nor find host countries willing to accept them. That
is an unsustainable situation to which a solution must
be found, and we call on the Tribunal to continue to
exert all efforts necessary to overcome the current
difficulties.

Finally, Portugal has always stood for fighting
impunity and ensuring accountability for the most
serious crimes without exception and wherever they
take place. Accountability for such crimes is of utmost
importance in order that countries that have been
subjected to the scourge of war rebuild their societies
in peace and security. It is an essential element for
promoting national reconciliation, strengthening
regional cooperation and allowing peoples to look
confidently to the future. In the case of the Balkans,
it also constitutes an essential step for the countries in
the region to fully integrate themselves into a common
European destiny and framework. The role played
by both Tribunals, firmly rooted in a comprehensive
normative framework established by the Council, has
been fundamental to the attainment of those goals of
the international community in full respect for the
principles of justice. Moreover, the Tribunals play a
crucial role in building a solid legacy for the benefit
of other international and domestic tribunals, which
Portugal would like to commend.

As it is the last time we participate as a member of
the Council in these regular briefings, we wish to take
this opportunity to thank the Presidents, Prosecutors
and staff of the two Tribunals for their important work.
Above and beyond the trial-related activities, they are
also laying the groundwork for the future, well after the
Tribunals close their doors, both by helping to launch the
Residual Mechanism and, most importantly, by helping
the countries of the respective regions to take over and
continue the vital task of fighting impunity for the most
serious crimes and fulfilling their people's legitimate
aspirations for justice. For all the aforementioned
reasons, Portugal wishes to express its recognition for
the Tribunals' work and for their overall contribution to
ensuring and promoting justice and reconciliation.

