Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): Mr. President, I am
delighted to begin by congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of April. I assure you of my delegation's
cooperation at all times. Allow me also to take this
opportunity to congratulate and thank your predecessor,
Ambassador Li Zhaoxing of China, and his delegation, for
the exemplary manner in which he steered the Council's
work last month.

The current year is considered to be a distinctive one:
this year we will witness the celebration of the fiftieth
anniversary of the establishment of the United Nations.
However, it is also the anniversary of the beginning of the
atomic era, which led to the invention of nuclear weapons
of mass destruction. The events of this era formed the
background to and were of crucial significance in the
important question of the provision of positive security
assurances. The question is especially important now, as the
deliberation of this question in the Council falls shortly
before the holding of the 1995 Review and Extension
Conference on the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT).

The Sultanate of Oman has continuously supported the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, in the hope that
mankind would be able to abolish completely all weapons
of mass destruction. My country is therefore looking
forward to the Conference, which will be held from 17
April to 12 May this year, in the hope that it will achieve
our goal of the renewal of the Treaty, which continues to
play a vital role as a legal instrument to counterbalance the
nuclear threat.
My delegation has endeavoured to include the issue of
the transfer of nuclear technology for peaceful uses and its
applications in the non-nuclear developing countries in a
more organized, legitimate and protected manner to replace
recourse to illegal means of developing and acquiring
nuclear technology, which lead to risks on a global scale,
to which incidents in many parts of the world bear
witness. The Omani initiative is peaceful in nature, and
falls within the scope of organized cooperation between
countries which possess the technology and those Parties
to the NPT which are still developing, and which need to
have access to this technology in order to achieve
progress in the social and economic spheres through its
peaceful use.

The developing countries will expect the Council to
afford them this privilege during the period of the Review
and Extension Conference. In this context, the Security
Council cannot stand in the way of a demand of this kind
from the developing countries, as it can be considered one
of the most important security assurances. We remain
fully convinced that the present draft resolution would
have been more integrated had the question of the transfer
of technology for peaceful purposes and its applications
in developing countries been better accommodated.

My delegation's proposal summarizes and focuses on
the responsibilities of the nuclear-weapon States
permanent members of the Security Council to assist
developing countries in the transfer of technology for
peaceful purposes. The obligation of the permanent
members to assist and cooperate with developing
countries in the transfer of technology for peaceful uses
will remain an issue which, we believe, will significantly
contribute to the creation of a balance between the rights
and obligations of the Parties under the umbrella of the
NPT. Furthermore, the inclusion of this issue in the text
of the draft resolution would encourage other countries
with peaceful nuclear programmes to adhere to the
Treaty - not to mention the positive impact such an
effort would have on the developing countries, which
would then be led to believe that the preferential regime
of the Treaty as currently established in the field of the
transfer of technology for peaceful purposes is not an
immediate threat to their security.

In conclusion, while welcoming the draft resolution,
we would like to emphasize once more the fact that the
provision of security assurances should not be an end in
itself in the world's endeavours to gain salvation from
weapons of mass destruction, but will remain only a step
in the right direction.

