Ms. Graham (New Zealand): Despite some
significant successes in degrading the capabilities of
and defeating terrorist groups around the world, the
threat of terrorism unfortunately persists. We have seen
ongoing attacks both in countries on the front line of
the struggle against terrorism and elsewhere. The
recent trend line in South Asia has been particularly
worrying.

No region or country can be complacent in
confronting the threat of terrorism. In New Zealand,
our efforts remain guided by the need to take a
comprehensive, multifaceted and long-term approach.

Domestically, we are continuing work to
strengthen our national counter-terrorism framework in
three main areas. We have overhauled our anti-money
laundering/counter-terrorist financing regime to bring
it into compliance with the standards of the Financial
Action Task Force. New legislation was enacted last
October and is now being implemented across the
pubic and private sectors. Our Government is moving
forward with designations of terrorist entities not listed
by the United Nations pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999).

While the threat of terrorist activity in New
Zealand remains low, we wish to support the building
of a global bulwark that shuts down terrorist activities
wherever they might occur. In February, our Prime
Minister announced four such national designations,
and work is under way on further cases. We are also
working to achieve full compliance with the
international counter-terrorism legal framework by
ratifying the four instruments to which New Zealand is
not yet party. We have legislation before our
Parliament to ratify the 2005 maritime terrorism
instruments, and legislation is being drafted to
implement fully the 2005 nuclear terrorism
instruments.

Within its region, New Zealand continues to
support its Pacific island neighbours in meeting the
challenges that they, like many other small developing
States, face in meeting their international counter-
terrorism obligations. New Zealand values the
continued efforts of United Nations counter-terrorism
agencies to engage with Pacific island States to
encourage and support compliance and to ensure that
United Nations initiatives and requests are carefully
coordinated to avoid duplication. We remain
committed to supporting these activities, including
through the provision of funding to the Terrorism
Prevention Branch of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime for its programme of assistance to the
Pacific. We also look forward to welcoming the United
Nations counter-terrorism committees to the next
Pacific Forum Working Group on Counter-Terrorism in
early June.

In South-East Asia, New Zealand is closely
engaged with key partners, both bilaterally and
regionally, on a range of counter-terrorism
interventions. Our police are helping to build capacity
amongst law enforcement counterparts in the region
through training and the provision of equipment. New
Zealand also supports a range of regional and
multilateral initiatives aimed at countering extremist
messages and recruitment into terrorism.

New Zealand strongly supports the Council's
efforts to ensure that the measures it employs to
combat terrorism are effective, transparent and fair,
and that the lists of entities and individuals subject to
such measures remain accurate, relevant and
actionable.

We therefore commend the refinements to the
sanctions regime of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) agreed in resolution
1904 (2009) last December. Once fully implemented,
the increased rigour and transparency these measures
will bring to the work of the Committee promise to
both enhance the Committee's deliberations and to
ensure that its work enjoys the broad support necessary
to enable effective implementation.

In this regard, we would also stress the
importance of the Committee's ongoing efforts to
complete its review of the names on its consolidated
list. While considerable progress has been made on this
task, the Committee requires the full cooperation and
support of Member States if the review is to be
completed by 30 June as mandated in resolution 1822
(2008). Full and timely responses to the Committee's
requests for information will help ensure that this
ambitious deadline can be met.

The work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) remains as important as ever,
as proliferators of weapons of mass destruction-related
materials continue their illicit activities around the
world. New Zealand was pleased to participate in the
comprehensive review of the 1540 Committee, and we
look forward to working with the Committee on
helping to implement the recommendations in our
region. I am pleased to announce that New Zealand
will be co-sponsoring a workshop in July for South-
East Asian countries on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) obligations.

Finally, New Zealand applauds the United States
initiative in hosting the Nuclear Security Summit last
month. The Summit focused political attention at the
highest levels of Government and industry on the
threat of nuclear and radiological materials getting into
terrorist hands. New Zealand is committed to helping
implement the outcomes of the Summit through
targeted bilateral and regional engagement in the Asia-
Pacific region and through broader international
initiatives.

