Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Mr. President, I
thank you for convening this important meeting. We
wish to convey how honoured we feel to see you
presiding over our work. We also warmly welcome the
participation of the Secretary of State of the United
States, the Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation,
the Vice Foreign Minister of China and the Foreign
Minister of Somalia in today's debate. We greatly value
the statement that was made by the Secretary-General
just now.

This meeting is an important opportunity to
reinforce international support for comprehensively
addressing the problem of piracy and armed robbery
off the coast of Somalia and thereby prevent it from
growing further as a threat to humanitarian assistance
to that country and to international navigation in the
area.

Over two years have elapsed since the Security
Council first engaged the Somalia piracy issue in its
presidential statement of 15 March 2006
(S/PRST/2006/11). Incidents of piracy have grown
exponentially since that time, in tandem with the
worsening security situation in Somalia itself.

Indonesia condemns all acts of piracy and armed
robbery off the coast of Somalia. We welcome the fact
that the challenge of piracy has generated action in the
region, both by regional countries and by international
organizations. We highly commend these concerted
efforts. Indonesia also extends its strong support to the
flag States and others that have already fallen prey to
those illegal acts.
On the other hand, we need also to acknowledge
that piracy is not a stand-alone problem. It is, rather, a
symptom of a more fundamental challenge, and its
durable resolution lies not in the territorial or high
seas, but on the land mass of Somalia itself. The twin
problems of lawlessness and anarchy in the territory of
Somalia, compounded by a lack of governance and law
enforcement, need to be addressed urgently.

Thus, we wish to reiterate our strong support for
the political process under the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia.
We urge the full implementation of the Djibouti
Agreement by all parties in the country. We associate
ourselves with the call for unity within the Transitional
Federal Government.

We share the View that the Security Council's
strong support needs to be manifest in the provision of
an effective presence of a peacekeeping operation. We
commend the African Union for its continued
leadership through the African Union Mission in
Somalia. More needs to be done to support the African
Union, including through additional financial,
logistical and technical support. We certainly cannot be
indifferent to the African Union's request.

In the immediate term, we recognize the value of
the participation and contribution of Member States to
deterring and countering piracy in the waters off the
coast of Somalia. Strong coordination among the naval
vessels located off the Somali coast, as well as among
littoral and other States, is essential, as recognized in
the resolution we have just adopted.

However, above all, the situation in Somalia calls
for a political solution. Only thus can we address the
various manifestations of the crisis, including the
threat of piracy.

