Ms. Mogherini (spoke in French): At the outset,
I should like to thank the French presidency of the
Council for having organized this briefing. This year
marks the second time we have met under this agenda
item during a French presidency. That may not be a
coincidence, especially given France's ability to build
the kind of global unity that brought us success in the
Climate Conference in Paris in December. I believe that
this is an excellent opportunity to exchange views on
a cooperation of truly strategic value to the European
Union and the United Nations.

I also wish to extend my best wishes to our Muslim
colleagues and friends for the onset of Ramadan, which
begins today.

(spoke in English)

When we last discussed cooperation between our
European Union and the United Nations a year ago (see S/PV.7439), I had just taken office as the Union's High
Representative and it was my first time in the Security
Council. Since then, I have came back to the Chamber
also to discuss migration and our fight against terrorism.
I cannot count all the exchanges, meetings and common
work I have done with United Nations agencies all
around the world, and with so many of those present
her in different multilateral formats.

I believe that this is the only way we have i as
Europeans andresponsible members of the international
community - to face these difficult times in the history
of the world. The entire Middle East is in turmoil, with
so many forces trying to redefine the regional balance
of power and so many people calling for an end to their
suffering. Inequalities are on the rise in large parts ofthe
globe. Climate change is challenging the economy and
security of large parts of our world. An unprecedented
number of people is on the move. Tens of millions are
fleeing war, looking for a chance of survival or for a
better life. We often say that Europe is facing a refugee
crisis. Let us always remember that this is first and
foremost a crisis for the men, women and children who
are going through it as they flee their homes. And it
concerns the whole world, not just Europe.

But indeed our own continent faces a great deal
of challenges. Our cities have been hit by terrorist
attacks, just like so many other places in the world,
from Africa and Asia to America. Hatred and violence
are growing within our own societies. Together with
inequality and insecurity, xenophobia, Islamophobia
and anti-Semitism are also on the rise. In times like
these, we need each other. We need all nations to come
together, united. We need the United Nations, because
only together can we draw the way forward and make
sure that tomorrow will be better than today.

One year ago, I told the Security Council that our
European Union believes in multilateralism and in the
United Nations. Today 1 can add that multilateralism
will be one of the core principles and priorities of
our new global strategy for foreign and security
policy, which I will present in the coming weeks. But
what truly matters to all of us is that we are turning
this commitment to multilaterlism into practice on a
daily basis.

This has also been possible thanks to United Nations
leadership, starting with the Secretary General and
to the whole senior leadership of the United Nations.
Our cooperation in these months and years has been
truly excellent and makes such a difference in so many
places in the world.

Our European Union has put multilateralism at the
core of our common external action. We have learned
the hard way that unilateralism does not pay off. This is
no time for global policemen. This is no time for lonely
warriors. If we want to finally put an end to the many
crises we face i and most of all, to prevent new ones
before they explode - our only hope is to work as truly
united nations. The hardest the task, the stronger our
cooperation must be.
In a moment I will talk about Syria, Libya and other
crises that are constantly at the top of our common
agenda, and also of the news cycle. But let me start by
addressing a much older conflict that will soon enter
its eighth decade. Let us not wait for the next open
war between the Israelis and the Palestinians. Because
that is what will happen if they do not go back now to
meaningful negotiations. The proliferation of conflicts
and crises in the region is not a reason to forget about the
fate of the Israelis and the Palestinians. On the contrary,
the new security threats in the Middle East should push
everyone to renew our efforts towards ending this
conflict. This is first and foremost in the interests of
every single Israeli and every single Palestinian, and
the events in the rest of the region make it even more
urgent than in the past.

A further escalation, especially around the holy
sites in Jerusalem, would have grave consequences
for the whole region. Contrarily, a peaceful solution
to the conflict, with bold leadership demonstrated by
both sides, could unlock genuine regional cooperation.
The Israelis would benefit from it, and the Palestinians
would benefit from it. The entire Middle East, Europe
and the world - we would all benefit from peace. It
would set a new paradigm of cooperation in the Middle
East. Peace in the holy places would send such a
powerful message to the whole world.

That is why I made the Middle East peace
process - if we can still refer to a "peace process" - a
top priority for our action at the very moment when
the prospect of two States is moving beyond reach.
The possibility of a secure State of Israel and a viable
State of Palestine living side by side is fading away.
And together with the prospect of two States, peace
would also move beyond reach. The trends could not
be more clear.

First, violence and incitement are not just inflicting
terrible human suffering; they amplify the mistrust
between the two communities. Secondly, Israel's policy
of settlements systematically erodes the prospects for
a viable two-State solution. It also raises serious and
legitimate questions about the Israeli leadership's true
ultimate goals. Thirdly, the lack of unity between the
Palestinian factions is still a major stumbling block.
Each of these trends - alone and/or combined - could
make the two-State solution impossible to achieve. We
would risk the collapse of all hope.

The Israeli and the Palestinian leaders have a
responsibility towards their people, the region and the
world. They can halt destructive policies and rhetoric,
reverse the trend, and finally rebuild the conditions for
meaningful negotiations. The future of the situation is
in the hands of the two peoples and of their leaders.
Right now, we all know that there is no peace process at
all and the international community cannot just sit and
wait for the next war.

We in Europe keep believing that the entire world
has to do its part. Last year, our European Union
pushed to revitalize the Middle East Quartet. We have
had several meetings at the principals' level to draw
together the way forward. Here in New York, we
invited Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Jordan and the League of
Arab States to also join the discussion. The cooperation
among our envoys has proceeded for months, so let me
thank the United Nations, the United States and Russia
for all the common work we have done so far.

A few days ago in Paris, we discussed how the
international community can help and accompany this
work. As Council members know, the Quartet's report
will be made public very soon. We will describe very
frankly the immediate obstacles to direct talks and
the policies that threaten the viability of a two-State
solution. We will also make clear recommendations on
the way forward with one main goal - to recreate some
confidence between the two sides and the conditions to
go back to meaningful negotiations. We are convinced
that the current stalemate is not sustainable for anyone.
There is no status quo, and we all know it. If the
situation does not improve, it will get worse. And that
is something no one - no one, first of all the Israelis
and the Palestinians - can afford.

We need to be as realistic as we can in analysing the
difficulties, risks and threats of the regiona and today's
world, but we also have to recognize the signs of hope
when we see them or when we manage to build them.
This is a strong reminder that change - and change for
the better - is possible if the international community
is united and focused.

In July last year, the Council endorsed our deal on
Iran's nuclear programme. The deal in itself was a major
success of patient multilateral diplomacy. Six months
later, the deal was implemented, and we keep monitoring
the full implementation of all its parts, counting also

on the good cooperation with the International Atomic
Energy Agency. In parallel, the European Union is
working to make sure that the benefits of the deal reach
the Iranian people and improve regional cooperation.
Because after the deal, we all knew that we had to
build on the positive momentum. In November we met
again in Vienna, where the deal was signed with the
new International Syria Support Group. For the first
time since the beginning of the war, all regional and
international actors were finally at the same table.

Since then, Staffan de Mistura has been doing a
truly amazing job, and much has been achieved. But
we all know that the process has come to a critical
point. It is now vital that humanitarian aid reaches a
greater number of areas. It is vital for the too many
people in need for help, but it is also vital for starting
real negotiations among the Syrian parties in Geneva.
We know how fragile the whole process is - and likely
will continue to be. So much blood has been shed, and
national reconciliation will not be easy at all. But there
is no other way to stop the carnage, give hope to Syrians
and defeat Da'esh.

Europe is doing its part. We reopened our
humanitarian office in Damascus. We are engaged
on the ground as the main donor to Syria and the
Syrian people. And we play our role in encouraging
and supporting the political track. Staffan de Mistura
knows he can always count on our full and active
support. I was personally in Geneva to meet with the
parties, at his request, during the last round of talks.
All international actors need to do whatever they can
to make the cessation of hostilities work, the delivery
of humanitarian aid continue and the negotiations start
so as to finally move towards a political transition for
Syria. Our divisions here in the Chamber and in the
international community will benefit only Da'esh and
serve chaos.

Having mentioned Da'esh, let me also say a word
about Iraq, which must also remain high on our agenda
as a centrepiece for stabilization in the broader region.
Good progress has been made in the military campaign.
The fight in Fallujah is ongoing as we speak. But there
are also concerns. The liberation of areas must be
followed by rapid stabilization and the restoration of
services. The European Union is doing its part in Iraq,
and will continue to contribute to both humanitarian
and stabilization needs.

The campaign against Da'esh needs to be framed
by an adequate political settlement. We continue
to support Prime Minister Abadi's efforts in that
respect. We hope that all political players will seek a
swift resolution to the current political impasse. As
the international community, we remain committed
to the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the country.
The unity of the international community and of
the region is also central when it comes to Libya. I
know some had lost hope that the Presidency Council
would ever be formed, or arrive in Tripoli. But it has,
and that would not have been possible without the
Security Council's unity and the excellent work of
Martin Kobler. I know he is briefing the Council in
a few hours, therefore I will limit my remarks to the
European Union's work on Libya, in strong coordination
with him.

In Vienna last month, we all restated our support
for the Government of National Accord. The European
Union has started to mobilize a package of€100 million
to make Libya's new start possible and help Libyans
to live their lives in safety and dignity, which is what
they deserve. Last month, the Libyan Government
invited the European Union to provide training to
the Libyan coast guard and navy. I spoke with Prime
Minister Serraj about the modalities just last Friday.
For us, it is key that anything we do be planned and
delivered according to Libya's full ownership and
Libya's priorities. Training the Libyan coast guard and
navy will be an opportunity to put Libyans in a position
to save lives at sea, dismantle the criminal economy
of human smugglers, control the country's territorial
waters effectively and create a safe environment for
Libyan fishermen.

Let me say a few more words on how we are working
in the Mediterranean. Last spring, when we decided to
launch a naval operation - Operation Sophia - against
the traffickers' networks, we asked for a Security
Council resolution to endorse our mission. Council
members were impressively united in doing so, and I
thank them for that. Since then, tens of thousands of
lives have been saved, over 100 hundred assets seized
and many traffickers brought to justice. On 23 May, we
decided to extend operation's mandate by a year.

Now, once again, we are asking the Security
Council to adopt a draft resolution on authorizing
Operation Sophia to enforce the United Nations arms
embargo on the high seas and off the coast of Libya.
This is the course of action that the European Union has
chosen: constant coordination with the United Nations
to best serve our collective interests, that is, those of the
international community as a whole. This is the place
where international action should be discussed, decided
and authorized. I can only hope that the Council will
once again do the right thing and help us make the
Mediterranean a safer place for everyone, starting with
our Libyan friends.

With so many crises taking up the headlines,
Yemen risks not geting the attention it deserves. Yet
the need for a political solution and for addressing the
dire humanitarian situation is just as urgent there as it
is elsewhere in the region and the world. We support
the work of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General. Progress was made during the peace talks
in Kuwait, which I would like to thank for hosting the
talks over the past five weeks. I encourage the parties
and players in the region to seriously engage with a
constructive attitude.

While we deal with Syria, Libya and Yemen and
keep our focus on the Middle East peace process we
cannot forget other crises, including at the eastern
borders of the European Union. Ending the conflict in
Ukraine remains a top priority for the European Union.
All parts of the Minsk agreements have to be fully
implemented by all parties if we want the situation in
eastern Ukraine to calm down. The United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is
doing a very valuable job in mapping and organizing
humanitarian assistance there. The United Nations
reports on human rights in Ukraine that are financed by
the European Union are also of great help in monitoring
the situation.

The European Union will continue to stand for
Ukraine's territorial integrity and does not recognize
the illegal annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol. We
are working closely with Kyiv to help them achieve
the reforms that the country and the people so urgently
needs. In that connection, let me mention the important
constitutional amendments approved just days ago,
which will improve the efficiency and independence of
the judiciary. They really matter because they can also
build momentum for the adoption of the amendments
on decentralization and other reforms. It is an important
achievement. It is also an important opportunity to
move the country forward and to address the needs of
all the citizens of Ukraine.

Our cooperation with the United Nations goes well
beyond our immediate region. The more I travel the
world 4 which I am doing quite a lot 4 the more I
realize that many of our partners already consider the
European Union as a global security provider. Colombia
might sound like a far away place to many Europeans.
Yet we are following very closely the negotiations that
could put an end to one of the world's oldest conflicts.
I was there just a few days ago to sign some important
agreements, thereby already lending our concrete
support to the peace process, and in particular to the
demining efforts. I confirmed to President Santos
Calderon our willingness to engage even more on the
implementation of the deal as soon as it was reached.
Our coordination with the planned United Nations
observer mission will be crucial.

Moving to the other side of the world, next
October we will host in Brussels a major international
conference on Afghanistan. After so many years, a
peaceful Afghanistan will be possible only if regional
Powers and the international community unite and
support the peace and reconciliation process and the
economic and social development of the country. On
that and on many other files, the unity of the Security
Council is one of the most powerful assets in our hands
for promoting peace and security. For instance, greater
involvement by the Council in monitoring the security
situation in Burundi would be most welcome, while
a United Nations police mission could deter further
threats to peace in the country. The European Union
stands ready to cooperate with the United Nations to
that end.

Our common work can build on so much positive
experience. Take the Central African Republic, where
the European Union and the United joined forces
to restore the basic functioning of the police and
gendarmerie. Our efforts contributed to the political
transition and the instalment of new, democratically
elected authorities.

The European Union continues to support the
work of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and of United Nations agencies. The current political
uncertainty risks evolving into a full-blown crisis, with
spillover effects in an already fragile region.

In fact, our common work cannot be limited to
crisis management, even if these difficult times require
much of it. We in the European Union remain convinced
that the best way to address a crisis is to prevent it. This
is an area where the United Nations and the European
Union can do so much together.

When we discussed Agenda 2030 and the
Sustainable Development Goals, it was clear to
everyone that Europe and the United Nations shared the
very same approach to security and development. When
we invest in growth, we are also investing in security.

Our cooperation has started to yield results.
The Paris climate agreement and the Sustainable
Development Goals are opportunities to overturn a
narrow and short-term concept of security. I believe
that everyone knows how much our European Union
has worked for these deals to come true, for this
philosophy of a long-term, comprehensive approach to
be shared, and we are now working hard to ensure the
full implementation of the deals we achieved last year.

The same long-term, comprehensive approach
has now become an integral part of our response to
migration and the current refugee crisis. I have already
mentioned our Operation Sophia and the great job it
is doing together with Frontex, with the Italian vessels
and our partners, including NATO, to save lives and
chase human smugglers. But there is much, much more
than that.

We need to prevent those lives from being put in
danger, both at sea, where we see them, and in the
desert, where thousands die far from our eyes and our
television screens. This is a common responsibility that
we share.

That is why tomorrow I will be in Strasbourg to
present, together with my colleagues in the European
Commission, the plan for a new migration partnership
with our friends in our region and in Africa. Migration
and displacement are one of the great challenges of our
era. Our response is the measure of our very humanity.

There are some key factors that Europe cannot
overlook and that will be central to our new
partnerships. We too often forget that countries such
as Ethiopia or Kenya, let alone Lebanon and Jordan,
host huge numbers of refugees. Hospitality is never an
easy task; we experience this reality every single day.
The closure of the Dadaab camp in Kenya could have
dramatic humanitarian consequences; our European
Union is following the issue very closely, together
with the United Nations and all relevant agencies. For
these reasons we will further reinforce our trust funds,
which are already providing health care and food to
those in need and are creating jobs for the refugees
and - let me underline this, because I believe that it
is very important to make hospitality sustainable - for
the host communities.

But we also know that public money alone will
never be enough. So a key component of our migration
partnerships will be to attract private investment on key
projects. Africa in particular has a huge potential for
growth, and we must manage to get the private sector
on board.

We must also offer opportunities: the best way to
dismantle the illegal business is to work on legal avenues
for human mobility. Europe needs to do its share, but
we also count on our partners here - in the United
Nations and in the Security Council in particular - to
do the same, to share responsibility. I look forward
to the summit in September, where migration will
be recognized for what it is: a global phenomenon
concerning all of us and requiring a global answer.

Strong partnerships are the building blocks of our
foreign policy in the European Union. All of today's
challenges transcend borders and national sovereignties.
None of us alone can carry the weight of the world on
our shoulders. But we all have a role to play, together
with others, in a multilateral framework, in a spirit of
partnership and friendship. So our European Union
will seek increasingly to reinforce old ties and create
new ones. This is true in our bilateral relations, but it
is even more true at the regional and global levels. A
network of regional alliances can truly contribute to
global peace and security.

That is why we invest in regional networks and
organizations. For instance, as the Council is aware,
we have supported African-led peace efforts through
the Peace Facility for Africa since the very beginning,
with more than €l.6 billion euros in the last 10 years.
It is now time to make sure that Africa's capacities are
provided in a more sustainable and efficient manner.
This is first of all in Africa's interest, to strengthen the
continent and its regional structures against the many
challenges it faces.

Our cooperation with the African Union, the
Arab League, the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States and the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations can only grow stronger. In some parts of
the world, we need to strengthen existing organizations.
In other cases, we need new and creative formats.
Our recent experience with Libya and Syria shows
the effectiveness of ad hoc formats working in close
coordination with the United Nations envoys.
Despite all of the setbacks, despite all of the stops
and starts, multilateralism has shown its strength.
Formats can change and institutions must be reformed.
But in our conflictual world, where power is scattered
and diffuse, global peace and security stands a chance
only if our nations and our regions are united and work
in a united manner. Our European Union will always
come back to the United Nations, to the core of the
international multilateral system, to the stubbornly
held idea of a cooperative world order.

