Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her important update on her
Office's activity. We appreciate the way she is carrying
out her mandate and fully support her in it.

I would like to start with the situation in Libya,
which, as we just heard, is still extremely difficult,
with an ongoing political deadlock and an escalation of
tensions. We are dismayed that many warring parties
continue to commit serious crimes and grave violations
of human rights, including executions, killings,
abductions, torture, unlawful detentions, desecration
of corpses, and so on. The practice of imprisonment
without trial for an indefinite period of time, which is
outside the legal fold, continues to be widespread. A
telling example of this type of unlawful practice is the
detention of four Ukrainians who have been kept in
custody since August 2011 without any official arrest
warrant having been issued. My delegation strongly
believes that such an unacceptable situation should not
be allowed to continue. The Libyan law onjustice in the
transitional period requires that the detainees, who are
civilians, be transferred to civilian authorities.

We believe that the difficult security situation
cannot be an excuse either for non-cooperation with
the ICC or for letting serious crimes be committed
during hostilities. Six years ago, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1970 (2011), not for the sake of
holding regular briefings or repeating the mantra that
perpetrators of crimes against humanity in Libya have
to be held accountable. Rather, the situation was referred
to the ICC Prosecutor for a concrete purpose - to
deliver justice. In this regard, we would like to echo
Ms. Bensouda's point that effective investigations and
prosecutions can be achieved only with cooperation
from States and other actors. It is worth recalling
that in resolution 1970 (2011), the Council urged all
States, including non-parties to the Rome Statute, as
well as concerned regional and other international
organizations, to cooperate fully with the Court and
the Prosecutor. Yet it is not just non-cooperation and
delays in responses to the ICC requests for assistance
that impede investigations in existing and new cases,
but also the climate of insecurity and impunity that
continues to stand in the way of investigative activities
in the country.

Under these circumstances, we fully support
the remote monitoring and investigations of crimes
committed in different parts of Libya that the Office
of the Prosecutor is carrying out through the gathering
of information from reliable sources. Still, much more
could be done to ensure accountability ifICC personnel
were able to work directly in Libya. We welcome
active cooperation between Ms. Bensouda's Office and
the Libyan Prosecutor-General's Office on this and
other issues.

We are also grateful to the Prosecutor for providing
additional information about the cases against Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi. In this
regard, we urge the Libyan authorities to facilitate the
transfer of Mr. Al-Qadhafi to the Court without further
delay. Justice needs to be done not only for crimes
committed by the previous regime; impunity must also
be ended for crimes committed by groups aligned with
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and by other
extremists and militias.

In this context, the international community must
continue to support the Libyan Government of National
Accord in its efforts to restore law and order in the
country. A comprehensive and lasting resolution of the
Libyan crisis will come only through a broad-based
political settlement, with the full commitment of the
Presidency Council of the Government of National
Accord, the House of Representatives, the High Council
of State and other Libyan actors.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that the ICC is
not just a venue for delivering justice for the victims.
It is also an effective tool for preventing future crimes.
We therefore join the call on all States to provide
full cooperation with the Court without exceptions
or preconditions, which would greatly contribute to
strengthening international peace and security.

