The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States.

After more than a year of brutal violence inflicted
by the Government of Syria on its own people, after
close to 10,000 deaths, after driving almost 45,000
Syrians out of their country and many more out of their
homes, and after the grotesque destruction by Syria's
own armed forces of Syrian towns and
neighbourhoods, the Syrian Government has claimed
that it is finally ready to step back from its murderous
policies.

Today, with resolution 2042 (2012), the Security
Council has indicated that it will judge the Syrian
regime by its actions, not its words. The Council has
authorized an advance group of monitors to verify the
Syrian Government's compliance. In doing so, the
Council has taken a step towards fulfilling its own
responsibilities. And it is about time.

On Thursday, the Joint Special Envoy of the
United Nations and the League of Arab States, Kofi
Annan, reported that a "fragile calm appears to be
prevailing" in Syria. We all hope that it will continue to
prevail. But we are under no illusions.

Two days of diminished violence after a year of
murderous rampage hardly proves that the regime is
serious about honouring its commitments. Just today,
Syrian forces resumed their brutal shelling of Horns
and shot innocent mourners at a funeral in Aleppo. This
resumed violence has cast serious doubt, yet again, on
the regime's commitment to a cessation of violence.

Despite that aggression, the Syrian opposition has
largely refrained from responding and has honourably
sought to extend the fragile calm. The regime's tanks,
heavy weapons and troops maintain their chokehold on
population centres, ready to resume attacks at any time.
Towns in large areas remain cut off, and the Al-Assad
regime maintains snipers and roadblocks throughout

Syria. Reports continue to come in that protestors have
been killed and arrested and thousands of activists
remain detained.

The Syrian Government must meet all of its
commitments, not only the bare minimum. It must do
so now. The suffering of the Syrian people has gone on
far too long. For many months they protested
peacefully, only to be met with violent retribution by
their own Government. When some protestors finally
dared to respond in self-defence, the retribution got
immeasurably worse. The Arab League proposed a way
forward to end the violence and meet the aspirations of
the Syrian people. The regime of Bashar Al-Assad
responded with broken promises, only to be followed
by intensified violence.

In the final days before 12 April, we saw an
outrageous escalation of violence by the Al-Assad
regime, including the stepped-up use of heavy artillery
on civilian areas and Syrian forces firing across
borders into Turkey and Lebanon. This horrific cycle
has lasted way too long. The Syrian people must be
allowed to exercise their rights and freedoms
peacefully, without fear of attack, detention, torture or
death.

We commend the opposition for the strength it
has shown in observing the ceasefire after the brutality
it has endured. We demand that the Syrian Government
at last honour its commitments. Those commitments
are plain to everyone.

Both the Security Council and the League of Arab
States have fully endorsed Mr. Annan's six-point plan.
As Secretary Clinton noted, the plan is not a menu of
options - it is a comprehensive set of obligations that
requires visible and verifiable actions by the
Government of Syria.

The resolution just adopted reaffirms the
Council's support for all elements of the Envoy's plan,
including an immediate end to violence, securing
humanitarian access and a Syrian-led political
transition that meets the democratic aspirations of the
Syrian people. The resolution stresses that the Syrian
Government must immediately fulfil its remaining
obligations to bring about a full cessation of Violence.
It emphasizes the necessity of the Syrian Government
immediately withdrawing all of its troops and heavy
weapons from population centres, and returning its
soldiers and their equipment to their barracks.

The resolution authorizes the Secretary-General
to send an initial team of up to 30 observers, to verify
that the Syrian Government is doing what it is obliged
to do, including ensuring that the full monitoring
mission can do its job unimpeded, with full freedom of
movement, full access to people and institutions and
unobstructed communications. The resolution also
expresses the Council's intention to establish a larger
observer mission once the Secretary-General presents a
blueprint, and if it is clear that the ceasefire is holding
and that the Government is cooperative. We see the
advance team's deployment as an important test of the
Syrian Government's intentions. If the Government
obstructs their work, it will raise serious concerns
about moving forward with the establishment of the
full mission.

We await the Secretary-General's proposal for a
full observation mission and express our willingness to
work quickly with Council members to authorize such
a mission, if indeed the Syrian Government fulfils its
commitments.

The United States expresses its appreciation once
again to Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan for his
dedicated work to try to stop the violence, respect the
rights of the Syrian people and begin a transition
towards stable and legitimate governance.

The opportunity is there; the burden is now on the
Syrian Government to seize it.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

