Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): The Kingdom
of the Netherlands would like to thank the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela for convening today's debate and
for providing the Member States with the opportunity
to re-emphasize the importance of the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his important
comments at the outset of our discussion today. I align
myself with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union earlier.

In my statement, I will focus on three issues that,
in our view, lie at the heart of the maintenance of
peace and security: the peaceful settlement of disputes,
human rights and peacekeeping missions.

First, on the peaceful settlement of disputes, the
international legal order is the foundation upon which
friendly and lasting relations between States are built.
International law is even more important when disputes
occur. The peaceful settlement of disputes, recognized
as one of the purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations, makes an invaluable contribution to a more
just and secure world.

In The Hague in the Netherlands, we host both
the International Court of Justice and the Permanent
Court of Arbitration. And to emphasize the importance
we attach to those institutions in The Hague, let me
highlight the presence in my delegation of the mayor
of The Hague, Mr. Van Aartsen, who is present in the
Chamber today. Both institutions I mentioned - the
International Court of Justice and the Permanent Court
of Arbitration -fulfil a crucial role in realizing the
ambitions of Article 33 of the Charter on the pacific
settlement of conflicts. The upcoming seventieth
anniversary of the International Court of Justice in
April will be a good occasion to reiterate the value and
achievements of that institution. As the host country
of that principal judicial organ of the United Nations,
we encourage all States to recognize the compulsory
jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice.

My second point is on human rights. The promotion
of human rights is a cornerstone of the United Nations.
Unfortunately, the current reality in the world shows
that we must do much more to realize our ambitions.
Large-scale violations of human rights, happening on a
daily basis in Syria as we speak, deserve action by the
international community. The principles of the Charter
and international humanitarian law need to be upheld
at all times. We condemn situations where the civilian
infrastructure, especially hospitals and schools,
are systematically targeted by parties to conflict.
Sovereignty should never be used as a shield by States
to prevent mass atrocities from being addressed.

As former Secretary-General Kofi Annan
stated, sovereignty was never meant as a license for
Governments to trample on human rights and human
dignity. The international community has been standing
by while people suffer horribly. The concept of the
responsibility to protect provides guidance on what we
could and what we should do. We urge the permanent
members of the Security Council to refrain from using
their vetoes in cases of mass atrocities and to use all
means at their disposal to increase their interaction
with human rights actors and improve the situation at
hand.

My third point concerns peacekeeping missions.
In order to maintain international peace and security,
the Charter of the United Nations allows for collective
measures. By accepting the Charter, all Member States
promise to give the United Nations assistance in any
action it takes. As Member States, we must fulfil that
promise, especially when it comes to peacekeeping.
Over the years, peacekeeping missions have been
deployed in more and more complex situations. Our
military, police and civilians experience that on a daily
basis in the Missions in which we are active, such
as the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan. We also work together with
other countries, especially in Africa, to train their
peacekeeping units and we call upon all Member
States to contribute to peacekeeping missions
with high-quality capabilities, in order to improve
the effectiveness of peacekeeping missions. The
effectiveness of peacekeeping should furthermore be
enhanced by implementing the recommendations of the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (S/2015/446).

In conclusion, as the Dutch philosopher Spinoza
said, peace is not an absence of war; it is a virtue, a
state of mind, a disposition for benevolence, confidence
and justice. As I have stated before, the Kingdom of
the Netherlands is the United Nations partner for peace,
justice and development. We will continue to work
together with all Member States until those goals have
been attained for the peoples and nations of the world.
For we believe those goals together embody the core
values of the Charter of the United Nations, which were
codified to address the needs and desires of humankind
on his journey towards a better future.

