Mr. Kovacik (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Indonesian presidency for organizing
this important debate. I would also like to extend our
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his recent report
(S/2019/373) covering the global state of the protection
of civilians, and a big thank you also goes to the
International Committee of the Red Cross and to the
Center for Civilians in Conflict.

While fully aligning myself with the statement of
the European Union to be delivered later this afternoon,
I would like to offer a few additional reflections in
national capacity.

As mentioned by many speakers before me, this
year marks two important milestones: the seventieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions and the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the landmark
resolution 1265 (1999), by which the Council added the
protection of civilians as an item to its agenda. The
former was motivated by the aftermath of the Second
World War, while the latter was a reaction to the reports
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Africa and the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Civilians accounted for the vast majority of casualties
in armed conflicts and were increasingly targeted by
combatants and armed elements. Women, children
and other vulnerable groups, including refugees and
internally displaced persons, were especially targeted
by acts of violence.

Today, 20 years later, we read in the report of the
Secretary-General that "the state of the protection of
civilians today is tragically similar to that of 20 years
ago" (S/2019/393, para. 4). Civilians still account for
the vast majority of casualties in armed conflicts,
and women, children and other vulnerable groups
remain targets.

The protection of civilians, although sounding like
one task, goes beyond a number of areas that affect
their protection, from clear and enforceable mandates,
effective training, the deployment of peacemakers and
respect for human rights to creating a safe environment
for return and further development of States.

Slovakia will continue to support the security
sector reform agenda, whereby parties are responsible
for the protection of civilians, respect for human rights,
political dialogue and arms control. Civilians and
citizens are #NotATarget; they are the foundation of
any State. Without our protection and respect for their
rights, and the creation of a habitable environment, we
fail in our fundamental role of ensuring peace. Slovakia
is also a strong supporter of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and its role in the fight against impunity
and in bringing perpetrators to justice. Achieving

universal jurisdiction of the ICC would be a major step
in this regard.

We have come a long way in the past 20 years, but
we are not there yet. Sadly, it seems that we are not
even half-way there. A lot has been done to strengthen
the framework for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, but owing to the nature of contemporary
warfare, the bar keeps rising and therefore more needs
to be done - on the regional level, by enhancing the
compliance of non-State armed groups; on the national
level, by developing national policy frameworks on
the protection of civilians; and on the international
level, by promoting compliance through advocacy and
accountability and by continuous joint engagement and
dialogue on this topic among Member States, United
Nations actors and civil society.

