Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
ninth report on the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC). We welcome his presence and that of his
Special Representative, Mr. Namanga Ngongi, whom
we thank for his briefing. In addition, we warmly
welcome back to the Council the Foreign Minister of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Leonard
She Okitundu, and we thank him for his comprehensive
statement.

The peace process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is currently at a crucial stage. China agrees
with the Secretary-General's assessment of the overall
situation contained in his ninth report. We also believe
that the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is still under control. The ceasefire among all
parties has continued to hold, and some foreign troops
are being withdrawn.

Although the inter-Congolese political dialogue
has been suspended for the time being, the process of
political dialogue has nevertheless been activated. We
call on all the parties to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to honour their commitments in
good faith and as soon as possible by implementing the
Lusaka peace Agreement and the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council. It is only by doing so that the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo can
continue to develop in a positive direction. The United
Nations must play a greater role in facilitating
reconciliation and mutual trust among all parties.

The focus of the Secretary-General's ninth report
is on the deployment of phase III of MONUC. We
agree with and support the Secretary-General's
proposal on starting the deployment of phase III. A
step-by-step deployment by the United Nations will
help to sustain the momentum in the peace process.
This will not only have symbolic value for peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo 4 and even in the
Great Lakes region - but will also have practical
significance.

We also agree that MONUC's main role in
phase III will be to establish reception centres where
combatants can surrender their weapons, which will
facilitate demobilization among all parties.
Arrangements should be stepped up for disarmed
combatants - including for the 3,000 former
combatants being received by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - so that they can
return to society in a smooth and peaceful manner. We
favour the setting up by the Secretariat of a lean
coordinating mechanism, within the existing
framework, to study and address a series of post-
conflict questions.

I would like to point out here that the United
Nations is an important force for promoting peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as in
the Great Lakes region. However, it is not a decisive
force. To put it precisely, the fate of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains in the hands of the
parties to the conflict. In order to facilitate the early
achievement of peace and development in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
region, the parties to the conflict must redouble their
efforts, create an enabling environment and actively
cooperate with MONUC in phase III of its deployment.
For that purpose, all the parties concerned should
proceed from their national interests and adopt a
pragmatic and cooperative approach, restore dialogue
and seek ways and means to achieve lasting peace. At
the same time, foreign troops must withdraw
unconditionally as soon as possible, and the parties
concerned should put an immediate end to all kinds of
support and assistance to the armed groups.

