Sheikh Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like to express my thanks and appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General and his
staff for the efforts being made to contain the current
crisis in the Middle East.

We are participating in this important Security
Council meeting in the hope that the Council will
carefully consider the delicate situation in Lebanon and
in the Middle East, whose extraordinary circumstances
and events are affecting peace, security and stability in
the region. The current crisis in sisterly Lebanon comes
at the expense of its people, its land, its infrastructure
and its political stability.

When the United Nations was established, it was
meant to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war, as provided by the Charter of the Organization,
which entrusted the Security Council with the
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. That is a major responsibility that
must be taken seriously, because it directly affects the
lives and the livelihoods of innocent people. Therefore,
it is most disheartening that the Security Council has
stood idly by, unable to stop the bloodbath that has
become the bitter daily lot of the defenceless Lebanese
people.

The draft resolution now before the Council
requires careful consideration that takes into account
the Arab position as expressed at the extraordinary
meeting of the Council of Ministers of the League of
Arab States held yesterday in Beirut. At that meeting,
the seven-point plan of the Prime Minister of Lebanon,
which has been endorsed by all Lebanese political
parties, was unequivocally adopted. The Council's
consideration of this issue should also take into
account the socio-political structure of Lebanese
society as well as the interests, unity, stability and
territorial integrity of Lebanon. Our presence at today's
meeting is an explicit expression of the collective Arab
position, which fully reflects Lebanon's position on the
draft resolution.

Accordingly, we draw the Security Council's
attention to the repercussions of adopting a non-
enforceable resolution. That would further complicate
the situation on the ground and have grave
ramifications for Lebanon, for other Arab countries and
for all the countries of the region. How often has the
Council adopted resolutions to establish benchmarks
06-45832
and lay the groundwork for peace in the region -
resolutions that were not accepted by some parties and
therefore were never enforced or implemented? An
example can be found in the resolutions relevant to the
primary question - the Palestinian question - and the
repercussions of the conflict that has engulfed the
region, leading to instability and to this spiralling cycle
of violence.

It is a mistake to believe that pursuing a policy of
violence against Lebanon will put an end to this
situation and provide security for Israel or help to
restore the stability we all desire. To the contrary, what
is now occurring will sow the seeds of hatred and
extremism in the area and provide a pretext for those
who believe that the international community is taking
sides and lacks fairness with regard to this dispute.

We believe that establishing a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace is the only way to achieve
stability in the region. We have expressed that strategic
position again and again, and we remain committed to
it. However, peace has requirements and commitments
that all parties in the region must respect: everyone in
the region must live within safe and recognized
borders, and the Palestinian people must obtain their
legitimate rights, including the right to establish their
own independent State, living side by side in peace
with the State of Israel.

We continue to have faith in the Security
Council's ability to shoulder its Charter responsibilities
to ensure the achievement of security, peace and
stability in the region. The stakes are high; so are the
hopes that the Council will adopt a decisive,
substantive and clear resolution that serves not only
Lebanon and the Arab community, but also a peace
built on justice and equity and that takes into account
the interests of all parties concerned without any
discrimination. That can be achieved through an
immediate comprehensive ceasefire, a withdrawal of
Israeli forces to behind the Blue Line, a strengthening
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
through an increase in the Force's strength and material
support and an expansion of its mandate to enable it to
play the role entrusted to it, and support for the
Lebanese Government's stated decision to extend its
authority throughout its territory by deploying the
Lebanese army.
06-45832

