The President: I thank the representative of Rwanda
for his kind words addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Italy.

Convincing information exists that arms are being
supplied to the former Rwandan government forces in
violation of the current embargo. These allegations are
creating ever more dangerous tensions, which are
worsening the situation in the Great Lakes region. The
international community is alarmed at the possibility of a
large-scale rearmament of those responsible for last year's
genocide, which is still haunting us. This potential
rearmament is bound to increase the perception of
insecurity and imminent danger in Rwanda. What is more,
this potential rearmament may obstruct national
reconciliation, which must be based on a dialogue
between all ethnic groups and be aimed at peaceful
coexistence - a policy that can succeed only if Kigali is
not constrained by the perception of external threats.

In this respect, we are encouraged by the solemn
appeal of the President of Rwanda, Pasteur Bizimungu,
for the repatriation of refugees, which he made during the

 

visit of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Mrs. Ogata. We hope that this appeal and the
new Rwandan Government's policy decision will help to
alleviate the fears of the refugees.

My Government fully supports the resolution just
adopted, because it is well aware of the crucial role that the
International Commission of Inquiry may and should have.
Of course, to obtain concrete results, the Commission must
be allowed to operate with complete autonomy and with the
support of all the Governments concerned. The Secretary-
General's latest progress report on Rwanda noted that the
Governments in the region are fully aware of the fact that
these illegal weapons have a highly destabilizing influence
not only on Rwanda, but also on its neighbours. The report
also emphasized the belief
shared in the region that this traffic should be fought
through collaborative efforts.

The new Commission, it seems to us, is off to a
good start, because it can count on the cooperation needed
for a successful performance of its mandate. Let us hope
that the results will meet expectations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 5.10 pm.
