Mr. Da Gama (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): Allow me first and foremost to congratulate you,
Sir, on serving as President of the Security Council for
the month of March. And I would like to say on behalf of
my country, Guinea-Bissau, how gratified we are to see
you chairing our deliberations. I would like to call to
mind the excellent bonds of friendship, cooperation,
fraternity and good-neighbourliness that, I am happy to
say, exist between our two countries. Our congratulations
also go to your predecessor, Ambassador Denis Dangue
Rewaka, Permanent Representative of Gabon, for the
outstanding manner in which he conducted the work of
the Council last month.

It has been a little more than six years since the
Security Council, in its resolution 748 (1992) of 31
March 1992, imposed sanctions on Libya, subsequently
reinforcing them by means of resolution 883 (1993) of 11
November 1993.

 

My delegation welcomes the constructive and resolute
attitude that prompted the members of the Security Council
to hold for the first time a public debate on this question.
They are thus giving all parties an opportunity to express
their points of view on this sensitive and important
political, moral and humanitarian issue.

We feel that it has become necessary to respond
favourably to the needs of the Libyan people and to the
readiness being displayed by that country to settle the
Lockerbie affair in a just and honourable fashion, within the
framework of the proposals made by the League of Arab
States, the Organization of African Unity and the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. These proposals are
conducive to finding an equitable settlement grounded in
international legality and are capable of ending the suffering
of the fraternal Libyan people.

My country, Guinea-Bissau, has constantly expressed
concern with respect to coercive measures, the humanitarian
effects of which may injure innocent populations.

No one could raise the question that is now under
consideration without recalling the Lockerbie tragedy and
the suffering of the families of the victims of that
horrendous act. However, it is nonetheless true that a large
number of people, both within Libya and in neighbouring
countries, continue to suffer the consequences of the
continual sanctions imposed on that African country. This
situation further compounds the economic difficulties of
these countries and impedes the socio-economic progress of
their peoples. My country reaffirms that it condemns
terrorism in all its forms, whether perpetrated by
individuals, armed groups or others.

Today the people of Libya are turning to the Security
Council in the hope that their cause will be heard and that
hands will be outstretched to them to extricate them from
the difficult situation they have been suffering for more
than six years as a result of the sanctions imposed by the
Council.

We wish accordingly to commend to the Libyan
authorities on the dispassionate and cooperative attitude
they have displayed, an attitude which assures that the right
of the victims will be respected and justice will be done in
accordance with universally accepted norms.

My country is of the view that the principles of
imposing sanctions on Libya should be reconsidered in the
light of the Judgment of the International Court of Justice
dated 27 February concerning the admissibility of Libya's
application to this highest organ of international
jurisprudence. We wish to see the whole matter
scrutinized once again in an open and constructive spirit
based on the facts and taking into account the truth of the
matter. In this respect, we would in turn urge the Security
Council to study diligently, impartially and with
detachment the joint proposals of the League of Arab
States, the Organization of African Unity, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the Non-
Aligned Movement, which envision mechanisms capable
of ensuring due process for the suspects, in order to
ensure that justice is done in unimpeachable conditions,
which guarantee the right of the victims and their families
to know the whole truth and permit the lifting of
sanctions.

