Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): We
are very grateful to Mr. Annabi for his briefing to us
today. In this connection, we wish to refer to two topics
and to formulate some very concrete questions at the
end. I wish to refer first to the situation of refugees in
West Timor and later to the electoral process.

With regard to the refugees, we have taken note
of the new programme for refugee return, in which the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET), the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration are participating. The
return of 600 refugees began in early March from the
camps of Tuapukan, Noelbaki and Naibonat. The
number of refugees who returned in March amounts to
more than 2,600, which is excellent news.
We are concerned, however, by the situation of
refugees in the other camps that United Nations
agencies have not revisited since last September,
where, according to the press, refugees are dying of
hunger and disease. In this regard, I wish to echo a
remark made by Ambassador Ward. We are aware of
the security risks, but the Office of the United Nations
Security Coordinator should undertake a speedy
inspection to determine whether conditions are right
for a change of security rating from phase V, thus
enabling United Nations agencies to return promptly to
the refugee camps.

As to the electoral process, we have taken note of
the decision adopted by the National Council of East
Timor and approved by UNTAET to convene elections
to choose members of the constituent assembly on 30
August, with the aim of promulgating the new
constitution in December this year - a process we
fully support, of course.

In the open debate held in late January, we noted
our concern about the political violence referred to in
the Secretary-General's report. We were saddened to
hear from Mr. Annabi about the incidents that occurred
in Viqueque in early March, as well as the deliberate
fire set in a Baucau mosque. We take note of the
establishment of a Truth, Reception and Reconciliation
Commission and hope that it will achieve its goal. East
Timor is a country in gestation, a new country for
which the international community has great
expectations. It would be very sad if the rebirth of the
Timorese people were marred by political violence and
religious intransigence.

I turn now to my questions. We have had a very
productive exchange of Views with the delegation of
Brazil, a country friendly to Colombia. Following the
process that you, Sir, have suggested, I have several
specific questions to put to Mr. Annabi on its behalf.

First, is there currently any mechanism
periodically to assess the security situation in the field?
How does the Secretariat envisage the transition to
independence from the perspective of the level of
peacekeeping forces that will be required?

Secondly, concerning the maintenance of law and
order, we have heard Mr. Annabi's descriptions of the
efforts to prevent incidents such as those that occurred
in Baucau and Viqueque last month. It is particularly
important to find out who is behind these acts of
violence and to identify the causes of tension in order
to determine in all cases whether these are instances of
political manipulation or rather of spontaneous
outbreaks, such as those referred to, produced perhaps
by frustration and impatience.

Thirdly, according to press reports that have been
widely distributed, in the course of a heated debate the
majority of the members of the National Council
claimed that they had not been appropriately informed
about the resignation of Xanana Gusmao and therefore
voted to postpone the debate on his replacement to the
following Monday. Mr. Annabi's reference to this topic
allayed many of our doubts, but I would ask whether,
on the basis of what he said, we should understand that
the recent political developments in East Timor will
have no impact on the implementation of the transition
schedule.

Finally, it would be useful for Mr. Annabi to tell
us more about the type of international assistance
required to prepare the forthcoming elections of the
constituent assembly. In addition to international
observers, what other type of help is now required?

