Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): We thank Viet Nam for convening today's timely debate. In its seventy-fifth year, the Charter of the United Nations remains the centrepiece for multilateralism and the international rules-based order. Upholding its purposes and principles is indispensable for the maintenance of international peace and security. A clear renewed commitment on the part of the membership to that end is needed in the light of the ongoing erosion of certain key provisions of the Charter, including those governing the use of force, in particular given current tensions with the potential of further escalation. In joining the United Nations, we all accepted that the use of force is illegal, except when authorized by the Security Council or carried out in self-defence. When invoking Article 51 preventively, States owe the international community a thorough justification, including evidence of the imminence of an external threat and the proportionality of measures to be taken in response. Excessively expansive and unchecked interpretations of Article 51 are a threat to the international rules-based order and an obstacle to the promotion of international peace and security. On the World Day for International Justice in 2018, the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court (ICC) over the crime of aggression went into effect, marking for the first time in history a permanent international court's authority to hold individuals accountable for that crime. That also equipped the Security Council with an important new tool - the ability to refer situations involving acts of aggression to the ICC. If applied in a meaningful way, that new tool can assist the Security Council in the prevention of conflicts, reinforcing its role under the Charter to maintain international peace and security, and it is ever more relevant given the proliferation of grave cyberattacks - acts over which the ICC also has jurisdiction if requisite thresholds are met. In too many instances, we have seen political divisions prevent the Security Council from taking the action necessary to address some of the worst crises of our times, with enormous costs in terms of human suffering. Over the past decade, the use of veto has significantly increased, most significantly with respect to the situation in Syria. In addition, the use of veto has had a paralysing effect on anticipatory obedience, with negative consequences on the ability of the Council to perform its tasks. As the Security Council acts on behalf of the entire membership, the General Assembly has a responsibility to hold the Security Council accountable in such cases. That is why Liechtenstein supports the automatic convening of the General Assembly whenever a veto is cast in the Security Council to discuss the matter. Such a discussion would take place without prejudice to any possible outcome and irrespective of the substance of the draft resolution that was subject to a veto. The situation in Myanmar is one example of how the Council has failed to carry out its responsibilities owing to the mere threat of the use of veto. While that is deeply concerning, we are encouraged that alternative tracks to address the situation in Myanmar have been found. Recent proceedings at the International Court of Justice, under the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, and efforts to ensure individual criminal responsibility under way at the ICC and the Independent Investigative Mechanism for Myanmar are acting in complementarity to bring justice to the victims of Myanmar's atrocity crimes. Those are positive steps. At the same time, we continue to expect the Council to carry out its duties as envisioned under the Charter. The proceedings before the International Court of Justice should be yet another reason to do so. Liechtenstein continues to promote the code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group, now supported by 121 States, including two- thirds of the current Security Council membership, for timely and decisive Security Council action to prevent and end mass atrocity crimes.
