Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and
Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for their briefings.

I will focus in my statement on two issues,
namely, political and security developments and
humanitarian developments.

With regard to the former, it has been eight months
since the Stockholm Agreement entered into force - a
period characterized by stalemate and failure to make
any concrete progress. That runs counter to the wishes
of the Security Council, in particular on the need to
advance towards a political solution based on a United
Nations-sponsored dialogue and resolutions 2451
(2018), 2452 (2019) and 2481 (2019), as well as a number
of press statements that stress the need to implement
the Al-Hudaydah Agreement in full.

The Stockholm Agreement has not been the
subject of any constructive measures to achieve its
goals. The blockade on Taiz started four years ago and
continues to this day. There has not been any progress
on implementing the memorandum of understanding
on Taiz or the agreement to exchange prisoners and
detainees. Parties continue to struggle to implement
the Al-Hudaydah Agreement and to complete the first
phase, but that will be impossible without respecting
the understandings and agreements reached through
the Redeployment Coordination Committee, especially
those regarding the concept of operations.

We welcome the efforts of the Special Envoy and
his proposals to end the deadlock on the implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement. We stress the need for
such efforts to be based on understandings that would
ensure that the Yemeni Government can exercise full
sovereignty across its territory.

We reiterate our established position that there is
no military solution to the crisis in Yemen. We stress
the need to ensure military de-escalation, as noted by
the Special Envoy a while ago. It is extremely important
to fully and concretely implement the three elements of
the Stockholm Agreement as the optimal path towards
resuming the next round of consultations, which would
focus on the broader aspects of ending the crisis.

With regard to security developments, the State of
Kuwait condemns, in the strongest terms, the continued
attacks against civilian and Vital infrastructure in the
sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The most recent
attack was on the Shaybah oilfield. We fully support
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the measures it is
taking to ensure its security, stability and territorial
integrity. The Houthis' continued and escalated attacks
against Saudi territories are a flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law and a clear and direct
threat to regional security and stability. In that regard,
we stress the need to fully implement the arms embargo
as per relevant Security Council resolutions.

We are concerned about recent developments in
Aden and look forward to the efforts of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia to host a dialogue in Jeddah between
the Yemeni Government and representatives of the
Southern Transitional Council. We hope that the
dialogue will lead to the return of security and stability
to Aden, while ensuring the unity and territorial
integrity of Yemen.

Pertaining to the humanitarian situation, it is still
difficult in Yemen due to the ongoing crisis and increased
challenges of lack of food, the spread of diseases and
obstacles to humanitarian efforts. The World Food
Programme had to suspend its operations in Sana'a for
two months before resuming them few days ago after
receiving certain assurances, including to not divert
humanitarian assistance from its main destination.

We once again call on all parties to cooperate with
humanitarian and relief agencies, not obstruct their
work and ensure the safety and security of humanitarian
workers, whom we thank and commend for their
tireless efforts to ensure the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to people in need, despite the difficulties
they are facing.

In conclusion, we renew our call on all Yemeni
parties to fully implement the Stockholm Agreement on
Al-Hudaydah and its three ports, as well as the exchange
of prisoners and the understandings on Taiz. That would

complement the efforts made by the Special Envoy to
reach a political solution based on the agreed three terms
of reference - the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcome of the
National Dialogue Conference and the relevant Security
Council resolutions, especially resolution 2216 (2015).
That would end the crisis in Yemen and safeguard its
independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and
unity and ensure non-interference in its internal affairs.

