I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this much-needed open debate and for providing this opportunity for the wider United Nations membership to speak on this important topic in the Security Council since the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has taught us a valuable lesson - that we are only as strong as our weakest link and that no nation is safe until every nation is safe. Across the globe, our peoples are feeling the effects of the pandemic's far-reaching consequences for our health systems, economies and day-to-day lives. Of the three pillars of the United Nations - namely, peace and security, development and human rights - none has been spared. It is only through collective will and effort that we can ever hope to overcome this challenge. In the context of peace and security, the pandemic can potentially create or further escalate social unrest and violence. At the same time, the continuation of hostilities will undermine efforts to fight the pandemic by restricting the ability to deliver humanitarian aid in fragile and conflict-affected situations. Malaysia is also concerned that such security vulnerabilities resulting from the pandemic could be exploited by terrorists to attract new recruits and stage a broader resurgence of acts of terrorism. To make matters worse, this could occur at a time when the established tools for maintaining international peace and security, such as mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, are operationally challenged by the COVID-19 situation. Malaysia strongly believes that efforts to relieve human suffering and conflict resolution should go hand in hand in leading efforts to address the pandemic. We must muster all our efforts to save lives and alleviate the social and economic devastation of our people, especially in addressing the plight of vulnerable groups that are affected by the hostilities, such as women and children. Recently, Malaysia initiated a statement of support to the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire amid the COVID-19 pandemic, which garnered the strong endorsement of 172 Member States and observer States. The statement, which was issued on 22 June, represents a clear and strong political message, reaffirming the moral commitment of the 172 signatories to an immediate cessation of hostilities in all corners of the world towards fighting this deadly pandemic and what Malaysia hopes would pave the way for sustained peace. It also reaffirms the commitment to multilateralism and the peaceful settlement of disputes, as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. On this note, we are pleased that yesterday the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2532 (2020), on COVID-19, supporting the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire. Malaysia commends the Security Council for the adoption of that resolution. With regard to maintaining international peace and security, Malaysia has continued to contribute troops to United Nations peacekeeping missions all around the world throughout this challenging period. As part of their mandate, our peacekeepers will support national authorities in their response to COVID-19. As a member of the United Nations Group of Friends of Mediation, Malaysia will continue to promote and advance the use of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes and conflict prevention and resolution, including in our region. In fighting this deadly pandemic, Malaysia also continues to advocate for the establishment of a comprehensive, systematic and coordinated global response to the outbreak. As one of the regional hubs for the United Nations Humanitarian Response Depot in Asia, we continue to ensure the integrity of the global supply chain and have been facilitating the delivery of humanitarian relief aid to countries and peoples in need. In closing, allow me to reiterate Malaysia's ongoing readiness to work closely with all Member States on our shared values for peace and security. Amid this deadly pandemic, we must remain united in our shared humanity and in giving peace a chance.
