Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I want
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing and the Prime
Minister of Serbia, Mr. Vucic', and the Prime Minister
of Kosovo, Mr. Thaci, for their statements.

Today we are reviewing the events of 2014, the
year of the implementation of the historic Agreement
of 19 April 2013 reached between Serbia and Kosovo
and facilitated by the European Union. As it happens,
there have been fewer major advances in the past
year, but the dialogue between the two countries has
continued, enabling technical enhancements necessary
for the normalization of their relations. We would like
to congratulate and encourage the parties to continue
their discussions despite the slowdown caused by the
electoral context in both countries. The hopes that were
raised continue to be fulfilled by the facts.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/773)
covers the period after the elections of 8 June in
Kosovo, which took place, we would recall, calmly
and in a transparent matter. Three months ago in this
very Chamber (see S/PV.7257) we were expressing
the hope that a compromise could be found for the
rapid formation of a Government. It seems that today
the Kosovo parties are finally about to achieve it. An
agreement was reached in principle among the main
political parties for a formal Government agreement,
and we look forward to the appointment of a Cabinet, if
possible as soon as 8 December.

That process took time, therefore requiring
increasing attention by the Council, but it took place
in line with democratic procedures. Today it seems
that the political crisis has been avoided, and we see in
this a new sign of the Kosovar parties' maturity. While
continuing to carefully observe their work to come in
Pristina, we reiterate our trust in them.

Kosovo needs a stable Government. Having one is
in the interest of Kosovars, given the pressing economic
challenges facing the country and the expectations that
the entire population, including the north, has expressed
through its appropriate participation in the national
elections. It is also an expectation that the Council has.

We will remain particularly attentive to issues
beyond internal reforms, such as the rapid resumption
of political dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
Technical progress certainly continues to be made, but
it is essential that the Governments of both countries
restore political momentum towards a normalization
process, as such a process will not drive itself. This also
involves the pursuit of their European rapprochement, a
subject to which I will return.

Kosovo will not be able to calmly face the future
without light being shed on its past. It is now up
to Kosovo to take responsibility and facilitate the
establishment of a tribunal to follow-up on the work of
the Special Investigative Task Force. Again, given the
gravity of the alleged crimes, the expected formation
of a Government and the resumption of the work of the
Parliament in Pristina are necessary developments for
a situation that should not, in any case, be neglected.

We have no doubt about the willingness of Kosovars
to engage in a legal process that will address all the
aspects of the difficult times experienced by Kosovo in
the late 19905. We again count on the political parties
in Pristina, who must show their maturity and their
determination as they have done in the past.

I will not go over the incidents that occurred at the
end of August or the police operations in the country
against possible support to the terrorist group Daesh,
but would simply like to acknowledge how responsible
the Kosovo security forces were in their effective and
measured response. For us, the security situation in
Kosovo remains stable.

We note with satisfaction the progress made in the
integration of former Serb policemen into the Kosovo
police, which is a Sign of the effective implementation
of the Agreement of 19 April 2013. The establishment
of a common Serbian community with real authority
was another sign of progress, which the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General urged us
to consider early this year. Those two processes are
inseparable and will serve to strengthen the confidence
of the local population in Kosovo's institutional
framework. We hope to quickly see progress on that
front as well.

Finally, we encourage the parties to ensure respect
for the rights of persons belonging to minorities. The
low numbers ofrefugees returning to Kosovo remains a
concern. The restoration of mutual confidence between
communities remains the only way to allow Kosovo
and Serbia to open a new chapter in their history.

I will conclude by commending the joint progress
by Kosovo and Serbia towards the European Union.
Important steps have been taken. Serbia has made
substantial institutional changes, and we welcome
the efforts already made. The technical process of
negotiations for accession to the European Union,
formally launched on 21 January, continues. We now
hope that the efforts by Serbia will be recognized and a
first round of negotiations can soon begin.

The European Commission has in turn welcomed
the commitment of Pristina to the conclusion of a
stabilization and association agreement, which we hope
will be finalized soon. It is important that the progress
by each of the two sides be made in step, so as to avoid
any delay of one slowing the progress of the other.

