We welcome the participation of the Secretary-General in today's meeting. I particularly welcome Minister Zarif, who is with us now. I would welcome the participation of the Secretary of State, but he is no longer with us. I understand that he has a very busy schedule, but we regret that he did not choose to listen to Council members, at least some of them. But more than that, we regret that in his statement we - at least I myself - did not hear a single mention of the word "dialogue" or "cooperation". I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for presenting the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/531) on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). We also welcome the contribution made by the Permanent Representative of Belgium, as Security Council Facilitator, to its implementation. We deeply appreciate his efforts to uphold the unity of the members of the Security Council and to that end negotiate a consensus Facilitator's report, even though it has not been approved. To our deep regret, the world of multilateralism and order, where the principle of pacta sunt servanda used to be respected through the centuries, is at a risk. The United States policy of unilateral action disregards both common sense and the opinions of other States. We have been watching with grave concern the policy of maximum pressure on Iran, which is better characterized as a maximum suffocation policy. Iran is being deliberately squeezed from all directions. The task is to achieve regime change or create a situation where Iran literally would not be able to breathe. That is like putting a knee on someone's neck. The responsibility for the current crisis belongs to the United States. Two years ago, it intentionally started to undermine the carefully balanced and calibrated agreement of 2015, of which both resolution 2231 (2015) and the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) constituted an inseparable package deal. Despite the fact that Security Council resolutions are part of international law and must be implemented by all Member States, the United States officially pulled out from its resolution 2231 (2015) and JCPOA obligations, closed the door behind it and engaged in unilateral pressure by reimposing and reinforcing national sanctions against Iran, which are contrary to the aims of both the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015). Such actions eliminate any incentives for Tehran to comply with their provisions. Still, Iran continued to uphold its obligations under the JCPOA. On top of that, the United States, being a major violator, has been threatening other countries with unilateral sanctions for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), which, as I said, is not an option but an obligation of Member States. The road to the JCPOA was very bumpy. Everybody made concessions to achieve that carefully calibrated deal, including, first and foremost, Iran itself. The whole world was celebrating this unique achievement and a system of checks and balances of which a temporary arms embargo - arms restrictions - on Iran was only one element. It was introduced with the clear and unequivocal understanding that it would expire on 18 October 2020, provided Iran abided by its obligations under the JCPOA. Iran honoured its commitments despite two years of continued threats and sanctions by the United States. But today we see that the United States is appealing to the authority of the Security Council to "demonstrate unity of vision" and adopt a new arms embargo resolution against Iran. We explained in detail our position in that regard in the letter dated 27 May 2020 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, Sergey Lavrov, addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2020/451), which* was distributed in the Council. We cannot accept an attempt to get a blessing for the United States-designed maximum-pressure policy through the Security Council and to legitimize it. We have a special mandate and responsibility here to protect the legitimate interests of all States and maintain international peace and security. The logic of the United States draft that was submitted is to impose a full- scale blockade of Iran by all means possible. It is obvious that the ultimate goal is to antagonize Iran and push it to radical retaliation, which would become an invitation to impose further sanctions. What we get in the end is an uncontrollable escalation, a destabilized region and lasting implications for international peace and security. Is this the remedy to resolve the current crisis that we are looking for? Making Iran a scapegoat for everything that is happening in the region seems an easy approach. But simplifying things and coming to easy, but questionable and arguable conclusions, to which, I think, we all are unfortunately accustomed, is not a magic solution to the problems the region is facing. Moreover, that simplistic approach does not bring us closer to solutions. It only complicates problems. We would like to reiterate that there are no legal or other grounds to raise the issue of arms embargo in the Security Council. The approval-based procedures for the transfer of armaments to and from Iran have been designed as temporary measures and their extension beyond 18 October 2020 has never been either envisaged or discussed. Given all that, it would be naive, at the very least, to suggest that there can be room for engaging the Council on this issue. Brian Hook, United States Special Representative for Iran, chose to accuse Russia and China of going down the road to dystopia with regard to Iran. I do not know what prompted such a flight of fancy or what exactly he meant by that. Maybe he recently read George Orwell, Ray Bradbury, Aldous Huxley or some Russian dystopian writers - of which, incidentally, we have plenty. But if we take it at face value, then I am compelled to say that Russia, in particular, is adopting a dystopian stance because the United States is adopting a utopian one. We have said from day one that the United States draft resolution on extending the Iran embargo is a utopia. It will not fly. It is not a sound basis for any negotiations. During the past two years, the United States has tried in vain to prove to us that Iran has been violating its commitments under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). In fact, the only moves that Iran has made have been aimed at showing its frustration with the provocative actions of the United States, but even those moves, strictly speaking, did not violate the JCPOA. In that regard, we would like to express our profound disappointment with the Secretary-General's ninth report (S/2020/531) on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). It clearly fails to meet the high standards of impartiality that are expected in such documents. The Secretariat has never been mandated with investigative tasks, including at the invitation of individual States. The Council has been effectively kept in the dark about its activities, being instead presented with ready-made judgments. The group that conducted those investigations has neither retributive nor prosecutorial mandates. Nevertheless, today our fellow Council members use expressions such as "almost certainly" or "highly likely" - as if we were considering not allegations, but established facts. We regret to see that as a result of these amateur inspections, the report suffers from a persistent lack of evidence. Final assessments of Iran's involvement in activities in violation of the resolution 2231 (2015) are baseless and biased. In these turbulent times, it is unfortunate that this document fuels tensions rather than contribute to their solution. While addressing the issue under consideration, we must not forget the broader picture. Today we are witnessing a spiralling escalation in the Persian Gulf, * jeopardizing peace and security in the region and undermining international efforts to settle conflicts there. We believe that there is a viable alternative - a comprehensive strategic solution that could help build trust and promote stability, transparency and predictability among regional players. The ultimate goal is to establish a genuinely inclusive security architecture that reflects the legitimate concerns of all countries of the region. Regional confidence-building measures could be instrumental in that regard. Our security architecture concept in the Persian Gulf, with international guarantees, remains relevant. Russia is also ready to work with our regional partners and all interested parties to support similar initiatives. In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that Russia is fully committed to the unconditional implementation of its obligations under resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA. We call on all Member States to make every effort to preserve the JCPOA. We will continue to pursue and encourage dialogue aimed at finding compromises, with a balanced consideration of interests at its core. Such measures could be taken on all levels of political communication. Russia, together with other responsible members of international community, will spare no effort to bring the current situation back under control.*
