Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): Madame President,
thank you for organizing this timely open debate on the
interdependence between development and security. As
pointed out in Brazil's concept paper (see S/2011/50), a
series of similar discussions has taken place over the
years. At this juncture, let me thank Brazil for that
concept paper, which provides a number of reference
documents but also poses thought-provoking questions.

A common thread that runs through all past
discussions on the issue before us is the linkage
between development and security. They are the two
sides of the same coin. It is now an established fact
that the Council, in discharging its role in the
maintenance of international peace and security, will
need to examine and address the root causes of
conflict. Only by doing so can long-term sustainable
peace be globally achieved. The Council, as advocated
by the concept paper, must take due notice of actors in
the other principal United Nations organs, in particular
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and other subsidiary bodies, including the
Peacebuilding Commission.

The linkage between development and security is
best summed up by our 2005 Summit document
(General Assembly resolution 60/1) and the report of
the then Secretary-General, Kofi Arman (A/59/2005).
The purpose of multilateralism is to provide our
populations with freedom from want, freedom from
fear and freedom to live in dignity. These populations
include our youth, women and children and our rural
communities.

As we look at the global environment, we see that
the global financial markets have since improved.
However, at environment remains fragile. External
factors, depending on their health, shape and size,
influence the level of instability and conflicts risk
throughout the world.

The situation for Member states operating on the
fringes of the international system is more brutal.
These countries will need to be put on a special watch
list with a dedicated development package. Countries
with low income, low growth and dependence on
natural resources and those vulnerable to climate
change have a high conflict risk. Least developed
countries and some small island developing States fall
into this category. If not confronted decisively and
meaningfully, climate change will determine our
future. It is for these reasons that resolutions of the
General Assembly have requested the Council to look
at the security implications of non-action on global
issues, including climate change. We therefore request
the Council to be seized ofthis subject.

We still have the opportunity to enhance the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
climate change funds promised need to be released in a
transparent manner through a United Nations
multilateral body. The trust and confidence restored in
Cancun remain fragile, and non-delivery threatens
multilateralism. For the least developed countries, the
Fourth United Nations Conference in May this year
must deliver. We must break with business as usual;
three 10-year programmes in the past three decades
have not yielded the results we have been seeking. The
Istanbul programme of action must be responsive to the
development aspiration of least developed countries,
allowing at least half to graduate from the group within
the coming decade.

At all levels, the maintenance of international
peace rests on the quality of development partnership,
which must be balanced and strengthen national
capacities with people-centred investment in the
productive sectors. The Group of Seven Plus group of
fragile countries led by Timor-Leste is seeking
dividends of peace and quality, air-tight partnerships
between partners and post-conflict least developed
countries, and continues to add its support to this
discussion. My delegation, with a watchful eye and
hopeful spirit, looks forward to the outcome of this
discussion, and once again thanks Brazil for its
initiative and all Council's members for their support at
this gathering.

