Mr. Malmierca Diaz (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, upon your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to thank you for convening this meeting. we also
thank Mr. De Soto for his briefing.

I have the honour to address the Council on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).

The international community has always been
unequivocal in recognizing the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, rejecting Israel's illegal occupation
of all Arab territories and demanding that Israel cease
all Violations of international law, including
international humanitarian and human rights law.

The continued Israeli escalation of its military
aggression against the Palestinian civilian population
in the Gaza Strip has brought about the death or injury
of hundreds of civilians, including women and
children, and the deliberate and unwanted destruction
of the property and vital infrastructure of the
Palestinians. The occupying Power continues to carry
out illegal measures, collective punishment and
psychological terror against the Palestinian people,
which cause great economic and social hardship in
Gaza.

Since 25 June 2006, more than 280 Palestinians
have died, including more than 60 children. More than
800 people have been severely injured. Due to the
many incursions by Israel into Gaza territory, many
families have had to abandon their homes. The United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) estimates that
more than 3,400 Palestinian refugees have sought
shelter in UNRWA facilities.

The unilateral measures in force by Israel in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, pose a grave threat to the prospect of
achieving a negotiated agreement based on a two-State
solution.

In the Declaration on Palestine adopted at the
fourteenth Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement,
held in Havana in September, the heads of State or
Government of the 118 members of the Movement
agreed to continue supporting the Palestinian people
and its leadership, in order to promote a revitalization
of the peace process towards the achievement of a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace so that the
Palestinian people can exercise its inalienable right to
self-determination and establish an independent and
sovereign State with East Jerusalem as its capital.

Israel continues the illegal construction of the
wall, in outright defiance of the relevant provisions of
the Advisory Opinion issued by the International Court
of Justice on 9 July 2004 on the legal consequences of
the construction of a wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory and General Assembly resolution ES-10/ 15 of
20 July 2004. The wall divides the occupied
Palestinian territory into isolated and fenced cantons,
thereby destroying entire communities and cutting off
occupied East Jerusalem from the rest of the territory.
If the construction of the wall is not stopped or
reversed, it will be impossible to reach a two-State
solution to the conflict.

The Non-Aligned Movement condemns Israel's
intensive settlement actions, among them the ongoing
confiscation of large areas of land and the construction
and expansion of settlements, as well as Israel's
declared intention to implement the illegal E1 plan in
and around East Jerusalem and to illegally annex the
Jordan valley.

We continue to be concerned about the grave
Violations of international law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention, such as the destruction and
requisitioning of land and property; violations of the
Palestinian people's freedom of movement and of their
right to work, to health care, to education and to the
enjoyment of an adequate standard of living; and the
displacement of Palestinian civilians from their homes
and lands.

Israel is under an obligation to terminate its
breaches of international law, to cease the construction
of the wall being built in the occupied Palestinian
territory, to dismantle the structure therein situated, to
repeal or render ineffective all legislative and
regulatory acts relating thereto and to make reparation
for all damage caused by the construction of the wall.

All States parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention have the additional obligation of ensuring
that Israel complies with the Convention. The United
Nations, particularly the General Assembly and the
Security Council, must consider what other measures
are needed to put an end to the illegal situation
resulting from the construction of the wall and its
associated regime, taking the advisory opinion very
much into account. Likewise, we request of the United
Nations that, in accordance with paragraph 4 of
General Assembly resolution ES-10/ 15, the Secretary-
General facilitate the establishment of a register of
damage caused by the wall; he must ensure that the
Secretariat's positions are fully consistent with the
advisory opinion.

We, the States members of the Movement, call
once again on the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibility to compel Israel to respect international
law and to end the occupation and the illegitimate and
illegal practices in the occupied Palestinian territory,
such as the imposition of collective punishment and
unilateral sanctions on the Palestinian people and
economy and the illegal construction of settlements

and the wall, which is aimed at confiscating and
annexing Palestinian land and property and altering the
demographic and geographic character of the
Palestinian territory.

In that connection, we remind the Security
Council of its resolution 497 (1981), which decided
that all actions and measures taken or to be taken by
Israel, the occupying Power - such as its illegal
decision of 14 December 1981, aimed at altering the
legal status, physical character, demographic
composition and institutional structure of the occupied
Syrian Golan, as well as Israel's measures to impose its
jurisdiction and administration over that territory -
are null and void and without legal effect. We reiterate
our demand that Israel comply with resolution 497
(1981) and that it fully withdraw from the occupied
Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June 1967, in accordance
with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).

We remain hopeful that the international
community will do everything possible during this
critical period to revive the peace process and to
salvage the Road Map and promote its implementation
in order to put an end to the occupation of the
Palestinian territory, that began on June 1967,
including that of East Jerusalem, thus achieving a two-
State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and
fulfilling the right of all the States and peoples in the
region to live in peace and security.

In that connection, we stress the continued
importance of the Arab Peace Initiative, adopted at the
Arab Summit held in Beirut in March 2002, and
emphasize the importance of the recent call made at the
eighteenth Summit of the League of Arab States, held
at Khartoum in March 2006, for the revitalization of
that Initiative.

We reaffirm once again the permanent
responsibility of the United Nations, particularly the
General Assembly and the Security Council, for the
question of Palestine until it is resolved in all its
aspects on the basis of international law, including a
just settlement of the difficult situation of the refugees,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 194
(III) of 11 December 1948.

