Mr. Al-Moumani (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I congratulate France on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of October. I would like to thank Mr. Jenea for his
extremely useful briefing.

The members of the Security Council and the
international community have reiterated in various
international forums the importance of achieving peace
and stability in the Middle East, demonstrating their
conviction that stability in the region is in the interests
of both the region and the international community as a
whole and will foster international peace and security.
We agree on that common ground. We share the wish for
peace and recognize the need to take into account the
aspirations of peoples to achieve stability. We reiterate
that peace will be possible only through cooperation
and dialogue, along with joint efforts to address the
underlying causes of the conflict and to deal with them
objectively, in accordance with international law and
relevant Security Council resolutions.

Jordan has played a major role in the Middle
East's political landscape, especially through our
wise and balanced foreign policy in a region that is
rife with conflict. We are a haven of peace and enjoy
close relations with all of the various regional and
international partners. We shall use those relations in
order to promote peace and security in the region, tackle
terrorism and find peaceful solutions to conflicts,
especially the Arab-Israeli conflict. Reaching a lasting,
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question is
a major factor for political stability in the region. We
welcome all efforts to seek a just settlement to the
question, which could drive forward the peace process
and relaunch and reactivate time-bound negotiations
between Israelis and Palestinians on the basis of the
two-State solution. That is the only means of resolving
the issue.

Israel's future and its acceptance by the region and
the Arab/Muslim world are dependent on the future
of the Palestinians. Peace will not emerge between
the two parties until an independent Palestinian State
is established within the pre-1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. There are many elements to
this issue, especially with respect to the Arab, Muslim
and international consensus regarding the two-State
solution. That is reiterated in the Arab Peace Initiative,
which defined the political horizon necessary to a
peaceful solution that would meet the aspirations of the
Palestinian people, while also taking Israeli interests
into account.

Under the Hashemite custodial protection of
Muslim and Christian holy sites, Jordan has made
great efforts to defend holy sites in Jerusalem and
preserve their historic and legal importance. It has
undertaken diplomatic initiatives in many international
forums, especially UNESCO, and the promotion of
international Arab consensus regarding a number of
resolutions that retain Jerusalem on the agenda of the
UNESCO Executive Board, which reiterates that the
legislative and administrative measures taken by Israel
to change the nature of Jerusalem and its legal status
are null and void. I reiterate the importance of the most
recent resolution adopted by the 58 States members of
the UNESCO Executive Board.

We reiterate the importance of the national
reconciliation agreement between the Palestinians
as the first major step towards putting an end to
divisions and promoting Palestinian national unity,
thereby contributing to conditions conducive to Israeli-
Palestinian negotiations with the goal of creating an
independent Palestinian State within the pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We support
Egypt's efforts and highlight its role in bringing about
Palestinian national reconciliation.

With regard to the Syrian crisis, we shall use our
relations with all stakeholders to achieve peace in
Syria. We have reached an agreement with the United
States and the Russian Federation that will end to
violence in the south and west of Syria. We emphasize
the importance of achieving a political solution to the
Syrian crisis that would preserve Syria's territorial
integrity and ensure a better future that will meet
the aspirations of the Syrian people and allow for the
return of Syrian refugees and the reconstruction of the
country.

We reaffirm our cooperation with all international
partners to establish a peaceful and stable environment
throughout Syria with a view to allowing access
to humanitarian aid for all of those in need and to
promoting stability for the Syrian people, who have
experienced seven years of violence. We hope that
the Astana peace process and the Geneva talks, which
are both taking place under the auspices of the United
Nations, will promote the political process, taking
into account the various relevant Security Council
resolutions, especially resolution 2254 (2015).

We restate the importance of putting an end to the
Yemeni crisis. There is a need to restore legitimacy and
calm in Yemen, on the basis of the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
as well as the National Dialogue Conference and
relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolution 2216 (2015).

We support the plan approved by the United Nations
to relaunch the peace process in Libya, and hope that
we will be able to provide the Libyan people with a
good transitional mechanism.

Lastly, we shall make every effort to put an end to
the extremism and terrorism that are destabilizing the
Middle East. We reaffirm the importance of combating
terrorism at all levels, theoretical and practical alike,
which requires collective international endeavours with
respect to the Middle East and elsewhere. The peoples
of the region want peace and stability and peaceful
solutions to the crises. Achieving stability is key to
promoting economic and sustainable development,
in addition to investing in the future, our youth and
generations to come.

