Mr. Wittig (Germany): As this is most likely to be
the last public meeting ofthe Security Council in which
I will have the honour to speak as the representative
of Germany in the course of our current membership
in the Council, I would like to express my delegation's
gratitude to you, Mr. President, and all the members
of the Council for the excellent cooperation we have
enjoyed during the past two years. Working with all
the members has really been a gratifying and great
experience. I also wish to express my delegation's
sincere appreciation and thanks to the Security Council
secretariat, to the team led by Movses Abelian and to
all other staff members of the United Nations, without
forgetting the interpreters, who have worked behind
the scenes, for their professionalism and unwavering
support during that period. As we leave the Council,
we will continue to serve the United Nations family as
best as we can, based on the very same principles that
have guided us in the past two years. We express our
best wishes to the five new incoming members.

With regard to peacebuilding, let me thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate and
for preparing the draft presidential statemement, which
we fully support. Let me also thank the Secretary-
General and the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul
Momen, respectively, for the insightful statement and
briefing this morning.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later in this debate on behalf of the European
Union.

We share the analysis contained in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/20l2/746) that progress has been
achieved * in strengthening and expanding United
Nations partnerships in the area of peacebuilding,
including with international financial institutions;
in launching the United Nations civilian capacities
initiative; in improving coordination between United
Nations missions and country teams on the ground; and
in providing timely support during critical phases of
transition through the United Nations Peacebuilding
Fund, just to mention a few areas. However, much more
needs to be done in order to deliver on commitments and
to further enhance the impact on the ground. We need
to continue to adapt our engagement in peacebuilding
to changing and evolving circumstances in countries
emerging from conflict. That also requires a regular
reassessment of the actual impact and effectiveness of
our engagement on a post-conflict country's capacity
to achieve its national peacebuilding goals. In that
context, let me briefly highlight four points that seem
of particular importance to us.

First, with regard to institution- and capacity-
building, we need to understand the term
institution-building in a very broad sense. This
is the approach my country adopts in its bilateral
development cooperation. Institution-building, or
rather State-building, is not only about constructing
Government institutions and State capacity. It is about
the whole social fabric of a society, about how a State
interacts with its society. Therefore, guaranteeing
the active participation of women, supporting the
establishment of a vibrant civil society or integrating
former child soldiers into their local communities can
equally be part of institution-building.

Also, we must think in medium and long-term
perspectives. We all know that building States from
scratch takes decades, not years. We therefore strongly
support the Secretary-General's call on Governments
and their international partners to carefully pace,
sequence and adjust institutional reform programmes,
balancing long-term support for institution-building
with a need to achieve early and tangible outcomes
through the restoration of core Government functions
or service delivery. In that context, the United
Nations civilian capacity initiative is a crucial tool in
ensuring the transfer of knowledge on how to build
institutions and how to train the people who will run
those institutions. We welcome the establishment of the
online platform CAPMATCH, which connects those
seeking expertise with potential providers, fostering in
particular South-South and triangular cooperation.

Secondly, with regard to women's engagement in
peacebuilding, each conflict is unique. There is no
one-size-fits-all approach. However, in all stages of
the peacebuilding process, including negotiating peace
agreements and introducing development programmes,
we need a stronger role for women. We take note of
the as yet modest progress on the implementation of
the Secretary-General's seven-point action plan on
gender-responsive peacebuilding, bearing in mind
that ensuring women's participation in peacebuilding
is, first and foremost, the responsibility of national
actors. It requires a sincere and long-term commitment
to the full inclusion of women in international policy.
We support the Secretary-General in his call on United
Nations entities and Member States to take more
systematic action to ensure women's participation in
peace processes and to report to the Security Council
on the concrete results of efforts to ensure that gender-
relevant provisions are included in ceasefire and peace
agreements.

Let me share with you the fact that the German
Government yesterday adopted the first German
national action plan to implement resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security. It should
intensify and better coordinate our national efforts to
promote the role of women in peacebuilding.

Thirdly, on the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission, I would like to reiterate that the PBC
must make better use of the political leverage of its
individual members. PBC member States need to
do better in assisting the PBC Chairpersons in their
important work. Members of the PBC Organizational
Committee and the PBC country configurations have
a responsibility to help the PBC have a true impact on
the ground. The PBC was designed to include members
of various United Nations bodies, including from
seven members of the Council, precisely for the reason
that those members bring their political weight and
experience from other bodies to the PBC's activities.
The intergovernmental nature of the PBC needs to be
much better used in order to support the countries on
its agenda in achieving their peacebuilding priorities.

Furthermore, the PBC Organizational Committee
can take better advantage of its unique intergovernmental
structure. It could therefore potentially serve as an
ideal platform, a connecting tissue, to create stronger
links between developments that have taken place
outside of the United Nations, such as the activities of
the World Bank and initiatives such as the New Deal
for Engagement in Fragile States, agreed on in Busan
in 2011, and the United Nations peacebuilding agenda.

Fourthly and lastly, with regard to peacebuilding
and the post-2015 process, progress towards achieving
the Millennium Development Goals has been slow in
fragile and conflict-ridden countries. The outcome
document of the United Nations Conference on

Sustainable Development (resolution 66/288, annex)
notes that countries in situations ofconflict need special
attention in order to achieve sustainable development
and that that requires good governance, including the
rule of law and effective, transparent, accountable and
democratic institutions. Any post-2015 process will
also have to tackle the root causes of conflict. Germany
therefore welcomes the Secretary-General's call on
Member States to support the incorporation ofpeace and
security considerations into the post-2015 development
agenda. The PBC could facilitate constructive dialogue
in that regard.

While several countries appear to be graduating
from fragility, there is room to maximize the impact
of peacebuilding efforts by further developing our
strategic approaches and bridging the gap between
policies conceived in New York and their successful
implementation on the ground.

Germany has supported the Peacebuilding Fund
with a new contribution of $6.5 million in 2012, thus
bringing our combined contribution up to $25 million.
My country stands ready to work to that end with
countries emerging from conflict, the United Nations
and all relevant stakeholders.

