Mr. Josselin (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank the presidency of the Security
Council for having taken the initiative of convening this
open meeting of the Council on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. While the international community is well
aware of the gravity of the crisis and of its important
implications for the peace, stability and development of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes region, it must now fully assume its responsibilities
and strongly support the process begun with the signing
of the Lusaka Agreement. For its part, France stands
ready.

The Lusaka Agreement, the basis of a negotiated
solution agreed by all the parties, is today the sole
complete consensual instrument that can lead to the
restoration of peace. Although it has encountered certain
problems and is not running according to the very
ambitious timetable set by the signatories, the
implementation of the Agreement has begun. The Political
Committee and the Joint Military Commission, the

 

keystones of the Agreement, have been established. They
are meeting regularly and have taken important decisions on
both their own internal organization and on how to monitor
the implementation of the Agreement.

Although unacceptable ceasefire violations -
particularly those occurring in recent weeks - are to be
deplored, the overall military situation has stabilized. The
international community - particularly the United Nations,
through the creation of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
announcement of an imminent peacekeeping operation -
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the European
Union have all rapidly committed themselves to supporting
the process, thus lending it additional credibility and
legitimacy.

We must recognize that the implementation of this
Agreement has been too slow - as many speakers this
morning emphasized - due certainly to a lack of trust and
cooperation among the signatories and because a certain
number of elements remain to be clarified or investigated
further before all the belligerents are fully convinced that
this is the right approach, inter alia, to ensuring their own
security.

The absence at this point of an international system to
monitor implementation of the Agreement - due to a lack
of resources for the Joint Military Commission and to the
delay in deploying United Nations personnel - regrettably
encourages further ceasefire violations that threaten at any
moment to reignite the conflict.

The host of unacceptable realities includes the
significant ongoing presence of foreign troops on Congolese
territory - in some cases against the will of that country's
authorities - numerous human rights violations and the
growing traffic in and illegal exploitation of the resources
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The national dialogue, which is to produce a new
consensus essential to a lasting solution to the crisis, has
yet to begin following the recent felicitous nomination of its
Facilitator, former President of Botswana Masire.

I would stress that the failure to respect the timetable
attests to the distrust among the parties and compromises its
implementation. But how are we to overcome this obstacle
if we ourselves remain hesitant? France appeals yet again
to the sense of responsibility and spirit of compromise of
the parties to the conflict, many of whom I met during my
recent travels in Central Africa. France solemnly recalls that
the international community can consider offering
concrete support for the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement, particularly through a peacekeeping operation,
only if its signatories clearly demonstrate their will to
abide by their commitments and to reconcile their
differences. That is what I heard from the African leaders
this morning.

But these leaders also expect the States members of
the Security Council to commit ourselves to them, first
and foremost, by sustained and credible action of the
United Nations speedily to strengthen respect for the
ceasefire. Without that, no progress can be made on the
other aspects of the Agreement. In this respect, we
welcome the recommendations made this morning by the
Secretary-General, the security aspects of which remain
to be fully determined but which will facilitate the actual
and verified implementation of the Lusaka Agreement.
They also open the door to subsequent United Nations
involvement on a larger scale, which we ardently desire
and which will help complete and consolidate the peace
process once conditions permit, inter alia, in terms of
security and the fidelity of the parties to their
commitments.

President Jacques Chirac has often said that we are
ready to support deployment of the operation, be it by
despatching Blue Helmets or by equipping certain African
contingents participating in it. The deployment of the
peacekeeping operation should enable the parties to abide
by their commitments to demobilize and reintegrate the
former combatants of armed groups. That will occur,
however, only if the countries from which the groups
originate came undertake to make the necessary reciprocal
arrangements to ease their return.

Measures must quickly be taken to end the illegal
exploitation of the country's resources. To that end, a
panel of experts could be established forthwith under the
auspices of the Secretary-General to analyse the situation
and propose solutions.

Secondly, we will undertake to help organize the
national dialogue. This is not a preliminary to deploying
the peacekeeping operation, which clearly cannot wait; we
feel, rather, that it is essential to achieving political
agreement among the Congolese, re-establishing state
authority throughout the territory and assembling the
elements of genuine national consensus, without which
the sovereignty, national integrity and democracy of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will remain fragile, if
not hypothetical. To be credible, the dialogue must

 

proceed along the lines set forth in the Lusaka Agreement
and without foreign interference. France welcomes the
appointment of President Masire as Facilitator of the
national dialogue and assures him of our full support.

Lastly, I would stress the prospects that would be
opened up by an international conference on peace,
security, democracy and development in the Great Lakes
region. It is clearly up to the countries concerned whether
or not to hold such a conference. However, we truly believe
that if the Ceasefire Agreement were to open the way for
such an initiative, such a conference would have a lasting
impact. This is simply because such an approach would go
to the root of the problems that underlie and have long fed
the current conflict.

As the Council knows, France has for a long time
suggested the holding of such a conference. The United
Nations often talks about it, and I myself have noted that
our conviction is now shared by a growing number of
leaders who not only want to end this crisis, but who above
all want to tackle its root causes. While we all want a
return to peace, we must agree that such a peace will not be
real or lasting unless there is a comprehensive study of the
phenomena that have for so long hampered peace and have
led to chain reactions in the region.

It is quite clear to us that the peace processes under
way - the Arusha process for Burundi and the Lusaka
process for the Democratic Republic of the Congo - are
fundamental prerequisites for the holding of such a
conference. In other words, the conference cannot be held
unless tangible progress is first made in those processes.
Such a conference would be the basis for a new
commitment by the international community to
reconstruction, development and democracy in the countries
of the region.

There are three sets of issues that could be addressed.
These include the questions of peace and security, which
necessarily and obviously touch upon the issue of border
control and involve all the parties and the principle of
territorial integrity. No less important would be the
implementation of measures to restore democracy, the rule
of law and respect for fundamental freedoms - first and
foremost those of minorities and refugees - as well as
doing away with any ideology of exclusion.

Finally, the Great Lakes region of Africa needs to be
supported in a major effort of reconstruction and
development. The region awaits a manifestation of
international solidarity in the struggle against poverty and,
thus, for improved social well-being; in favour of trade
and, for regional economic integration; and, let us not
forget, for the restoration of the basic functions of States
in administration, justice and security.

The conference, organized by the OAU with the
support of the United Nations, could lead to the adoption
of a declaration of principles, to be followed by a series
of bilateral and multilateral agreements and partnerships
to define the modalities of its implementation.

France is resolutely committed to the Lusaka
Agreement, both through the liaison officers it has made
available to the United Nations and through the assistance
it provides to the Joint Military Commission. We are
resolved to support all activities along the lines I have
mentioned. We have only one desire: a peace in the
region that is solid and lasting, which will require
exemplary determination and solidarity. As I said, France
stands at the ready.

