Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): Benin
voted in favour of resolution 1574 (2004) because we
wanted to welcome the broad consensus achieved by
the parties and because we are convinced that the
situation prevailing in the Sudan requires urgent action.

The holding of this Security Council meeting in
Nairobi attests to the concern of the international
community and to the will of the Council to enter into
a constructive dialogue with the parties to the conflict
so that they can understand the gravity of the situation.
That is why we welcome the frankness and openness of
spirit that have characterized the very edifying and
encouraging discussions that we have had with the
parties and with the high-ranking representatives of
African bodies that are seeking to facilitate the ongoing
negotiations. We very much appreciated the lofty sense
of responsibility demonstrated by one and all during
our discussions. That enabled the Council to deliberate
in an atmosphere of complete tranquillity.

The Council, by resolution 1574 (2004),
committed all the parties to do their utmost to achieve
the desired result: nothing more or less than the
conclusion, at an early date and within the framework
of the Naivasha process, of a comprehensive peace
agreement that will provide the keys to a lasting
settlement of open or latent multidimensional conflicts
and the formula to eliminate the real risk of escalation
that has been facing the Sudan.

My delegation welcomes the signing of the
memorandum of understanding whereby the parties
themselves pledge, as witnessed by the international
community, to make every effort to finalize the
negotiations on all pending issues and to conclude the
comprehensive peace agreement by 31 December 2004
at the latest. We are convinced that the comprehensive
agreement will create a new dynamic of peace, have a
positive impact in all the regions of the country and
cause all the people of the Sudan to see their future in a
new light. In that regard, we believe that the parties
should create new opportunities as soon as possible
that will enable us to make the peace process as
inclusive as possible.

We welcome the current strengthening of the
African Union mission in Darfur. The African Union
can make a difference in preventing the grave human
rights violations caused by the conflict, but it can fully
carry out its mission only if it is fully supported by the
United Nations and Member States. The resolution
recognizes that imperative need. In that context, Benin
associates itself with the appeal to the parties to put an
immediate end to the violence against the civilian
population and to fully respect international
humanitarian law in order to facilitate full access to
humanitarian assistance and the security of personnel
entrusted with providing such assistance. We stress
there is a need to ensure full safety for such personnel.

We urge the international community promptly to
mobilize the resources needed to help finance
programmes initiated by the Government of the Sudan
to build peace and sustainable development, so that all
the people of the Sudan can once again enjoy the
wonders of peace, prosperity and social progress.

