Mr. Cui Tiankai (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The question of Angola has become the last hot
spot in southern Africa. China sincerely hopes that in the
context of the general trend of seeking peace, stability and
development on the African continent, the question of
Angola will also be promptly resolved so that the Angolan
people could enjoy peace and prosperity at an early date.

We were pleased and relieved at the signing of the
Lusaka Protocol more than three years ago, and we were
encouraged by the establishment nearly a year ago of the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation of
Angola. However, in the latter half of the past year, the
peace process in Angola has begun to stagnate and has even
come to a halt. Certain measures stipulated in the Lusaka
Protocol have never been effectively implemented.

This is a matter of deep concern for us. The Chinese
delegation wishes to reiterate that the peace and well-being
of Angola ultimately depend on the Angolan people
themselves. The genuine and lasting settlement of the
question of Angola requires the political will of and
practical action by the parties concerned. We appeal to the
parties in Angola to conform to the general trend and to the
will of the people and, with the fundamental interests of the
Angolan people in mind, seriously to fulfil their agreed
obligations, especially with respect to completing their tasks
in areas such as demilitarization and the normalization of
State administration, so as to push Angola towards the final
realization of peace and reconciliation.

In this connection, we are pleased to note that the
Joint Commission approved on 9 January the latest
timetable for the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.
We were also pleased to learn that President Dos Santos
and Mr. Savimbi will hold a meeting soon. We sincerely
hope that all this will take place as scheduled.

In accordance with resolution 1118 (1997), the tasks
of the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(MON UA) should be completed by the end of this month.
In view of the fact that the peace process in Angola is at
a crucial juncture at present and still needs the firm
support of the United Nations, including the Security
Council, and considering that the parties concerned in
Angola are also requesting the United Nations to continue
to play a positive role in promoting the peace process in
Angola, the Chinese delegation is in favour of extending
MONUA's mandate and will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us.

In the meantime, I wish to point out that when the
Council adopted resolution 1118 (1997), the Chinese
delegation expressed reservations with regard to certain
functions of MONUA. This position of ours remains
unchanged.

We sincerely hope that the parties concerned in
Angola can seize the favourable opportunity offered by
the extension of MONUA's mandate and intensify their
efforts so that genuine and lasting national reconciliation
and peace can be realized in Angola and Angola can start
reconstruction and development soon.

