Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union (EU).

First of all, I would like to thank the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina for his
briefing, which paints a bleak picture of the current
situation in the country. The implementation of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina remains incomplete; its work remains
essential. In that respect, any refusal to grant access
to official information and documents at the Office of
the High Representative, as mentioned in his report
(S/2019/364, annex), is a matter of concern to us. We
recall that all authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
are required to cooperate fully with the High
Representative, in full compliance with the letter of
the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

The High Representative's report illustrates the
scant progress made. The reconciliation process has
deteriorated in recent years. A change of attitude is
apparent in the rhetoric on war crimes. Those are all
important signs of a setback, and we must monitor them
closely. The process offorming a new Government drags
on at the national level and at the level of the Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We call on the country's
political leaders to overcome their differences and
assume their responsibilities so that they can continue
to implement the many reforms the country needs.

We deplore the fact that the implementation of
several recommendations made in the past to improve
the electoral process in Bosnia and Herzegovina has
remained a dead letter. The Constitution of Bosnia
and Herzegovina recognizes three constituent peoples.
At the same time, we reiterate that the principle of
equality of all citizens and non-discrimination must be
fully guaranteed. Any political or legislative solution
concerning the electoral process must be in line with
the case law of the European Court of Human Rights.

Strengthening the rule of law remains one of the
main challenges. It is imperative that the authorities
implementurgentreformstostrengthentheindependence
and impartiality of the judiciary and intensify the fight
against corruption and organized crime.

The human rights situation remains at the
centre of our focus. We are deeply concerned about
the increasing number of statements that deny the
genocide in Srebrenica, glorify war crimes and their
perpetrators and spread hatred. Such statements are
incompatible with European Union membership and
must give way to reconciliation efforts. It is important
that the reconciliation process be widely supported in
society and include civil society organizations, young
people and women. We strongly condemn attacks
on journalists. We also recall the need to respect the
freedom of assembly, without any discrimination.

We are concerned about the adoption at first
reading by the National Assembly of the Republika
Srpska of a law providing for a police reserve unit.
That development is part of a broader framework of
secessionist rhetoric and only increases tensions. It is
not conducive to a climate of reconciliation.

In conclusion, we reiterate our firm commitment
to the mandate given by the Council to the European
Union-led Operation Althea mission, which plays an
indispensable role in maintaining a secure and stable
environment. We will also continue to offer our
support to Bosnia and Herzegovina on its path to Euro-
Atlantic integration. As a member of the European
Union, Belgium supports the aspirations of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to one day become a member of the
European Union, as a united and sovereign country.

