Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Salame for his briefing and by reiterating the
United Kingdom's strong support for him and the work
of all his team on the ground.

It is clear that a military solution to Libya's problems
will not bring the long-term peace and stability that
the country needs. All Libyans must come together
in a spirit of compromise and engage in the United
Nations-led political process. The United Kingdom
fully supports the additional clarity that Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salame' has
provided on the next steps in implementing his action
plan of September 2017. A Libyan-led, Libyan-owned
national conference will provide an opportunity to
forge greater consensus among Libyan stakeholders on
the way forward on some of the key questions relating
to Libya's political transition. Let me highlight three
important building blocks to help make the Libyan
national conference a success.

First, as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Salame said, participants in the national
conference should be drawn from as broad a political,
regional, tribal and ethnic spectrum as possible. It will
also be vital for women to be represented.

Secondly, Libya's political institutions will need to
work with the national conference and take account of
its outcomes. That will signal that they have the best
interests of the Libyan people at heart and that they
are committed to finding a durable political solution to
Libya's crisis. The Libyan people will not understand if
those institutions continue to fail to do what has been
asked of them. It is vital that Libya's institutions deliver

the essential public services across the country for the
good of the Libyan people.

Thirdly, it is essential that the international
community and the Security Council now support
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Salame
and the United Nations action plan. The conference
hosted by Italy in Palermo will be an important
opportunity to demonstrate wider international and
Libyan support for the United Nations-led effort,
including the national conference. It will also offer
the chance to secure important commitments from
the Libyans in terms of economic reform and the
establishment of more sustainable and credible security
arrangements.

We also look forward to seeing Libyan delegations
at Palermo that are inclusive and representative of
the Libyan people. To that end. We congratulate
the Presidency Council on establishing women's
empowerment units within it and the ministries of the
Government of National Accord. Those units should
now be given the authority and resources that they need
to be effective.

Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Salame touched on the challenging security situation
in Libya. We welcome the progress on security
arrangements in Tripoli since the ceasefire in September,
and we thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Salame for his efforts in securing the ceasefire.
Such arrangements should not be limited only to the
capital. A sustainable security architecture across the
country is necessary for a secure and stable Libya.

The United Kingdom continues to recognize the
importance of tackling terrorist threats in Libya. We
again express our deep concern about the humanitarian
situation, including in Derna. We reiterate the urgent
need for humanitarian access to the civilian population.
Those who violate international humanitarian law will
be held to account.

On the economy, the recently introduced transaction
fee on foreign exchange in Libya must now pave the
way for wider work on economic reform. We all must
support the work of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya and the international financial institutions
to put in place further reforms. We also welcome the
progress made towards an audit of the Central Bank of
Libya. That should take place in parallel with work to
reunify the Central Bank of Libya and its counterpart
in the east.

Lastly, we welcome the recent visit by the members
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya, which enabled them to
better understand the dynamics in the country. We look
forward to seeing how that will translate into even more
targeted and effective sanctions against the spoilers.
We call on the Libyan authorities to do more to ensure
that the sanctions are implemented effectively.

Finally, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Salame' told us that Libya was rapidly becoming
the tragedy of lost opportunity. The United Kingdom
calls on all parties in Libya and the members of the
Security Council to unite behind the United Nations
efforts in order to ensure that we seize this opportunity
for an inclusive political solution.

