Mr. Matenje (Malawi): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your presidency
of the Security Council for the month of April and by
thanking you for the initiative to hold this debate and
giving me the opportunity to address the Council.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on small arms, which highlights adequately the
problems associated with small arms and light
weapons.

Over recent years Malawi has witnessed an
increased and alarming flow of small arms and light
weapons into the country from conflict-afflicted areas,
particularly in Africa. The use of such weapons,
illegally brought into Malawi, has destroyed lives and
livelihoods, bred insecurity of person and property and
caused fear and horror among the people in various
ways. That has in turn imposed enormous costs on the
Government, on communities and on individuals, and
has had a profoundly negative impact on socio-
economic and human development in the country,
particularly in the rural areas, where economic
activities have been greatly affected by armed crime
and violence. Ordinary people in rural communities
have lost valuable property and lives to criminals
armed with small arms or light weapons. Many have
been maimed or injured and are no longer able to freely
conduct their economic activities without the threat of
armed violence.

Freedom from the threat of violence is a basic
human right and a precondition for social, economic
and human development, and the dignity and well-
being of all people. In that regard, in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome Document, our heads of State and
Government recognized the linkage between
development, peace, security and human rights and its
impact on the achievement of the internationally
agreed development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals.

Accordingly, Malawi calls upon the international
community, led by the United Nations, to intensify its
efforts in assisting to remove illegal arms from African
countries and to prevent armed violence in order to
help Africa achieve the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals, in a peaceful and secure
environment. After all, the vast majority of arms used
to commit armed violence and armed conflict come
from outside Africa. Africa can no longer afford the
cost of armed conflict or allow armed conflict to
continue to hold back economic growth and the
livelihoods ofits people.

In her foreword to briefing paper 107, entitled
"Africa's missing billions", published by the
International Action Network on Small Arms, Oxfam
and Saferworld and launched on 11 October 2007,
President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf of Liberia summarizes
the immeasurable loss of development occasioned by
armed violence and conflict in Africa in these words:

"This is money Africa can ill afford to lose.
The sums are appalling: the price that Africa is
paying could cover the cost of solving the HIV
and AIDS crisis in Africa, or provide education,
water and prevention and treatment for TB and
malaria. Literally thousands of hospitals, schools,
and roads could have been built, positively
affecting millions of people. Not only do the
people of Africa suffer the physical horrors of
violence, armed conflict undermines their efforts
to escape poverty."

In that regard, Malawi views the unregulated
manufacture and supply of small arms and light
weapons as a real threat to peace, security and
development. It is for those reasons that Malawi
endorsed the Geneva Declaration on Armed Violence
and Development, which emerged from a summit
hosted by Switzerland and the United Nations
Development Programme in June 2006.

Furthermore, we also associate ourselves with the
efforts of the international community to establish an
effective international regime to regulate the
manufacture and transfer of small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition. We believe that the
unregulated availability of small arms and light
weapons leads to a breakdown of the rule of law,
democracy and legitimate State structures.

Accordingly, we support ongoing efforts towards
the elaboration of an arms trade treaty aimed at ending
the illicit manufacture of and trade in small arms and
light weapons and their ammunition. We believe that
this is a significant step towards the standardization of
international trade in conventional arms and ensuring
that small arms and light weapons do not end up in the
wrong hands and are not used for illegal activities. It is
therefore our hope that the arms trade treaty will
control both the supply of and demand for conventional
weapons. In that regard, we call upon African
Governments, arms-producing countries and the rest of
the international community to vigorously and
proactively support international discussions to achieve
a robust arms trade treaty to ensure that Africa is
protected from armed violence.

In the meantime, we support all the efforts being
made in the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects.
In conclusion, we commend the Peacebuilding
Commission for its integrated approach to post-conflict
peacebuilding and its central role in addressing the
problem of armed violence and conflict in Africa.

