Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I should
like to thank the Colombian presidency of the Security
Council and you personally, Madam Minister, for
convening and presiding over this long-awaited debate
on the report of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
on its fifth session (S/2012/70). Today's open debate
provides an excellent opportunity for the Council
members and the wider United Nations membership
to exchange views on the important role that the
Commission plays in advancing the United Nations
peacebuilding efforts, and to assess progress and
challenges.

I also thank the Secretary-General, the former and
current Chairs of the Commission, and Mr. Joachim
von Amsberg for their briefings and statements. Let
me also emphasize the dedicated work of the Chairs
of the country-specific configurations. We are looking
forward to an informal interactive dialogue tomorrow
with them, in which we will continue to reflect in a
frank and detailed manner on the issues relevant to the
United Nations peacebuilding efforts.

Azerbaijan has aligned itself with the statement to
be delivered later today by the representative of Tunisia
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Post-conflict peacebuilding does not exist in a
vacuum and is dependent on a number of underlying
principles. First of all, the peacebuilding process can
take root and succeed only if a genuine peace, based
on the norms and principles of international law, is
established on the ground. Peacebuilding must not be
directed at sustaining the status quo created as a result
of the violation of international law. It should not be
used as a tool to consolidate illegal solutions based on
faits accompli.

Secondly, the Governments of countries emerging
from conflicts bear the primary responsibility for
peacebuilding, including for identifying their own
needs and setting up national development agendas.
The international community should fully respect the
sovereignty, independence and national development
choices of countries, and the United Nations should
play the role of coordinator of international efforts and
mobilizer of international resources to assist countries
in formulating and advancing their national strategies.

Thirdly, peacebuilding can be truly effective only
if it strives to build the national institutional capacities
ofpost-conflict countries to sustain peace and stability.
Solid national capacities and strong national ownership
are key prerequisites that underpin the continuity and
sustainability of peacebuilding.

Speaking of national ownership in peacebuilding,
we would like to stress that in certain situations in which
some parts of national territory are conflict-affected,
strategic planning and long-term preparation are
required for the immediate and smooth rebuilding
process to be launched once peace is achieved.

As a country suffering from conflict and foreign
military occupation of its territories, Azerbaijan
is working hard on the political track to achieve a
negotiated settlement based on international law.
Although the prospect ofa speedy solution still remains
elusive, the Government of Azerbaijan long ago started
designing strategies and programmes for the social,
economic and environmental reconstruction of its
territories after their de-occupation. Simultaneously, we
are increasing institutional and resource capacities in
all spheres to effectively meet our goals. It goes without
saying that the engagement of international expertise
at the relevant phases of national peacebuilding efforts
will be required.

The establishment ofthe Peacebuilding Commission
sought to bring coordination, coherence and integrity
to the United Nations peacebuilding efforts with a
view to achieving sustainable peace. By virtue of the
complexity and heavy dependence of the peacebuilding
process on existing circumstances in the field and
changing realities globally, the Commission cannot
entirely meet expectations across the whole spectrum
of activities that fall within the notion of peacebuilding.

The year 2010 marked the first review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture. The review
laid out a number of ambitious, yet very plausible
recommendations aimed at further improving the
effectiveness of the Peacebuilding Commission. The
Council's subsequent resolution 1947 (2010) provided
political ground for all relevant United Nations actors,
including above all the Commission, to take forward
these recommendations in their activities. Therefore,
the Commission's fifth annual report is of particular
importance, since it is the first to reflect progress in
the implementation of the recommendations set out by
the review.

The Commission's road map for actions in 2011
provided a structured approach for the implementation
of two overarching recommendations addressed to
it by the review, namely, enhancing its impact in the
field and strengthening its relations with key actors
at Headquarters. Looking at the road map for actions
in 2012, we note that this year the Commission,
while focusing on further advancing its work in these
directions, also recognizes the need to place particular
emphasis on improving the effectiveness of its
configurations.
Despite being a complex process with a variety
of actors and spheres of engagement, peacebuilding
constitutes an integrated system and a web of
different components, with one complementing and
reinforcing another. The success of the Commission's
work is inextricably linked to and gauged against the
achievements of its configurations on the ground. In
other words, the more effective the country-specific
configurations become in the field, the more valued and
in-demand the Commission will be by Member States.
In this regard, further strengthening the role of the
country-specific configurations, as recommended by
the 2010 review, could bring qualitative improvements
to the effectiveness of the Commission's work and to
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture.

