Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Mr. President, for those very cordial words
of welcome. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Alvaro de Soto, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General to the Palestinian Liberation
Organization and the Palestinian Authority, for his
briefing.

The report we have just heard is cause for great
concern. In particular, we note that the crisis continues
between the presidency and the Government of the
Palestinian Authority, and that an Israeli soldier
remains captive. The persistence of this crisis makes it
difficult for the parties to return to the path of a
peaceful solution, as described in the Road Map
defined by the Quartet and supported by the Security
Council in resolution 1515 (2003); that is necessary to
restore hope.

The recent war in Lebanon has taught us a lesson
regarding the risk of escalated conflict. The persistence
of the internal crisis in Palestinian governance is
particularly alarming. The continuing disagreements
between the presidency and the Government represent
a major factor in the financial, economic and
humanitarian crisis that gives rise to suffering among
the Palestinian people, particularly in the Gaza Strip.
The lack of cohesion between the presidency and the
executive branch makes it very difficult to establish
public order and makes it far harder for the security
forces to stop the unacceptable attacks from Gaza
against Israeli targets, which are often chosen
indiscriminately.

For that reason, we hope that the efforts of
President Abbas to form a government will continue,
enabling the Palestinian Authority to act coherently.
These efforts received the support of the Quartet last
month in the hope that they would lead to a political
platform, enabling the donor community to feel able to
resume support for the Palestinian Government.

Likewise, we have taken note of the Quartet's
decision, announced in its statement of 20 September,
to intensify its efforts, working closely with the
countries of the region with which it has established
special links, and with the parties to the conflict. We
need to create a dynamic that will encourage the parties
to pursue their efforts towards a solution based on the
principle of the peaceful coexistence of two States:
Israel and Palestine. This continues to be key in
clearing the path of negotiations.

With Israel's continued occupation of Palestinian
territories and the creation of faits accomplis on the
ground, and with continued acts of terrorism against
Israel, the passage of time is eroding the only platform
on the basis of which a lasting solution can be reached;
such a solution must be achieved in the framework of
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397
(2002).
With regard to the situation in Lebanon, I would
like to stress the need for the parties to continue to

respect the cessation of hostilities and the Blue Line.
The demarcation of the international borders of
Lebanon, especially in zones where there is
controversy, remains unresolved, as does the
establishment and normalization of conventional
diplomatic relations between Lebanon and its
neighbours. We encourage the parties to implement
soon the bilateral political dialogue at the highest level.

Moreover, the existence of armed groups, which
threaten the State monopoly on the legitimate use of
force in Lebanese territory, cannot be accepted. They
are sources of internal and external instability. I
understand that we will shortly be receiving reports
from the Secretariat on resolutions 1559 (2004) and
1701 (2006); after we have heard those reports, we will
come back with our detailed comments.

