Mr. Okuda (Japan): At the outset, let me join
previous speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for December. We are grateful to Ambassador Mayr-
Harting and his team for the excellent leadership with
which they successfully conducted the work of the
Council in November. I would also like to thank the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the Tribunals for briefing
us on the latest developments in their completion
strategies.

The contribution of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) to the
development of international criminal law cannot be
overstated. In this regard, we would like to extend our
appreciation to all the judges, prosecutors and staff for
their devoted efforts to ensure the fair and expeditious
operation of these important judicial bodies.

Japan expected and strongly urged the Tribunals
to complete all judicial proceedings in 2010, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1503
(2003). We recall that, in their most recent reports

(S/2009/394 and S/2009/396), the two Tribunals have
affirmed that this was unrealistic on the basis of their
latest estimates. Japan notes with gratitude the efforts
made by the two Tribunals to minimize the delays in
the proceedings, while ensuring fair trials. We strongly
encourage the Tribunals to continue their efforts to
complete their work as expeditiously as possible.

Regarding particular requests by the Tribunals,
such as for the extension of their judges' terms, we
have been informed that these measures are necessary
in order to accomplish the completion strategy in an
expeditious and cost-effective manner. Based on this
understanding, Japan is prepared to work on the
necessary measures to be taken by the Council. We also
note the remarks on the necessity of staff retention to
the work of the Tribunals.

It is clear that the arrest of the remaining
fugitives is of paramount importance to the success of
the Tribunals. We commend the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda for the
arrest and transfer to the ICTR of Gregoire Ndahimana
and Idelphonse Nizeyimana. On the other hand, it is
regrettable that two suspects indicted by the ICTY,
Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic, and 11 others under
indictment by the ICTR, including Felicien Kabuga,
have yet to be apprehended. We encourage the relevant
States to cooperate in order to secure the arrest of all
indictees as early as possible.

The referral of cases is an important part of the
completion strategy. In this regard, we appreciate the
efforts made by the Rwandan authorities to facilitate
the referral of cases, including the establishment of a
witness protection service within the Rwandan
judiciary.

With regard to the ICTY, cooperation from States
of the former Yugoslavia in such areas as access to
archives, documents and witnesses is also vital. We
take positive note of the initiative taken by Croatia to
accelerate cooperation in response to the request of the
Prosecutor in relation to the missing documents. We
also take positive note of the improved cooperation of
Serbia and the adequate response of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the requests of the Prosecutor. We
encourage them to continue their efforts in this regard.

Given that the ICTY and the ICTR were
established by Security Council resolutions adopted
under Chapter VII of the Charter in an exceptional
manner, they are facing challenges unique to ad hoc
tribunals, including the need for a residual mechanism
after completion, which was not fully anticipated at the
time of their establishment. Japan attaches great
importance to the rule of law, and considers that
impunity for the most serious crimes must not be
condoned and that the individuals involved must be
brought to justice in accordance with international
standards. The residual mechanism should serve to this
end, while efforts must be made to maintain as cost-
effective a system as possible.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on the administrative and budgetary aspects of residual
mechanisms dated 21 May 2009 (S/2009/258),
submitted pursuant to the Council's presidential
statement of 19 December 2008 (S/PRST/2008/47).
The report provides a valuable basis for our discussion
in the Informal Working Group on international
tribunals under the chairmanship of Austria. We thank
both Tribunals for including in their reports
preparatory measures taken for the transitional period,
which the Informal Working Group requested based on
the recommendation of the report. We will continue to
take active part in the discussion on the residual
structures to be established, paying due attention to the
progress of the proceedings at the Tribunals.

