Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to express my great pleasure at seeing
you, Sir, the representative of the sisterly country
Syria, presiding over the Security Council this month.
It is a responsibility with which the international
community has entrusted Syria in appreciation of its
efforts and its continual quest for international peace
and security.

I should also like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to Mr. Kishore Mahbubani, Permanent
Representative of Singapore, and his delegation, for the
way in which Singapore presided over the Council last
month.

I apologize for the fact that I do not have a
written statement. I should like simply to make several
brief comments.

In the past few months, we have attended many
Security Council meetings dealing with the same
question, but nothing ever changes. There is merely a
further insistence by Israel on violating the decisions of
international legitimacy, further oppression of the
Palestinian people, continued siege of the Palestinian
people and the Palestinian Authority, and an ongoing
policy of occupation of Palestinian land.

Indeed, the only variable is that every day we
hear of new acts of aggression perpetrated by Israel.

The constant is the crisis in international
conscience as the world witnesses the injustice meted
out to the occupied Palestinian people at the hands of
an occupying Power, recognized as such by the entire
international community. The world stands idly by and
watches the oppression of a people, its women and
children, without raising a finger. That represents a true
crisis of conscience.

Another constant referred to by many speakers is
the Security Council's utter inability to assume its
responsibilities vis-a-vis this issue and to stand up to
Israeli arrogance, rejection of international resolutions
and contempt for the international community. This
attitude began with the adoption of a resolution by the
Security Council over 35 years ago. Resolution 242
(1967) remains a dead letter. After 35 years, the
international community is still unable to ensure the
implementation of one of its resolutions on the Middle
East while a country is under siege. I shall not even
address all the other resolutions adopted subsequently,
such as resolutions 1402 (2002), 1403 (2002) and 1405
(2002). Perhaps we shall reach the magic number of
5000 at some point. That is another constant - the
first being the crisis of conscience and the second the
Security Council's inability to act.

What is sad is that we speak of an occupying
Power's "right of self-defence". From the very outset,
the issue has been one of occupation and the usurpation
of a people's rights. How can one speak of the right of
self-defence against a people whose land is occupied,
whose rights are suppressed and whose daily life is
oppressed? We remind the Israeli Government and
those who choose to encourage it that siege, daily
killings and the military option will never obtain the
peace that Israel desires.
Israel has made the existence of the Palestinian
people a living hell. Death might be preferable. Does
Israel expect security from such injustice? Security
comes only with justice, peace and a peaceful
settlement. It will not be obtained through ongoing
injustice, which generates only more violence and
hatred on both sides. Innocent blood has been shed on
both sides. Responsibility lies at the feet of the Israeli
Government, the occupying, usurping Power that
continues to displace, kill and strangle Palestinian
people.

Despite our disappointment at the Council's
idleness and inability to act, we continue to come and
to make our statements in order to place that impotence
on record. The time has come for the Security Council
to shoulder its responsibilities for the maintenance of
peace. It must let the world know that no country is
above the law. That alone will obtain international
peace and security.

