Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for her detailed
briefing, as well as to welcome my brother His
Excellency Mr. Aljarallah, Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait.

My delegation is seriously concerned about the
recent escalation of hostilities in north-west Syria, the
ongoing hostilities in the north-east and, as mentioned
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/949), the
increasing tensions in the south-west. We are extremely
troubled by the risk of a worsening humanitarian
situation in those areas as a result of hostilities - the
deaths of civilians, including women and children,
injuries, displacements, the destruction of civilian
infrastructure and further suffering. The world is
watching. The international community is watching.
But we are not here to just watch; we are here to help
and take action. Our mandate is to save lives, and
that is exactly what we need to do as members of the
Security Council.

My delegation would like to highlight three points.

First, Indonesia calls for immediate de-escalation
and urges all relevant parties to strictly uphold their
obligations under international law. We urge all parties
to cease all attacks against civilians and civilian objects,
including the indiscriminate use of weapons, barrel
bombs and air strikes. It is crucial to protect civilians
from attacks and the effects of hostilities and to allow
them to voluntarily move to safe places.

Secondly, it is important for all parties to allow
unimpeded, safe, timely and sustained access for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, in order for the
United Nations and its humanitarian partners to be able
to reach all people in need in Syria. We commend the
tireless work of the United Nations in continuing to
provide life-saving assistance to millions of people in
need, despite the various challenges.

Thirdly, my delegation endorses the Secretary-
General's call regarding the renewal of the cross-
border mechanism. It is clear that 4 million people are
dependent on that mechanism - a mechanism that
has no other alternative, as stated many times by the
United Nations. My delegation strongly believes that we
cannot jeopardize the ongoing cross-border operations
that provide food aid, medicines and other immediate
humanitarian needs. The suffering of the Syrian people
must end, and we in the Council can start to ease the
suffering by setting our differences aside and focusing
on the 4 million people who need the cross-border
operations. That is the least we can do for them. Civilian
lives are at stake, and people have been suffering for far
too long. Again, as far as my delegation is concerned,
saving people's lives is not an option but the main goal.

This afternoonthe Councilisscheduledtotake action
on a draft resolution on the cross-border humanitarian
aid. We acknowledge the existing dynamics, as well as
the differing views of Council members, and I appeal
to all my colleagues to use the time remaining before
the meeting to intensify our efforts and to speak to one
another in an objective manner with a view to saving
human lives. It is not about us. It is all about saving
Syrian civilians, people on the ground. I once again
appeal to all the members of the Council to do the right
thing, particularly in this season ofjoy when people are
united in a spirit of hope and love.

