Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Security Council and the Secretary-
General must rightly give priority to the humanitarian
situation in the Sahel region. That is the very reason we
welcomed the appointment of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General to the Sahel, who is a man ofpolitics
of world renown, Mr. Romano Prodi. We are grateful to
Mr. Prodi for his significant work in carrying out his
mandate.

The region of the Sahel suffers from instability
and serious socioeconomic challenges. The processes
ongoing there are difficult and multifaceted and have
the most heterogenous root causes. It is clear that
the disjointed measures to stem crises are a priori
ineffective. In the Sahel, indeed, there are clear links
between security and development.

In those conditions, resolving the problems of the
region can only be done in a comprehensive manner.
Steps taken by the States of the region should be
buoyed by a wide range of measures undertaken by the
international community, for a swift settlement to the
troubled situation in this vast region of Africa is in all
of our interests.

We note that this is the very foundation of the
approach for drawing up, under Mr. Prodi's leadership,
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel,
and we reiterate our support for that strategy. Its
consistent implementation should play an important
role in bolstering security and stability in the region,
establishing sustainable socioeconomic development
and countering new threats and challenges. We hope
that set objectives will be achieved. We intend to
provide assistance in that process.

It is our conviction that in carrying out the
strategy, national priorities must be taken into account,
in particular, those of State recipients of aid. We are
pleased that the countries of the region are actively
stating their support for the strategy and are seeking
to implement it and are engaging in productive joint
cooperation.

Today, it is clear that the contradictory processes
in a number of North African and Middle Eastern
countries were a strong catalyst for an escalation of the
terrorist risk, the spread of extremist ideologies and the
uncontrolled spread of weapons. Those went hand in
hand, in some cases, with the interference of outside
forces, with significant destabilizing consequences.

We are very concerned about the continuing threat
of the Sahel region turning into a haven for the activities
of terrorists and criminal structures, including the
illegal spread of weapons and drug trafficking. We
must note that at present in the Saharan-Sahel region,
there are mutually beneficial cooperation arrangements
among large terrorist structures ,as well as the danger
of sleeping cells and even armed groups that engage in
plundering and rivalry with one another for control of
drug trafficking routes.

The crisis in Mali was a serious challenge for the
States of the Sahel, which speaks to the complex and
intertwined nature of the problem. It was a true threat
to the security of the region and far beyond it. We hope
that with the support of the international community,
the Malian authorities will successfully reinstate
constitutional order, and order in general, across
the country, ensuring sustainable and progressive
socioeconomic development.

In conclusion, we should like to thank the delegation
of Morocco for the preparation of the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2013/20), which we supported.

