Mr. Adeniji (Nigeria): I would like first of all to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I would also
like to thank you and the other members of the Council
for having given me this opportunity to address you on
the peace process in C6te d'Ivoire. This is an issue
which has repeatedly appeared on the agenda of the
Council in the past two years, and one that has been a
source of great preoccupation to the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
African Union (AU). It is a subject with regard to
which we have witnessed, alternately, periods of great
expectation and periods of great anxiety - anxiety for
Africa in general, but particularly for the West African
region, whose States, because of their proximity to
cote d'Ivoire and their strong economic and cultural
links, are very vulnerable to the effects of
developments in that country.
Today, as over the past few weeks, Cote d'Ivoire
is witnessing one of the cyclical periods of anxiety. But
this time it is potentially explosive, in particular
because of the impossibility of meeting the deadline
for the transition phases envisaged in the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement. That situation and the need for
anticipatory actions to avert a catastrophe that could
set back the entire West African region by several
years, if not decades, account for the flurry of
activities - one phase of which is culminating in the
appearance before the Council today of an AU
delegation that I have the privilege to lead.

This Council is well aware of the commendable
efforts and the significant resources that the South
African President, acting on the authority of the
African Union, has devoted to the peace process in
Cote d'Ivoire in the past nine months or so. Both
ECOWAS and the African Union have paid well-
deserved tributes to President Thabo Mbeki.
Obviously, considerable progress has been made in the
implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis, Accra and
Pretoria agreements during the mediation period of the
South African President.

Notwithstanding the progress, when it started to
become clear that the transition period - which was
expected to end with the holding of elections on
30 October 2005 - could not be completed, it became
urgently necessary to consider how to manage the post-
30-October arrangements. Thus, at the initiative of
President Obasanjo, Chairman of the African Union, a
meeting of the AU Peace and Security Council at the
level of heads of State or Government was convened in
New York at the margins of the General Assembly on
14 September 2005.

During the course of its deliberations, the Peace
and Security Council received a report from President
Thabo Mbeki, the Mediator, who also happened to be
the Chairman of the Council for that month. After that
very clear and lengthy expose, the Peace and Security
Council expressed concern that, notwithstanding the
tireless efforts of the AU Mediator, the Ivorian parties
had not demonstrated the necessary political will for
the full implementation of the agreements reached on
the outstanding issues, particularly the dismantling and
disarmament of the militias, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes
and the creation of conditions for the holding of free,
fair and transparent elections. The Peace and Security
Council underlined the need to review the situation in
C6te d'Ivoire before 30 October 2005, and requested
ECOWAS to convene urgently at the summit level to
assess the situation and report thereon at a meeting of
the AU Peace and Security Council to be convened
urgently at the summit level to consider the matter and
decide accordingly.

Thus, in view of the urgency of the issue,
ECOWAS convened an Extraordinary Summit of
Heads of State and Government on 30 September 2005,
in Abuja, to consider the situation in C6te d'Ivoire and
the developments that would have to be put in place
post-30 October. The ECOWAS Summit made far-
reaching recommendations that were submitted to a
meeting of the Peace and Security Council, which itself
was held within a week of the Abuja Summit, on 6
October 2005.

The recommendations of ECOWAS were, by and
large, the basis for the adoption of its own decision by
the Peace and Security Council at the 6 October
meeting, but I will not elaborate on those
recommendations. However, the result of the summit
of the AU Peace and Security Council is, of course,
what the AU delegation has brought to submit formally
to the Council this afternoon, in accordance with
paragraph 14 of the Peace and Security Council's
communique that reads "Decides to submit this
decision to the United Nations Security Council to
obtain its support (S/2005/639, Annex).

That decision, and a brief synthesis of its main
points, I shall leave to the Commissioner for Peace and
Security, Mr. Djinnit, to present to you very succinctly.
I should like, however, to call attention to one
important aspect of the decision that concerns the
request of the AU Peace and Security Council to the
United Nations Security Council - a request which is
not being made for the first time, I daresay - to
consider a substantial increase in the strength of the
United Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire (ONUCI).
That request is particularly germane in a period which
is fast approaching when it is envisaged and hoped that
we will witness increased activities in Cote d'Ivoire,
linked to the disbanding and disarmament of the
militias and, not least, the conduct of free, fair,
transparent and credible presidential elections in C6te
d'Ivoire.

The current authorized troop level of ONUCI is, I
believe, just over 7,000. Now, please believe me,
speaking as a former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, that this is far too low a number for
the level required if a credible disarmament in C6te
d'Ivoire is desired. Thus, the AU expects and hopes
that this United Nations Security Council's resolution
on the AU Peace and Security Council's report, which
Mr. Djinnit will succinctly, but in some detail, present
to you, will be adopted quickly so that between now
and the end of October we can put all the structures
into place that will be absolutely essential for the post-
30 October governance of the country. We hope that
this same resolution will include a firm commitment on
the increase of ONUCI.

In conclusion, it is needless to say that the clock
is ticking towards the 30 October date and there are
many steps to be taken on the ground in cote d'Ivoire,
not only to enable us who are present to have all the
parties in Cote d'Ivoire accept the decision of the
Peace and Security Council - a decision which will
hopefully be endorsed by the United Nations Security
Council - but also to be able to make a firm
commitment for the decision's implementation, as that
is really a key issue in Cote d'Ivoire. We are not short
of agreements - we have had a series of agreements
on the Cote d'Ivoire situation, to which all the main
parties have subscribed - but when it comes to the
implementation stage, this is another story.
Nevertheless, we hope that this time, with the
collaboration of all concerned, with the great
involvement of ECOWAS and the AU and, of course,
the United Nations, we are optimistic that the story will
be different.

What is important at this stage is that the Security
Council demonstrate the sense of urgency that has
characterized the speed with which, at the African
level, ECOWAS and the AU Peace and Security
Council - even at the level of heads of State or
Government - have been able to get together to do
their own part at this preliminary stage in the
resolution of the crisis in C6te d'Ivoire.

