Ms. Bird (Australia): Let me begin by warmly
commending the Indonesian presidency for its
successful leadership of the Council this month and for
the focus it has given to today's important topic.

The protection of civilians is the primary
responsibility of States, a fundamental principle of
international humanitarian law and a critical benchmark
by which the performance of the United Nations is
judged. Emerging in response to the international
community's failures to prevent mass atrocities in
Rwanda and the Balkans in the 19905, the protection-of-
civilians agenda of the United Nations has become a
critical component of the Security Council's work in
maintaining international peace and security. While a
solid normative protection-of-civilians framework has
been established under international law and through
Council practice, the realities on the ground often
paint a different picture. The majority of casualties in
armed conflict are civilians. Vast numbers are killed,
maimed, raped, starved or forced to flee. Civilians are
often indiscriminately targeted. I would like to make a
few points about what more can be done to ensure the
protection of civilians.

First, the Council must be more systematic,
comprehensive and consistent in addressing protection
concerns within and across conflict situations. Where
peaceful means are inadequate and national authorities
manifestly fail to protect their populations, the
Council must uphold the international community's
responsibility to protect populations from mass
atrocities. We urge all States to sign the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group's code of conduct
and to support France and Mexico's initiative on veto
restraint, to ensure that Council resolutions designed to
prevent or halt mass atrocities are not blocked.

Secondly, the credibility and legitimacy of United
Nations peacekeeping depends on the Council's
capacity to act when civilians are under threat. The
effective protection of civilians requires comprehensive
and trusted engagement with local communities to
understand and respond to their protection needs.
We welcome the expansion of community liaison
alert networks and recognize the indispensable role
of women and child protection advisers in combating
sexual violence and the recruitment of child soldiers.
We urge Council members to further explore the
unarmed civilian protection methodologies employed
by a number of organizations. Community engagement
is central to the success of those efforts. Uniformed
components must be well trained and equipped for
protection-of-civilians tasks that require a proactive
posture. New protection-of-civilian performance
assessments will help address shortcomings and
strengthen accountability. We encourage all troop-
contributing countries to endorse the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians.

Thirdly, we must enhance and ensure respect
for international humanitarian and human rights
law in conflict. We welcome the development of
national protection-of-civilians policies to ensure
that international obligations are met and protection
strategies are effective. In 2015, we adopted the
Australian Guidelines for the Protection of Civilians.
We applaud the ongoing engagement with States and
non-State armed groups to deepen understanding and
respect for international law, including ongoing efforts
to end the recruitment and use of child soldiers.

Finally, we support more robust and innovative
approaches to accountability, including through
sanctions and independent investigative mechanisms,
to help bring justice and deter future crimes.

