Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): There are two points that
we have regularly stressed since we joined the Security
Council in connection with actions taken by the
Security Council on chemical-weapons matters.

The first is the unity of the Council. The rationale
for that is that the alternative, namely, division within
the Security Council, is counterproductive in any effort
to ensure the cessation of the use of chemical weapons.
It is also inimical to the peace process.

Secondly, a major step was taken only a few weeks

ago in terms ofremoving chemical weapons from Syria.
That was a major achievement, which should serve as
an example regardless of any doubts now with respect
to how effectively it has been implemented. That is
why it is unfortunate and regrettable that the Council
today was unable to respond to the report of the use of
chemical weapons in Idlib on 4 April 2017.

We do not really believe that it would have been that
hard to reach consensus on a draft resolution, because
what the resolution was supposed do was to call for
was a thorough investigation to ensure accountability
based on the results of an independent, professional and
impartial process. There was certainly a possibility for
us to reach the necessary compromise on the sticking
issue that many of us had concerns about. What could
have easily resolved the issue was to turn to already
agreed language from previous resolutions. That
language is strong enough to convey the message and
ensure that the objective is achieved, namely, to hold
those responsible to account. We tried, as the 10 elected
members of the Council, to work towards that end. We
thank China for its readiness to look at the positive
aspects of that effort.

All parties undoubtedly have an obligation to
cooperate with the Fact-Finding Mission of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
which was stated very clearly in the past. It would have
been easier to resort to the language that I referred to
earlier to achieve the necessary consensus, because no
one in the Council opposes the main thrust of the draft
resolution calling for an investigation. That is what the
wider membership of the United Nations and the rest
of the world expected from the Security Council today.
They are, no doubt, very sad that we have not been able
to send the right message.

As we stated clearly last week, we were certainly
inclined to look at the draft resolution favourably,
because it simply requests that an investigation into an
incident that potentially constitutes a grave Violation of
international law take place. Our hope and expectation
was that the paragraph in the draft resolution that caused
us and other Council members some concern would be
handled through consultations. It is really unfortunate
that the Council was not able to reach consensus and lost
the opportunity to send a powerful and unified message
to the world about the use of chemical weapons, which
represent an affront to all humankind.

