Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
Mr. President, I would like to express our thanks to you
for having taken the initiative to convene this open
debate on children and armed conflict. This is an issue
to which Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches the highest
importance.

Bosnia and Herzegovina aligns itself with the
statement made by the delegation of the Czech
Republic speaking on behalf of the European Union.

As has been described in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/158), the overall situation
of children affected by armed conflicts continues to be
of serious concern. Children continue to suffer from
the horrors of war. Recruitment by armed groups and
widespread violence, including killing and maiming,
sexual violence, abduction and other grave crimes in
war-affected countries, is daily life for thousands of
children. Children also suffer from the indirect impact
of war, such as the loss of their families and homes,
hunger and various diseases.

Bosnia and Herzegovina considers that
addressing the root causes of conflicts and adopting a
comprehensive strategy, with the participation of the
United Nations and its specialized agencies, such as
UNICEF, regional organizations, the parties concerned
and non-governmental organizations, could lead to the
development of more effective tools in fighting all
forms of violence against children. Bosnia and
Herzegovina believes that the Working Group of the
Security Council on Children and Armed Conflict is an
important body and should take more serious steps
vis-a-vis all parties involved to put an end to child
recruitment and to the serious violations against
children. It would be more effective if the Working
Group worked closely with existing sanctions
committees.
The protection of children under the provisions of
international humanitarian and human rights law
should be carried out under the scrutiny of the States
parties to the respective conventions, including the
Geneva Conventions of 1949, and the obligations
applicable under the Additional Protocols to the
Geneva Conventions of 1977 and the Convention on
the Rights of the Child of 1989. In that regard, States
parties should adopt appropriate measures at the
national and international levels for the prevention of
the recruitment of children and for their protection
from all forms of violence. In that regard, as a party to
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, adopted in May 2000, we join others in calling
upon those countries that have not done so to accede to
the Protocol.

Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a State party to the
Rome Statute, considers that the International Criminal
Court is an adequate and indispensable legal body that
can take appropriate steps to investigate and prosecute
crimes perpetrated against children that fall within its
jurisdiction. It is the only accessible way to put an end
to impunity and to prevent crimes in those cases where
the judiciary system at the national level is not able to
do so.

With regard to child protection advisers, their
reports from the field are an indispensable tool for
obtaining a comprehensive assessment that will help to
learn lessons and to find the most effective solutions.
Deployment of child protection advisers should be
considered during the preparation of each
peacekeeping operation and political mission,
respectively. I would like to stress that the participation
of child protection advisers in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process is of the
highest importance.

The Secretary-General's report recounts
disturbing incidents affecting the education sector.
Armed conflict is distorting education in a number of
countries around the world, and children who are
deprived of their right to education also remain
deprived of their right to a better future.

In conclusion, I would like to express the hope
that this open debate will contribute to the
deliberations of Security Council.

