Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Mladenov
for his briefing.

The United Kingdom has long made its position clear
that Israeli settlement activity is illegal. The increased
pace of settlement advancement and the retroactive
approval of unauthorized settlement outposts - as
seen in the Jordan Valley on Sunday - further threaten
the physical viability of a two-State solution. We have
also previously made clear our deep concern about
suggestions that any part of the occupied Palestinian
territories could be annexed.

In the light of further recent comments, I want
to reiterate the United Kingdom's opposition to the
unilateral annexation of all or part of the West Bank.
As we have stated before in the Security Council,
such a move would be contrary to international
law and damaging to peace efforts, and could not
pass unchallenged. The United Kingdom remains
seriously concerned by the continued demolition of
Palestinian property by the Israeli authorities. In all
but the most exceptional circumstances demolitions
are contrary to international humanitarian law. The
practice causes unnecessary suffering to ordinary
Palestinians and is also harmful to the peace process.
We urge both sides to enable Palestinian development
to accelerate, including in Area C.

Settlements and demolitions are not the only
obstacles to peace. The people of Israel deserve to
live free from terrorism, anti-Semitism and incitement
to violence.

Returning to Gaza, the ongoing levels of violence
are troubling. The loss of life and the large number of
injured Palestinians is tragic. We call on Israel to take
all action possible to limit civilian casualties. But the
recent increase and infiltration attempts risks Israel's
security and contribute to an environment of terror. We
call on Hamas and other armed groups to permanently
end their incitement and rocket fire against Israel. Such
violence is destructive to peace efforts. I would also
add my voice to those who have called for the release
of the remains of the deceased Israeli soldiers. Holding
on to those soldiers' remains and not allowing their
families to complete their grieving is inhumane and
beneath those who do it.

We continue to welcome the efforts of Egypt
and the United Nations to work towards a cessation
of violence and sustainable improvements in the
humanitarian situation. Ultimately, a long-term solution
that addresses the underlying causes of the conflict and
returns the Palestinian Authority to Gaza is required to
end the cycle of violence.

A just and lasting resolution that ends the occupation
and delivers peace to both Israelis and Palestinians is
long overdue. As we have said before, we encourage
the United States Administration to bring forward
detailed proposals for a viable Israeli-Palestinian peace
agreement that addresses the legitimate concerns of
both parties. The United Kingdom continues to believe
that the best way to achieve that is through substantive
peace talks between the parties leading to a two-State
solution, with Jerusalem as a shared capital. We call on
all parties to immediately end actions that undermine
support for the two-State solution and ultimately make
peace more difficult.

