Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): To begin
with, I would like to express our appreciation to the
Special Coordinator, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his
comprehensive briefing before the Council today.
I would like also to express our condolences to the
Government and delegation of C6te d'Ivoire for the
sudden death of our dear friend, Ambassador Bernard
Tanoh-Boutchoue, the Permanent Representative of
Cote d'Ivoire and its former Ambassador to Cairo.

Today's meeting is held against the backdrop of
deplorable regional and international developments
that are having a negative impact on international peace
and security and, specifically, on peace and security in
the Middle East. These developments also threaten the
multilateral system embodied by the United Nations, in
particular the Security Council, which risks losing its
credibility and international legitimacy.

An increasing number of unarmed innocent people
in Palestine, Syria, Libya, Somalia and other countries
in the Arab world are falling victim to the current
environment. Yet the Security Council is unable to play
its crucial role in maintaining international peace and
security owing to the paralysis in its decision-making
mechanisms, particularly the alarming increase in the
use or threat of use of the veto in resolutions that aim
to put an end to the suffering of Arab people in our
countries, or to stop the violations of the legitimate
rights of our people, or to conduct an impartial and
transparent investigation into such violations with a
view to bringing the perpetrators to justice. The use or
threat of use of the veto in resolutions that emphasize
the principled positions taken by the Council leads to the
protection of one party at the expense of other parties.
Furthermore, the inability of the Security Council and
its mechanisms to provide a clear political framework
for restoring peace and stability in the Middle East
based on respect for international legitimacy and
recognition of the right of all peoples in the region to
live, without exception, in peace, security and stability
and of their right for their territories not to be subject
to competition between the major Powers is clearly
exacerbating the crisis.

The Council must refrain from the use of double

standards in dealing with various Arab issues, which
undermines its credibility, and it is therefore urgent that
efforts be made to reform it and enlarge its membership.
The Security Council must reaffirm the principle of the
two-State solution, which has long been recognized by
the international community as a whole as the basis
for reaching a just and comprehensive settlement to
the Palestinian question, and realizing the right of the
Palestinian people to establish their independent State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital across the 4 June
1967 borders. That requires direct negotiations between
Israel and Palestine on final-status issues, foremost
among which is that of Jerusalem, under impartial
international supervision. This should be done without
favouring any party on the account of another party, in
keeping with the main parameters ofthe peace process,
which include, inter alia, the Madrid principles and the
principle of land for peace; the Arab Peace Initiative;
the Quartet road map; and Security Council resolutions,
especially resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 478 (1980)
and 2334 (2016).

All of this should be consistent with the
comprehensive vision presented by President Mahmoud
Abbas to the Security Council on 20 February 2018,
which would ensure the establishment of the independent
State of Palestine and its becoming a full-fledged,
effective member of the United Nations following an
international conference to be held in the summer of
2018. That vision was endorsed by the Arab Summit
held in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which Arab
leaders called the Jerusalem summit. This represents
an affirmation of the centrality of this cause of reaching
a just and comprehensive settlement, as indicated by
the representative of Tunisia in his statement today on
behalf of the Group of Arab States, which supports that
statement in its entirety.

Until the independent State of Palestine is
established, with East Jerusalem as its capital, the
League of Arab States stresses that it is urgent to
provide protection to the Palestinian people. This is
particularly true in the aftermath of the bloodshed that
occurred when the Israeli army fired live rounds at
unarmed Palestinian protesters who had taken to the
streets starting on Earth Day to express peacefully
their right to return to the land of which they had been
dispossessed. Those events claimed the lives of scores
of Palestinians and injured thousands more. We stress
the importance of the Security Council responding
to the call by the Secretary-General to conduct a
transparent and impartial investigation into these events
under United Nations supervision, as they represent
gross violations of international law, international
humanitarian law and human rights law. The aim is to
bring the perpetrators to international justice.

The League of Arab States calls on the Council not
to be deceived by the false allegations that Palestine
uses children as human shields. The Council instead
should focus on the situation of Palestinian children in
Israeli prisons. The League also stresses the importance
of the full and honest implementation of resolution
2334 (2016), which will prevent Israel, the occupying
Power, from altering the realities on the ground through
its illegal and expansionist settlement policy. That
policy has consistently been condemned by the League
given its negative impact on final-status negotiations.
This can be achieved only if the Secretary-General
provides monthly written reports with maps, images
and documents, pursuant to resolution 2334 (2016). In
addition to that, there should be an effective response
to the humanitarian needs of the Palestinian people,
including the provision of sufficient funding to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in order to enable it to
discharge its lofty mandate.

In conclusion, the League of Arab States
underscores that the continued occupation by Israel
of Palestinian territories and Israel's violation of the
rights of the unarmed Palestinian people, as well as
the settlements built illegally by Israel, all pose serious
threats to international and regional peace and security.
Hence, on the basis of the provisions contained in
Article 23 of the Charter of the United Nations,
the 22 States members of the League of Arab States
believe that Israel is not qualified to be a candidate for
non-permanent membership in the Council for 2019-
2020, given that it lacks the main prerequisite needed
as stated in that Article, which is to contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security and to
achieve the lofty goals of the United Nations.

The League of Arab States and its member States
call on all peace-loving countries to do the same and to
express their rejection of Israel's candidacy, given that
it is continuing to occupy territories in Palestine, Syria
and Lebanon; to violate the norms of international law,
humanitarian and human rights law; and to explicitly
disrespect the international legitimacy of Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions. Israel
openly disrespects the United Nations and its principal
organs and Member States - whose goal is to maintain
multilateral international legitimacy, the Organization's
solid foundation - by falsely accusing them of being
biased against it.

