Mr. Smith (Australia): Australia welcomes the
opportunity to participate in an open debate in the Security
Council on this important issue. We congratulate you, Sir,
and the delegation of Malaysia on this initiative.

We would like to make some observations about the
challenges created by the problem of regions emerging
from conflict, drawing on Australia's own practical
experience in the aftermath of the conflict on the island
of Bougainville. Many of these observations serve to
illustrate the conclusions and observations in the informal
paper prepared for this debate. They are themes that have
been cited by other speakers today.

Our experience supports the obvious conclusion that
there are no simple solutions to the problems posed by
former combatants. The challenges are multifaceted and
involve a range of economic, social, educational, judicial
and disarmament issues - all of which must be
addressed in an integrated, coordinated way. They include
the need for effective demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants into productive civilian life; post-conflict
reconstruction and reconciliation in stable and secure
environments; reform and capacity-building of police,
judicial and penal systems; and promotion of respect for
international humanitarian law, including with regard to
the use and transfer of small arms.

In the case of Bougainville, the first real challenge
facing local leaders has been to re-establish civil society
and a viable local economy. Working with
Bougainvilleans and the Papua New Guinea Government,
Australia has been pleased to be able to help address both
the immediate and the long-term needs of ex-combatants.
Rehabilitating social services, restoring much-needed
employment opportunities and addressing unresolved
social issues of weapons disposal, alcohol abuse, family
violence and ongoing trauma are examples of areas where
initiatives are being taken.

Peace on Bougainville has allowed the re-emergence
of a fledgling local economy and some early employment
opportunities. These must continue to be nurtured and
expanded. The Australian Government, through its
international aid agency, encourages the participation and
employment of local Bougainvilleans, including ex-
combatants, in its aid projects. More than 4,000 people
have been employed to date, and this number will
increase as projects get under way to rehabilitate
Bougainville's road and bridge infrastructure and its once
highly productive agriculture sector, and to re-establish
services in health and education.

To date, the absence of a highly skilled workforce
has usually limited the employment of local people to
manual labouring. Many of the young ex-combatants in
particular have received very little education and training.
In recognition of this, priority is being given to the
rebuilding of education facilities in Bougainville. Two
major high schools are being rebuilt, and the construction

 

of Bougainville's only vocational training centre has just
been completed. Working alongside Bougainville
communities, the Australian Government has also rebuilt
some 30 double classrooms for village schools.

Many ex-combatants are severely traumatized by their
experience during years of armed conflict. This challenge
is also being addressed through collaborative efforts. We
have encouraged and funded the work of local non-
governmental organizations to train trauma counsellors,
encourage the reintegration of ex-combatants and deal with
ongoing social problems.

We are also working closely with the New Zealand
and Papua New Guinea Governments to develop a policing
project, which will ultimately see 200 Bougainvilleans
trained as community police. Some 30 local men and
women have already benefitted from an earlier project to
train them as community police. A number of the
beneficiaries are unemployed Bougainvillean youth. This is
an important measure. In the absence of civil authority, a
number of local law-and-order bodies have emerged with
former rebels and local chiefs. In some instances, this has
led to summary justice and an approach to law and order
that is subject to no constitutional or legal control.

The presence of the Peace Monitoring Group, a
multinational force led by Australia and comprising
approximately 300 personnel from Australia, Fiji, New
Zealand and Vanuatu, working cooperatively with the
United Nations Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB)
have both been crucial in managing the problem of
disenfranchised combatants. The Peace Monitoring Group
and UNPOB are both neutral, unarmed bodies mandated to
monitor the peace and report to the parties. Their collective
presence has provided a critical climate of security for
Bougainvilleans, and has instilled in them the confidence to
work through their differences. Without their presence, the
threat to the Bougainville peace process posed by large
numbers of ex-combatants would certainly have been more
serious.

The United Nations Political Office is also playing an
important role in weapons disposal on the island. This is a
key issue in the debate on Bougainville's political future. In
early June 1999, the Peace Process Consultative Committee,
a forum chaired by UNPOB and through which the parties
can discuss peace-process-related issues and make
recommendations to leaders, authorized UNPOB to develop
a plan for weapons disposal, in conjunction with the key
parties. The parties' agreement to such a plan will not only
be significant in terms of reducing the number of weapons
on the island and their threat to the peace process, but
will also be a very important confidence-building measure
in the context of negotiations over Bougainville's political
future.

I will conclude with a brief comment on the problem
of small arms. Demobilization, weapons disposal and
peace-monitoring programmes, such as those in which we
have been involved in Bougainville, can and do play a
key role in managing the problems caused in many other
parts of the world by the proliferation and misuse of
small arms. The small arms problem is a complex one,
covering many issues: disarmament, human rights, legal,
good governance and law and order issues, among others.
But an effective response can come over time through
enhanced national and regional responses, which in turn
can serve as building blocks for an effective international
response. This approach has helped guide the Australian
Government in the development of its own policy on the
small arms issue.

We offer these observations in the hope that they
contribute in a practical way to this important debate.
These are complex issues and clearly they do warrant
further study, particularly with a focus on how our
objectives can practically be built in to United Nations
peacekeeping, post-conflict peace-building and post-
conflict reconstruction activities. In this context, we
welcome the proposal for further work on the issue
assisted by a report from the Secretary-General.

