Mr. Lauber: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council on the activities of the
BurundiconfigurationofthePeacebuildingCommission.

The following statement has been approved in
consultation with the 54 members of the configuration,
including the country concerned, Burundi. The full
version has been shared with the members of the
Security Council.

In their most recent meetings, the members of the
configuration heard reports by various United Nations
entities, all of which underscored that the situation in
Burundi requires sustained attention and support from
international partners:

We heard reports by human rights monitoring
mechanisms on the situation of public security and
human rights, including on acts of violence and
Violations of human rights, as well as on pressure on
civil-society organizations and human rights defenders.

We were briefed by United Nations Special
Adviser Jamal Benomar on the ongoing political
impasse, including the lack of confidence between the
Government and the opposition, on the situation of the
media, as well as on national, regional and international
efforts to find a political settlement of the crisis. We
also learned from the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and the United Nations country team
about the deteriorating socioeconomic situation.

Regarding the socioeconomic situation, the then
United Nations Resident Coordinator in Burundi,
Mr. Paolo Lembo, and I convened Burundi's main
multilateral partners on 7 and 8 November 2016 near
Geneva for a socioeconomic consultation. The World
Bank, the African Development Bank, the International
Monetary Fund, the United Nations country team and
the European Union participated in those consultations.

The participants shared the View that Burundi
is currently experiencing severe macroeconomic
difficulties, which are reflected in a negative growth
of the gross domestic product in 2015 and 2016. Food
insecurity affects a much larger part of Burundi than in
2015, and consumer prices are on the rise.
Participants identified food security and agriculture,
health and education as the sectors that are most
seriously affected by the current situation. Besides
these sectors, the need for broader macroeconomic
engagement in Burundi was emphasized, since
decreasing fiscal revenues, partly related to decreased
investments and direct budgetary support, put the
national budget under pressure.

In view of these economic indicators, Burundi's
partners showed continued readiness to address
the needs of the population and to prevent a further
deterioration of the socioeconomic situation.

While recognizing the importance of the
contribution of Burundi in African Union and United
Nations peacekeeping operations, members of the
configuration expressed concerns about the signals of
disengagement sent from the Government of Burundi
to their regional and international partners, for instance
by suspending the cooperation with the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights.

We welcome the fact that the Government of
Burundi transmitted, on 24 February, to the Office of
the High Commissioner in Geneva a draft agreement
between the Republic of Burundi and the United
Nations concerning the establishment of an office of
the High Commissioner in Burundi.

Nevertheless, I am personally afraid that, faced
with the current situation, the international partners
may decide to disengage vis-a-Vis the Government and
the people of Burundi.

Peacebuilding in Burundi requires a long-term
vision and sustained efforts. Abandoning Burundi
now would mean wasting past efforts and putting the
country and its people at risk of recurring conflict.
While the primary responsibility for the well-being
of the Burundian people lies with the Government of
Burundi, the international partners must maintain their
support for the current efforts aimed at reaching a
peaceful settlement of the crisis in Burundi.

I would therefore like to invite Burundi's regional
and international partners, in particular the relevant
parts of the United Nations system, to maintain
and, where possible, step up their support in the
areas of peace and security, human rights, political
reconciliation and institution-building, as well as with
regard to humanitarian aid, socioeconomic development
and preparations for credible, peaceful and democratic
elections in 2020.
At the same time, I invite the Government of Burundi
to recognize its partners" goodwill and to facilitate the
efforts of the EAC, the AU and the United Nations in
engaging with Burundi to advance the inter-Burundian
dialogue and to strengthen the cooperation with both
the AU and the United Nations. I welcome any efforts
at reconciliation within Burundi, as well as ongoing
dialogue inside and outside the country, in particular
the efforts of the EAC Facilitator. In that regard, I wish
to reassure President Mkapa of the continued support
of the Burundi configuration of the Commission for
his work.

I am planning to travel to Burundi from 27 to
31 March in order to get a first-hand impression of the
situation on the ground, meet with the Government
opposition and civil society, pursue the socioeconomic
dialogue and brief the Government on my continuous
conversation with Burundi's partners. I see the
continuation of the socioeconomic dialogue not only
as an opportunity to address the socioeconomic
challenges, but also as a means to increase confidence
between the Government and its international partners.
I will keep the Security Council informed about my
visit to Burundi and about the configuration's further
engagement, as per established practice.

