Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): I would like,
first of all, to extend my warmest congratulations, on
behalf of the Government of the Republic of Haiti, to the
Ambassador of Argentina, Her Excellency Mrs. Maria
Cristina Perceval, who is presiding over the Security
Council for the month of August. I would like to reiterate
the profound gratitude of the authorities of my country
and myself for taking the initiative to convene today's
debate on the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) on the eve of the expiration
of its mandate, as provided for in resolution 2070
(2012), of 12 October 2012. My Government expresses
its sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his balanced and detailed report (S/2013/493), which
touches upon many aspects of the political, economic,
financial, health and security situation in Haiti. The
Haitian Government supports the observations and
recommendations contained in the report, in particular
the extension of MINUSTAH's mandate for another
year.

Let me take this opportunity to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti,
Ms. Sandra Honore, for the high quality of her briefing
and the relevance of her comments. I extend to her my
best wishes for success as she takes on her mission in
Haiti.

The Haitian delegation wishes to express its
appreciation to the members of the Security Council
whose comments and expressed concerns strongly
coincide with the Views and concerns of President
Michel Joseph Martelly, Prime Minister Laurent
Salvador Lamothe and the entire Government. I would
also like to thank the members of the Security Council
for their moderation, their reserve and the sense of
proportion that they have shown in assessing the facts
and events in my country.

I have the privilege today to make the following
comments before the Security Council, which is playing
such an essential and indispensable role in the future
of our world, and before Ambassadors who embody
the mind to such a high degree and who contribute
unceasingly and with talent to the standing of the
Organization and the pursuit of its noble objectives.

The Republic of Haiti, as is well known,
is experiencing a very particular time which is
undoubtedly decisive in its history. It seeks to strengthen
its democratic institutions, while working relentlessly
after so many lost decades to re-establish growth and
finally commit to a path where the economy takes off
and development is sustainable. Directly in line with its
efforts to strengthen and see to the good functioning
of the Republic's institutions, the President solemnly
invited, on 14 August, the transitional College of the
Permanent Electoral Council to take all necessary
measures in order to organize partial senatorial and
local elections no later than December 2013. Yesterday,
Tuesday, the executive power, through the Minister of
Justice and Public Safety, submitted the draft electoral
law governing the elections to the Chamber of Deputies.

Over the past two years, significant advances and
notable and indisputable progress, underscored almost
unanimously by observers in good faith and by the
Secretary-General in his report, have been made in
all areas - institutional, socioeconomic, cultural and
security. However, the task is immense, the challenges
are great and the obstacles are formidable. That is why
we attach a particular value to understanding, solidarity
and cooperation with the international community, and
primarily the United Nations.

In addition, while welcoming the fact that Haiti, in
the View of the Security Council, no longer constitutes
a threat or a danger to international peace and security
in the region, we believe that it is necessary to launch
and deepen consideration of the post-MINUSTAH
period with responsible partners through discussions
that are calm and without preconceptions. As has been
emphasized in the Secretary-General's report, voices
are being raised in the country to call into question the
presence of MINUSTAH. It would be desirable that all
possible scenarios for disengagement be considered in
order to avoid a repetition of history.

The historic and unique ties that exist between
Haiti and the United Nations are more relevant than
ever. Haiti is an original member of the Organization
which, from the very first cooperation mission of the
Economic and Social Council pursuant to resolution 51
(IV), of 26 March 1947, has brought unceasing support
to us in our development efforts. In that regard, Haiti
can be proud to have a special and unique relationship
with the United Nations. The time has therefore come
to work to expand and redefine, as is clearly necessary,
that cooperation, which of course has proven itself, so
that it can be given a new impetus and a new dynamism
and so that it can be better able to meet the needs of
the times and more coherent with respect to national
priorities. In that regard, I am certain that I can count
on the nobility of the Council's views and its attachment
to the Republic of Haiti, whose stability, development
and progress it has always particularly valued.

Iwould like to convey to the Council the willingness

of the Haitian Government, in solidarity with the ideals,
principles and objectives defined by the Charter of the
United Nations, to work tirelessly with the Council for
international peace and security, development and the
promotion and protection of human rights and political,
economic, social and cultural rights. In that regard,
in addition to ongoing efforts in the country to build
the rule of law, which is inseparable from promoting
respect for differences despite disagreements, the
Government of Haiti has reached a new milestone in its
commitment to the pre-eminent dignity of the human
person. On 16 August, here at the United Nations,
Haiti signed the 1984 Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment, adopted by the General Assembly on
10 December 1984.

In that spirit, the Government of Haiti will
continue to support the efforts of the Organization and
the personal efforts of its representatives and staff to
promote human rights in all their dimensions, which
is a very real exercise in universal solidarity, tolerance
and respect for cultural identities. These are all values
that have never been more relevant to and necessary for
the building of a national and international order that is
more just, more human and more fraternal, an order to
which humankind has aspired since 1945.

I welcome the report of the Secretary-General,
which is balanced and, overall, in line with the previous
report (S/2013/139). It reports the facts, highlights
the efforts of the Haitian authorities to strengthen
political, economic and security governance and lists
the existing limits and shortcomings in terms of what
remains to be done. I reiterate, on behalf of my country
and its Government, my faith in the many United
Nations initiatives, both in Haiti and elsewhere, to
resolve and overcome conflict, reduce poverty, promote
development and bring people together.

