The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran and
Tajikistan in which they have requested to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. Nejad
Hosseinian (Islamic Republic ofIran) and

Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) took the seats reservedfor
them at the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have also received a letter dated 18
January 2002 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2002/81, and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council to be held
today, Friday, 18 January 2002, regarding threats
to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the current debate, in accordance with the
rules of procedure and the previous practice in this
regard.

There being no objection, it was so decided.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took the seat reserved for him at the
side ofthe Council Chamber


The President: May I once again make an appeal
to all members to try to be brief because we still have a
long list of speakers ahead of us.

The next speaker is the representative of Japan. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.


