Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): We
thank former President Michel Kafando, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi;
Ambassador Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations; and Ambassador Jiirg Lauber, Chair of
the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), for their important and insightful
briefings on the evolving situation in Burundi and for
their unwavering commitment to the country.

South Africa fully supports the facilitation
process led by the East African Community (EAC)
in the spirit of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement, with the support of the African Union
and the United Nations. In this regard, the efforts of
the mediator, President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda,
and the facilitator, former President Benjamin Mkapa
of the United Republic of Tanzania, is acknowledged
and commended. We also commend the essential and
valuable work of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, former President Kafando, as well as the
Burundi configuration of the PBC, under the able
leadership of Ambassador Lauber.

South Africa welcomes Burundi's participation
in the summit of Heads of State of the East African
Community and the African Union summit of
11 February. That participation is in line with our long-
standing position on the importance of the role played
by regional and continental bodies in the resolution of
the impasse.

With the submission of the final report of former
President Mkapa to the EAC, South Africa and the
international community need to await direction from
the leadership of the East African Community and the
African Union in strengthening our commitment to
helping Burundi, especially in view of the elections
scheduled for 2020. South Africa supports a Burundi-
led process that respects its sovereignty and that is
within the parameters of the Constitution.

Any political impasse in Burundi can be addressed
only through a fully inclusive dialogue. We therefore
call on the international community to continue to
support the initiatives of the EAC. We deplore any
efforts, by any party, that seek to undermine or sidestep
the Arusha accords. As South Africa, we are concerned
with the current trajectory, which has overturned the
2000 Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for
Burundi. As such, we implore the mediation process to
revert to the principles of that Agreement.

South Africa calls on upon the Burundians to
implement the principles of the 2000 Arusha accords. It
is our view that the global ceasefire agreement flowed
from those accords and that, as such, the two should be
read together. South Africa stands ready to support the
Government and the people of Burundi.
We encourage Burundi to work closely with the East
African Community and the African Union to create an
environment conducive to the holding of elections. In
this regard, all Burundian parties need to demonstrate
a spirit of cooperation in order to ensure peace and
stability beyond 2020. South Africa welcomes the
decision by the Government of Burundi to finance the
elections with the country's own national budget.

With regard to the political developments in
Burundi, we are encouraged by the continued stable
security situation in the country. We would like to
congratulate the Government of Burundi on having
initiated the preparatory process for the elections,
especially the establishment, on 31 August 2018, of
an Independent National Electoral Commission, in
keeping with the Burundian electoral code.

We commend Burundi's contribution to peace and
security through its deployment of troop contingents.
Burundi participates alongside other countries in United
Nations and African Union peacekeeping missions
with much success, with more than 6,000 Burundian
men and women deployed in various peacekeeping
operations, mostly in the Central African Republic
and Somalia. We therefore call on the international
community to support Burundi in strengthening its
peacekeeping capacity, as it is of critical institutional
value to the country. We would like to congratulate
Burundi on its appointment to the African Union Peace
and Security Council.

We note Burundi's adoption of a 10-year national
development plan that provides direction on the way
towards sustainable development by 2030. We urge the
international community to do more to alleviate the
socioeconomic challenges and humanitarian situation
facing the people of Burundi and call on its partners
to support the implementation of the national dialogue
process for the benefit of the Burundian people. In that
vein, we reiterate the call made by the AU during its
thirty-second summit for the European Union to lift
the unilateral sanctions imposed against the Republic
of Burundi.

We encourage Burundi to continue to work towards
the voluntary repatriation and dignified return of
refugees. The gradual return of refugees is evidence
of the improvement in the country's situation. To
date approximately 210,000 refugees have returned
voluntarily to Burundi. In 2018 alone, 58,262 Burundians
returned, mainly from Tanzania, the Congo, Kenya
and Uganda. We call on the international community
to support these efforts and in particular to provide
assistance for the refugees" return and reintegration.

Finally, we appeal to the international community
to support the Government and the EAC mediation
process so as to lay the foundation for an environment
that is conducive to the holding of democratic elections
and support a peaceful transfer of power, in order to
ensure peace and stability beyond 2020.

