Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to thank you, Madam President, for giving us the
opportunity to comment briefly on the draft resolution
just adopted on the situation in Darfur and the extension
of the mandate of the Panel of Experts as per resolution
1591 (2005).

I should like at the outset to thank the States
members of the Council that have worked hard with us
in continuous attempts to elaborate a balanced text that
takes into consideration the positive developments in
Darfur.

Unfortunately, the draft resolution just adopted
does not list the positive developments that have taken
place in Darfur since the adoption of the previous
resolution that extended the mandate of the Panel
of Experts last February (resolution 2091 (2013)). In
addition, much progress has been made with regard to
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, and we are
working on its implementation with our partners from
the Liberation and Justice Movement and the Justice
and Equality Movement-Mohamed Bashar.

It is true that there are some shortcomings, but the
Security Council needed to be aware ofthose. The most
important issue is that the Sudan, for the sake of peace
and security, has sacrificed one third of its territory
and a great deal of its resources and has acknowledged
the separation of the South. It had expected the
international community to appreciate the resulting
economic repercussions in terms of loss of resources.

Despite the economic difficulties that we are
experiencing because of this courageous decision on
the part of my country, we are implementing the Doha
Document and honouring our obligations with regard to
the implementation of that agreement. We are providing
all of the wire transfers to the Darfur Regional
Authority, so that we can expedite the implementation
and thereby comply with the timelines.

Hence, if the implementation is behind schedule,
the Security Council should have been aware of
this. However, that fact was not included in the draft
resolution just adopted.

Many of the provisions of the draft resolution
refer to tribal violence in Darfur and to violations
of international humanitarian law. Perhaps we have
brought to the attention of the Council the fact that
conflict in Darfur has deep roots in history. We had
therefore expected that we would find in the resolution
some paragraphs that commended and welcomed the
efforts of the Government of the Sudan to achieve
reconciliation in many of the tribal conflicts in Darfur,
because the Government was able to reach many
agreements that ended numerous tribal conflicts.

On the contrary, however, many of the paragraphs
of the resolution state the opposite of the truth. Some
of the paragraphs refer to hurdles being placed in the
way of the Panel of Experts; it comes as a surprise to
us that the Government of the Sudan should be putting
such hurdles in the way of the Panel. Here the Council
is referring to one person who has not received an entry
visa; he is the finance expert, and his name is Ghassan
Schbley.

The Security Council is well aware that the same
issue existed with regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005). That person was
not allowed to enter the Sudan and was listed as a
persona non grata before he was appointed to the Panel
of Experts. Before that, we had communicated to the
Committee and the Council that he was on the persona
non grata list, and we had asked that he be replaced - as
if the United Nations cannot find a replacement expert.
Every single time, the United Nations comes up with
the same request as with regard to Ghassan Schbley.
That is why there are so many paragraphs on our lack of
cooperation. That individual was not allowed because
he crossed a line, which should not be tolerated. We
are a sovereign country. He used to work for the United
Nations on Somalia and Eritrea, and at the time of that
mandate made mistakes that infringed on our national
security. This is the reason, and it is well known to
the Council. The resolution should not have referred
to hurdles imposed by the Government due only to a
single individual who could easily have been replaced
by another expert.

Furthermore, with regard to the monitoring of the
arms embargo, we have many reservations concerning
references that impinge upon our legitimate rights.
As a sovereign nation we are committed to defending
our territory. With regard to our commitments under
resolution 1591 (2005), there should be no contradiction
of our rights pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations to defend our sovereignty and protect our
citizens.

In addition, as all members of the Council are no
doubt aware, one of the reasons for the delay in the
implementation of the Doha Document has been the
action of movements that reject peace, especially the
wing of the Justice and Equality Movement led by
Jibril Ibrahim, which assassinated the head of another
faction, Mr. Mohamed Bashar, and 10 of his team just
because they joined the Doha peace agreement. We
expected the resolution to contain a paragraph very
clearly condemning that crime in strict terms. The head
of a factional movement was assassinated because he
joined the peace process! Instead we find very vague
language, which is a great source of disappointment, as
we had other expectations of the resolution.

In conclusion, I do not wish to go on much longer,
but we need to set the record straight. The Government
of the Sudan has taken the unique step of appointing a
senior official, General Mohammad Mustafa Al-Dabi,
to lead a committee established precisely to implement
resolution 1591 (2005). The committee is tasked with
coordinating the implementation of resolution 1591
(2005) and includes all of the relevant officials from
various Ministries, such as the Ministry of the Interior,
to complete that task. We challenge the Council to refer
to a single case where we have obstructed the Panel of
Experts or refused any of its members an entry visa,
except for the person I already mentioned for the
reasons I outlined.

We strongly object to the reference to obstacles
because we have been very cooperative with the Panel
of Experts. Our cooperation has even included the
establishment of a high-level committee headed by
a senior official to facilitate the implementation of
resolution 1591 (2005). Itherefore hope that the Council
will review and reconsider the wording regarding our
cooperation or lack thereof.

I also hope that the Council will exert pressure on
those movements opposing peace. As I already said,
those movements are not only fighting in Darfur. The
Darfur rebel movements that oppose peace have moved
from Darfur to South Kordofan and North Kordofan
states. They are now in the heart of the Sudan. Council
members heard Mr. Herve Ladsous state from this
very seat in previous deliberations on the Sudan that
the movements opposing peace in Darfur were now
participating in the fighting in South Sudan. I ask the
Council to clarify its position vis-a-vis that situation.

