Lieutenant General Prakash: I shall first answer
the question posed by the representative of Guatemala
about what can be done with the feedback provided by
the Force Commanders.

I think that the Council can do a lot. There are a
number of players who have a role to play in the feedback
that is provided by the Force Commanders. Because
there are a number of players to act on the feedback
that is provided, the chain is long. In the military
component, the frequency with which it changes is very
high; it is somewhere between six and 12 months. Thus,
unless that time gap is cut down, the feedback provided
by the Force Commander is of no use. My request for
the support that the Council can give is to reduce that
time gap, which will help the Force Commander.

As to the question that was raised regarding the
flexibility or rigidity of standards, when one has real
standards there is definitely a tendency for rigidity to
creep in. But my request is that it not be considered in
that light. It should be considered from the viewpoint
that standards provide us with capability, and that
flexibility is the state ofmind with which these standards
should be used to one's own advantage. If there are no
national caveats, there is an inbuilt flexibility in the
memorandum of understandings. The standards that
are laid down by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations can only help us to perform better.

There was another question about the issues to which
common military standards can apply. In fact, there is
a wide range of facets to be addressed in that regard.
First and foremost, I would say, are force protection
measures. Various contingents come with varied types
of equipment and varied perceptions concerning force
protection. That is one issue that can be addressed. Even
with a small tactical activity like patrolling, different
nations have different ways and means of undertaking
it; even that is an area that could be addressed.

Some or most military contingents, having been
trained to fight wars and not to keep peace, do not
understand the implications ofjoint assessment teams
and joint protection teams, or what kind of role the
military has to play in them. That is another area where
standardization can be undertaken. Another area is
the gathering of analyses of information. That, I feel,
is a major facet where the standardization of military
contingents can be brought in.

