Mr. Swe (Myanmar): I wish to commend you,
Mr. President, for the initiative in holding an open
debate on the issue of children and armed conflict, an
issue that is given high importance by my Government.
I wish also to thank you for the opportunity to speak in
the debate.

Myanmar has gone through more than four
decades of insurgency and has recently emerged from a
situation of armed conflict with the return to the legal
fold of 17 major insurgent groups. Only a few fringe
insurgent groups such as the Karen National Union
(KNU), Karenni National Progressive Party and Shan
State Army-South still continue to take up arms against
the Government and engage in terrorist activities
against the population. Except for counter-insurgency
operations against these insurgent groups, major
military campaigns are no longer conducted in my
country. The Government is able to bring about peace
and security in almost all corners of Myanmar.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2007/757)
reflected some, but not all, of the important activities
undertaken by the Government of Myanmar to prevent
the recruitment of child soldiers. In spite of the
commitment made by the Government at the highest
level that no child under 18 years will be recruited into
the military, and despite the concrete steps taken by my
Government - some of which are reflected in the
Secretary-General's reports S/2007/666 and
S/2007/757 - we are greatly disappointed that the
Myanmar national army, Tatmadaw Kyi, is still listed
in Annex 1 of the Secretary-General's latest report. I
strongly urge that Tatmadaw Kyi be taken off of the
list.

Let me again reiterate that Myanmar's military is
an all-volunteer army and that, under the defence
services act and relevant regulations, the minimum age
for recruitment is 18 years old. In order to prevent
under-age children who lie about their age from getting
into the military, and in order to institute stringent
scrutiny and educate the public, the Government in
2004 set up a high-level committee to prevent
recruitment of under-age children. The committee is
headed by the Secretary One of the State Peace and
Development Council, who is also the Adjutant-
General of the Armed Forces. The Government is
implementing stringent scrutiny at the recruitment
stage, at the training stage and even after the training
period.

As a result of strict scrutiny, between February
2007 and January 2008 some 962 under-age persons
were rejected during the recruitment stage. Between
2004 and January 2008, 172 people who had slipped
through the initial scrutiny were discharged from the
military. Between 2002 and January 2008, disciplinary
action was taken against 44 military personnel who
failed to strictly abide by the recruitment criteria.

We are also closely cooperating with the United
Nations country team in Myanmar, including UNICEF.
We have drawn up a plan of action and have regularly
provided updates to the United Nations country team
regarding the activities of the committee, including
detailed information on under-age children who were
discharged, and disciplinary action was taken against
military recruiters who contravened regulations.
As part of the cooperation with the United
Nations, since 2004 we have invited the United
Nations resident coordinator and the UNICEF
representative to visit the recruitment centres, training
facilities and military establishments. We have also
invited the Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF and,
more recently, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to Myanmar. During the Special
Representative's visit, we agreed to cooperate in the
establishment of a monitoring and reporting
mechanism within the framework of Security Council
resolution 1612 (2005), and we appointed the Director-
General of the Ministry of Social Welfare as the focal
point. Those developments were reflected in the
aforementioned reports of the Secretary-General. Most
recently, at the suggestion of the Special
Representative, the Director-General of International
Organizations in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was
nominated as an additional focal point for
implementing the resolution 1612 (2005).

Education is an important element in addressing
the issue of child soldiers. The end of the conflict in
former insurgency areas has enabled the Government
to build hundreds of schools in those areas.
Additionally, in order to educate military personnel,
police personnel, staff members of relevant ministries
and the general public, the Government, actively
assisted by the UNICEF, has conducted a number of
seminars and workshops. In November and December
2007 4 workshops and seminars were held, in which
both World Vision and Save the Children took active
part. They were followed by a number of multiplier
courses in various states and divisions. Public
awareness campaigns have been intensified to educate
the general public.

We see some improvement in the report of the
Secretary-General. We noted that it now includes the
situation of children in Lebanon, Iraq and Afghanistan.
But for some inexplicable reason the groups that are
clearly mentioned in the body of the report for
recruiting child soldiers and wounding children in
those situations were not listed in the annexes. We
would strongly urge objectivity and fairness in treating
all situations that affect children in armed conflict.

The Secretary-General's report mentioned that
United Nations country teams are primary sources of
information for the report and that the information in
the report is gathered, vetted and verified for accuracy.
This certainly is not the case with regard to allegations

concerning Tatmadaw Kyi and the insurgent groups
that have returned to the legal fold. In contrast, the
remaining insurgent groups are given undue favourable
treatment.

We are greatly disturbed that in the annex to the
report Tatmadaw Kyi is falsely described. I quote,
"This party has also been responsible for the killing
and maiming and denial of humanitarian access to
children in the reporting period." This is added despite
the admission in the report that "these reports,
however, cannot be confirmed". In view of this, I
would like to urge that this reference to Tatmadaw Kyi
be deleted.

The issue of protection of children in general and
children in armed conflict in particular is too important
to be politicized. It is in this spirit that I find
objectionable the unfounded allegations made earlier in
the morning, some of which have even found their way
into the report. These allegations have crept into the
report because of lack of cooperation with the Member
Government. To resolve the issue of children and
armed conflict, cooperation with the Government is
most crucial. In fact, resolution 1612 (2005) clearly
stipulated that the monitoring and reporting
mechanisms must operate with the participation of and
in cooperation with the national Government. It also
stipulates that any dialogue with non-State armed
groups must be conducted in the context of peace
processes where they exist and in the cooperation
framework between the United Nations and the
concerned Government.

That has not been the case with regard to
Myanmar. Cooperation needs transparency. On the
ground, we have a close working relationship with the
United Nations country team. In fact, to be transparent,
the United Nations country team has volunteered to
share its report. We are disturbed that, owing to the
objection by the Office of the Special Representative,
the United Nations country team was unable to do so.
Let me stress that it is only through cooperation and
partnership and acting transparently that we can
address the issue of children and armed conflict.
In this spirit, my delegation will continue to
cooperate with the Security Council Working Group.
Here, I wish to express our support for the View
expressed earlier that more transparency and
improvement in the Group's working methods would
certainly enhance its effectiveness.
Let me close by once again reiterating our
commitments made at the highest level that no one
under 18 years of age will be recruited into the
Myanmar armed forces. I wish also to inform the
Council that the six armed groups that have come back
to the legal fold - the Democratic Karen Buddhist
Army, Kachin Independence Army, Karenni National
People's Liberation Front, Myanmar National
Democratic Alliance Army, Karen National Union-
Karen National Liberation Army Peace Council and the
United Wa State Army - have committed themselves
and openly declared that they will not recruit child
soldiers.

The Government of Myanmar will continue its
cooperation with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Coomaraswamy, whose
integrity and fairness we hold in high esteem. We will
intensify our cooperation with the United Nations
country team in general and UNICEF in particular.
Together we will work for the protection and
promotion of children.

