Mr. Heinbecker (Canada): Thank you, Sir, for
providing this opportunity for the Security Council to
discuss the very dangerous situation that prevails in the
Middle East.

The Government of Canada is deeply concerned
about the escalation in fighting between Israelis and
Palestinians. We call on both sides to do their part to
end the violence which has caused so many injuries
and so much death.

The cycle of action and reaction-which has
been so appallingly in evidence again today and in the
past few days in Israel and the West Bank and Gaza,
and which has exposed civilians, including children, to
such terrible risk and harm-must be stopped. We
offer our condolences to the families of the victims.

Each side has an obligation to protect civilians.
This imperative cuts both ways: civilians must not be
made targets, nor must civilians engage in hostilities
and provoke, or expose themselves to, a forceful
response.

I wish to be perfectly clear: we condemn all the
violence. We hold both sides responsible for ending it.
The Palestinian Authority must do everything in its
power to prevent terrorist attacks from occurring.
According to the draft resolution on terrorism adopted
today by the Sixth Committee of the General
Assembly, "all acts, methods and practices of
terrorism" are "criminal and unjustifiable, wherever
and by whomsoever committed". Canada condemns all
such terrorist attacks, and we invite all parties wanting
peace also to condemn such attacks.

For its part, the Government of Israel must do
everything in its power to restrain its forces, to use
proportionate force and to refrain from escalation.

Canada believes that the best chance for a
de-escalation of the situation lies in the prompt
implementation of the understandings reached at Sharm
el-Sheikh. In that context, Canada expects that the fact-
finding committee, as agreed to by Prime Minister
Barak and Chairman Arafat at Sharm el-Sheikh, to be
launched promptly and to carry out its crucial work in a
timely fashion. We welcome the meetings planned for
the next days and urge that the committee's work be
facilitated.

Canada also supports the Council mandate given
to the Secretary-General to explore options with the
parties, including an observer presence, possibly
building on the work of the fact-finding committee. It
is in the interests of peace that the Secretary-General
be given the full opportunity to explore these options
and to pursue his contacts with the parties and others.

Canada would support any international effort,
agreed to by both parties, that would help in easing
tensions. Now is the time for the international
community to come together in support of peace. If
ever there were a time for diplomacy and dialogue, it is
now.

