Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We
congratulate Nigeria on its initiative in arranging
today's briefing. Ebola was and remains a truly global
threat. It is fitting that the Security Council was, and
has remained, involved in dealing with that threat and
in ensuring international preparedness in dealing with
any recurrence of Ebola or of any other deadly disease
of similar proportions. We would like to thank all the
briefers for their statements, which, among other other
things, described the range and depth of the responses
to last year's outbreak at the international, regional,
national and community levels.

The Secretary-General's establishment of the
United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response
(UNMEER) was a new and appropriate reaction as the
first-ever United Nations emergency health mission.
In part, it came in response to the Council's call, in
resolution 2177 (2014), for a comprehensive response
to the epidemic. We would like to acknowledge the
leadership of the United States in the adoption of that
resolution and in the mobilization of the international
response. We also want to acknowledge the terrible
human toll wrought on the affected States of West
Africa, and the enormous amount of work they and
their peoples did to bring the outbreak under control.
New Zealand joined the international response, giving
to the trust fund and deploying medical personnel
to Sierra Leone to work alongside their British and
Australian counterparts. We also worked with Pacific
nations to enhance their preparedness to respond to an
Ebola outbreak.

Thankfully, the outbreak in West Africa has now
been contained and rolled back. That is rightly cause
for considerable satisfaction. However, the Council
should not miss the opportunity to learn from the
UNMEER experience, both its successes and mistakes.
Others have spoken extensively on the crisis and the
global response, and we endorse their views and
assessments. There are four additional points I would
like to emphasize.

First, preparations should be made to ensure rapid,
focused reactions to future health threats. International
responses drawing on all relevant frameworks, such
as the International Health Regulations, must be
coordinated across regions, particularly where cross-
border transmission is occurring. The speed in this
instance with which a United Nations trust fund was
mobilized, and its lower administration costs, should be
a benchmark for establishing funds where urgent action
is required in future. The report of the Ebola Interim
Assessment Panel of the World Health Organization
(WHO) on the WHO response is a positive step towards
ensuring that we learn as many lessons as possible from
the Ebola outbreak, so that future health responses are
quicker, more effective and better coordinated.

Secondly, the rapid and far-ranging nature of
the outbreak caused widespread fear across the
globe. We should remind ourselves that such fear,
although understandable, should not drive States to
impose unhelpful, and ultimately counterproductive,
restrictions on movement during pandemics, other than
those in line with the International Health Regulations.
While a crisis can be intense for a number of countries,
or even a subregion, in a continent as large and diverse
as Africa, calibrated approaches to restrictions are
often called for. We applaud those countries that took
steps to reopen borders and reinstate air links as safely
and quickly as possible.

Thirdly, we recognize that the logistical burden of
mounting a large international response in a short period
can be heavy and a severe strain on local systems. Close
coordination amoang responding countries is vital.
Our own experience demonstrated the value of having
country responses led by a single donor as part of the
wider WHO-coordinated response. At the same time,
the roles of the Economic Community of West African
States and the African Union were vitally important in
coordinating among States within the subregion most
affected by the outbreak.

Fourthly, the international community, particularly
the United Nations system, must maintain support to
affected areas in order to avoid any further resurgence.
The progress in developing vaccines is very encouraging,
but we must also acknowledge that the next health crisis
could come from an as-yet unidentified threat. In our
region, preparedness undertaken in the context of the
Ebola outbreak to respond infectious diseases will have
long-lasting effects for the Pacific's ability to combat
other emerging health threats.

Lastly, I would again like to commend Nigeria
for taking the initiative to arrange today's briefing. It
has done us a great service both in marking a situation
that posed a very real threat to regional and potentially
global security and in providing an opportunity for
reflection on how we, the international community,
dealt with that challenge and can do better in the future.

