Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Bosnia
and Herzegovina highly appreciates this debate on
civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict. We thank
Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno for his briefing. We
commend the Senior Advisory Group under his
leadership, which provided the Secretary-General with
important advice on how to better develop, recruit and
rapidly deploy civilian expertise, in close cooperation
with national authorities, in order to meet the urgent
needs of post-conflict countries. We welcome setting
up the Steering Group and the appointment of
Ms. Susana Malcorra to provide strategic oversight,
views and advice on follow-up and implementation of
the review. Of course, we thank Ms. Malcorra and the
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador
Gasana, for their remarks today.
The debate on institution-building during the
Bosnia and Herzegovina presidency in January (see S/PV.6472) emphasized the critical role of national
ownership in peacebuilding and of drawing on existing
national expertise to support the development of
national capacity. We are convinced that enhancing the
capacity of national institutions should be seen as a
core issue of peacebuilding and that this process is
among the most relevant steps towards improving the
United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding
performance.

We emphasize that building accountable,
legitimate and resilient institutions should be a
strategic objective from the early stages of a
peacebuilding process. Priority has to be given to the
development of those institutions that will prevent
relapse into conflict, progressively reduce dependence
on the international community's capacities, and
promote self-reliance by creating stable, viable and
responsive domestic institutions.

In the past, we have seen how the international
community has, in particular cases, faced challenges
and difficulties in promoting the national capacities
necessary for an enduring peace in a post-conflict
environment. The civilian aspects of post-conflict
peacebuilding often lag behind police and military
efforts in given settings.

We support recommendations on prioritizing
national capacities and providing expertise tailored and
adapted to the specific needs of a post-conflict country.
Strengthening national ownership of peace processes
by supporting core Government functions, such as aid
coordination and policy management, is essential.
Nurturing national capacities can contribute to
improving the economic impact of various
international interventions and achieving sustainable
peace. The co-location of international experts is
desirable when needed and where appropriate.

The issue of civilian capacity is of a cross-cutting
nature. We are of the View that it provides an
opportunity for improving cooperation with Member
States in this area. Creating an effective mechanism for
cooperation will enable peacekeeping operations or
political missions to draw upon the civilian capacities
of Member States or regional organizations while the
United Nations acts as a platform for qualified
expertise. It should contribute to better matching needs
with capacities. Nevertheless, the United Nations needs
to work more on better coordinating its activities with
Member States in order to make more efficient use of
existing capacity. Improving guidance on enabling
capacity-building and improving training resources is
especially important. Planning processes need to
include host Government views, expertise and
priorities from the outset.

It is necessary to clarify roles and responsibilities
with regard to the lead responsibility for the
development and deployment of civilian expertise in
core peacebuilding sectors. We believe it crucial to
harmonize overlapping mandates and various policy
perspectives with a view to providing agile and more
relevant United Nations support.

Responding to changing circumstances requires
greater flexibility in everyday operations in the field.
To that end, getting the right people to the right places
at the right time is an imperative and requires the
system to define areas of responsibility and
accountability. The United Nations must ensure that
planning processes have sufficient capacities to
adequately address gender issues. The participation of
women and their inclusion in all processes is of the
utmost importance.

Although some recommendations from this
review can be easily and quickly implemented, we are
fully aware that a number of them will require more
detailed elaboration and certain organizational reform.
We support the application of recommendations related
to national ownership, capacity-building and lessons
learned in order to achieve a practical difference on the
ground.

Work in conflict-affected areas entails the
transformation of United Nations structures, using
lessons learned, drawing on the expertise of Member
States and other bodies, and innovative methods of
work for mandate delivery and operational success.
Greater flexibility and better responsiveness to
nationally identified priorities are indispensable. While
the United Nations is the most legitimate agent of the
international community, civilian capacity is
undoubtedly an integral part therefore.

The United Nations, Member States, international
organizations and donors must do more in order to
increase flexibility, efficiency and the impact of our
common efforts in post-conflict settings. Designing
adequate responses, choosing the right mix of
instruments at the right time, allocating resources
based on comparative advantage and the search for
optimal solutions never end. Finally, responsive
civilian capacity is a shared responsibility in
supporting and building durable peace.

