Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
first to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting of the Security Council so speedily. Allow me
also to welcome the presence of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and to thank him for his statement.

Since 27 December 2008, Israeli war planes have
been continuously raiding the Gaza Strip. This has led

to more than 2,000 casualties, many of whom are
women and children. Furthermore, buildings, including
homes, schools and mosques, are being destroyed with
people inside them.

This past Saturday, the Security Council held an
urgent meeting. An understanding was reached by the
Council, expressed in a statement on Sunday morning.
Since then, we have continued to call for a ceasefire,
the opening of crossings to Gaza, the meeting of the
humanitarian needs of the Palestinian people and the
protection of civilians.

Israel, at this very moment, continues to
perpetrate its aggression, an aggression that comes on
the heels of more than 18 months of a suffocating siege
against Gaza, during which Israel prevented any
medical or other essential supplies from reaching Gaza.
This is a flagrant breach of international humanitarian
law. It represents a policy of collective punishment,
and it has been followed up by a policy of collective
killing of the Palestinian people.

The continuing deterioration of the situation in
Gaza serves no one's interests. It will have serious
consequences and will result in more extremism and
violence in the region. There will be less of an
opportunity to reach a just and comprehensive peace.

The Council of the League of Arab States has
taken up this grave situation at the ministerial level. It
took a decision today strongly condemning Israeli
aggression against the Gaza Strip, demanding that
Israel instantly cease all military activities in the area
and condemning Israel for its blockade against the
Palestinian people in Gaza, which has led to a grave
deterioration of the humanitarian situation. Israel is
directly responsible for this situation and is called upon
to put an end to it.

The Council of the Arab League also stressed the
need to continue to provide urgent humanitarian
assistance to the Gaza Strip and support to
international humanitarian organizations. We appeal to
those organizations to shoulder their responsibilities
vis-a-vis Palestinian civilians in Gaza in the light of
Israeli violations of international humanitarian law. We
call on the high contracting parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention to convene a meeting of the parties
to ensure the implementation of their decisions of 2001
and of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

The Security Council is called upon today to take

the necessary measures to compel Israel to instantly

cease all military activities in the Gaza Strip and allow

the entry of humanitarian assistance to Gaza. The

Council is also called upon to shoulder its

responsibilities for the maintenance of international

peace and security and to ensure the humanitarian
protection of the Palestinian people.

How can the Security Council condone the daily
killing of hundreds of people? How can it remain silent
while Israeli raids are killing human beings and
20

destroying buildings? Where is the international
community? The Security Council has a responsibility.
The credibility of the international community is about
to dissolve as a barrage of ammunition continues to
strike the Gaza Strip.

