Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank the Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Cheikh Tidiane Sy, for his statement,
which clearly sets out the current situation in the
Central African Republic. I should like also to thank
for their statements Mr. Frederick Lyons, Acting
Deputy Director of the Regional Bureau for Africa of
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
and Mr. Mats Karlsson, Vice-President for External
Affairs and United Nations Affairs of the World Bank.
IfI may, I should like also to pay tribute in particular
to Mr. Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Mauritius, for his presence
and for his particularly wise statement.

Undeniable progress has been achieved in the
past four years and continues to be achieved, thanks to
the presence of the United Nations in the Central
African Republic. Recent achievements include
disarmament and the restructuring of security forces.

The Central African Republic, situated as it is in
one of the most unstable and fragile regions of Africa,
is undoubtedly one of the success stories ofthe United
Nations in the past few years. Nevertheless, the
situation in the Central African Republic remains
unstable and fragile. The breakdown in the political
dialogue, the recurrent strikes and the economic
difficulties that have been mentioned are all causes of
concern.

The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo can explain these difficulties to some extent, but
it does not explain the entire situation. France, along
with the other members of the Council, would like to
know, as soon as possible, the results of the mission
carried out by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Amara Essy, who last December went to
assess the consequences of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on the situation in
the Central African Republic.

These tensions threaten the process of civil peace
and national reconciliation that was initiated four years
ago and which led to the signing, in January 1997, of
the Bangui Agreements. It is, unfortunately, the Central
African people who would be the primary victims of
any return to the dark years of 1996 and 1997. But the
international community itself would stand to lose a
great deal were the process of reconciliation in the
Central African Republic to be blocked.

Four years of intense efforts are at stake: those of
the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Banguie Agreements, until April
1998; those of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic; and, finally, those of the
United Nations Peace-Building Support Office in the
Central African Republic, since February 2000. These
efforts enabled the Central African Republic to
appear - and I paraphrase the words of the Secretary-
General in a previous report - as an island of relative
stability in a war-torn region.

To emerge from this difficult situation in the
Central African Republic, two complementary types of
efforts are required. The first area continuing
international assistance, which is indispensable. We
can thus only be gratified at the decision of the World
Bank to disburse to second tranche of $5 million of the
fiscal consolidation credit. The International Monetary
Fund's recent decision on the reduction of indebtedness
is also a step in the right direction.

I am gratified at this opportunity to share our
views with eminent representatives of the United
Nations Development Programme and the World Bank.
I believe this is a good example, which we should
follow on other occasions. The Security Council must
increasingly serve as the forum to craft integrated
strategies for peace-building.

There should be no pause either in bilateral
assistance. The commitments undertaken here in New
York in May 2000 must be honoured in full. France, for
its part, has fully honoured the pledges it made in 2000
and will continue to honour all of its commitments.
France is the principal bilateral donor, accounting for
more than 18 per cent of total official development
assistance. In terms of civilian operations, this
represents $18 million in 2000. More than 82
volunteers are present in the field.

Among its main projects in military cooperation,
France has helped to equip two companies of the
Central African army, one in Bouar, the other in Bria.
Work has begun to deploy a third motorized police unit
in Bambari. The principal objective of these
decentralization efforts is to achieve security and the
revival of economic activity in the provinces of the
Central African Republic.

International assistance, however, is not all that is
required. The second focus of efforts must be civil
peace. Peace-building has now replaced peacekeeping.
Central Africans are once again fully in charge of their
own fate. France entirely agrees with the assessment
made by the Secretary-General in his report that
"It is up to the Central Africans themselves to
summon the political will and work towards
national reconciliation". (S/2001/35, para. 36)

Among all the political actors who must
participate in that national reconciliation, the Central
African authorities have a particular responsibility. It is
incumbent on them above all to make decisions
conducive to allaying existing tensions. Two measures
are of the highest priority. First, the dialogue with the
opposition must be revived and, secondly, all arrears of
wages must be paid as soon as the budget permits.
From this perspective, the Government's
announcement that, as of February, it intends to repay
all arrears from the year 2000 is good news. Similarly,
the release in early January of 62 detainees held since
the banned rally of 19 December was another positive
signal. We hope that, in light of recent tensions,
structural reform will resume, beginning with reform of
public finances in order to stabilize the financing of the
civil administration.

It is in this spirit of peace-building that the
Security Council's dialogue with the Central African
authorities must continue. The presence here today of a
high-level representative of the Central African
authorities, Minister Agba Otikpo Mezode, is
particularly welcome and I welcome him very warmly
here today.

