Mrs. Blokar Drobic (Slovenia): I would like to
start by thanking Japan for taking the initiative to
convene this open debate, as well as for preparing a very
comprehensive concept note (see S/2017/1016, annex).

Slovenia would like to align itself with the
statement delivered earlier by the delegation of the
European Union and would like to add a few remarks in
our national capacity.

Long-standing and newly emerging security
challenges are not only significantly impacting
international peace and security; they are also
challenging our fundamental values and principles as
enshrined in the United Nations Charter.

Slovenia welcomes the considerable engagement
in conflict-prevention issues at the United Nations and
the fact that the surge in diplomacy for peace is one of
the key priorities of the Secretary-General. We support
the proposals outlined aimed at better addressing the
changing security environment, including by bridging
the gaps between United Nations political affairs
and peacekeeping.

We agree that any reform measures need to
acknowledge the interconnectedness of the three
pillars of the United Nations and create greater synergy
among them. In this context, Slovenia believes that the
Security Council needs to better integrate peacekeeping
with development and humanitarian efforts. The United
Nations, together with its Member States, regional
organizations, non-governmental organizations and
civil-society actors, must do more to support fragile
countries, especially by helping them to enhance their
society's resilience and security architecture.

We recognize the need to better utilize mediation
efforts, including through regional organizations and
local communities. Ending impunity for the most
serious international crimes is equally crucial. We
stress the importance of effective cooperation with the
International Criminal Court and call upon States that
have not yet done so to ratify the Rome Statute.

We have noted increased political will to consider
water scarcity as a potential driver of conflict,
as also shown during the Security Council open
debate organized by Senegal in November last year
(see S/PV.7818).

Allow me to recall the highly relevant work of the
Global High-level Panel on Water and Peace, which is
chaired by the former President of Slovenia, Mr. Danilo
Tiirk. The Panel launched its report, together with a
range of concrete recommendations, on preventing
water-related conflict and leveraging water as an
instrument of peace. In addition, regional cooperation
is vital in removing the issue of water as a potential
cause of conflicts or as a risk amplifier.

Slovenia's positive experience in the region of the
Western Balkans demonstrates how water can become a
source of stability and cooperation. We believe that the
successful practices in the region, for example in the
Sava River Basin, could be used as a model of water-
related cooperation elsewhere in the world.

An important aspect of conflict prevention is also
a global commitment to ending hunger. In this regard,
Slovenia is raising awareness of the key role of bees
and other pollinators in global food security, and we
are particularly pleased that just today the General
Assembly adopted resolution 72/211, on World Bee Day.

Slovenia will continue to support activities aimed
at raising awareness of the various aspects and wide
range of contemporary challenges to international
peace and security. We hope that the Security Council
will continue to address these challenges, including in
its adopted documents.

