Mr. Pedersen (Norway): I have the privilege of
speaking on behalf of the Nordic countries, namely,
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my own
country, Norway.

Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) and
subsequent resolutions, such as resolution 2325 (2016),
supplement agreements on disarmament and on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD). It fills a critical gap in terms of preventing
non-State actors, notably terrorist groups, from
developing, acquiring, manufacturing, possessing,
transporting, transferring or using nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons and their means of delivery.
The resolution's continued relevance is underscored
by recent reports of use of chemical weapons in Iraq
and Syria.

Efforts to prevent non-State actors, including
terrorists, from acquiring and using weapons of mass
destruction is an ongoing process. Hence, we agree
with the President's view that the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) is a long-term task. It requires
the continued vigilance and active participation of all
relevant stakeholders, such as States Members of the
United Nations, relevant international and regional
organizations, the private sector and other civil-society
partners. Our efforts must be dynamic. New threats are
emerging, such as cyberthreats relating to weapons of
mass destruction. The biological and chemical sectors
require more attention, as significant gaps remain there
as well.

It is crucial that we take into account the rapid pace
of technological development. Technological advances
may, on the one hand, facilitate our efforts to implement
resolution 1540 (2004), but new technologies may
also lead to new threats. It is therefore important that
we continuously update our tool box for combating
WMD terrorism. That must be an important task for
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), as well as for the Council
itself during its regular deliberations on WMD-related
issues. States that have the necessary legislation and
enforcement measures in place are better placed to
benefit from ongoing technological advances. Hence,
the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) also
contributes to social and economic progress.

The comprehensive review of resolution 1540
(2004), undertaken last year, showed that considerable
progress has been made in both the outreach and the
implementation of the resolution. Initial reporting from
Member States has clearly improved, but progress
has been uneven. We need to do more to ensure that
domestic legislation and enforcement measures are
adequate for addressing the current challenges. That
is primarily a national responsibility, but the Nordic
countries recognize the need for international support
and assistance, and we provide such support in
various ways.

Since its adoption by the Security Council,
resolution 1540 (2004) has become more firmly
anchored within the United Nations system and is
complemented by work under relevant multilateral
treaties. Such extensive ownership is crucial, since
no nation is immune to WMD terrorism. Over the
past decade, a broader international architecture of
initiatives and partnerships has emerged to fight WMD
terrorism. It is of the greatest importance that all such
efforts be mutually supportive.

The Nordic countries are active in the broader
partnership. We have contributed financially to
the Secretariat's work on resolution 1540 (2004).
At the latest Nuclear Security Summit, held in
Washington, DC, in 2016, individual Nordic countries
made national pledges, such as working towards
minimizing the use of highly enriched uranium in the
civilian sector and enhancing the nuclear-detection
architecture. We are also engaged in long-standing
technical cooperation with several countries on both
nuclear safety and nuclear security. Other examples
of relevant cooperation projects include the training
of chemists from developing countries and assisting
States in building their capacity to prevent and counter
biological threats.

Resolution 1540 (2004) is clearly a key component
of the international security architecture. We must all
strive towards its full and global implementation.

