Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first to welcome the presence of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Kingdom of
Spain, Mr. Alfonso Dastis Quecedo, and to congratulate
the Spanish presidency on drawing attention once again
to the great importance of and growing concern raised
by the risks of the proliferation of weapons of mass

destruction across the world, particularly when they are
in the hands of non-State actors.

We are pleased to see the leadership shown by
Spain, particularly by Ambassador Oyarzun, in
forming the Group of Friends of Resolution 1540
(2004)- and Panama was a part of that initiative - as
well to congratulate Spain on achieving resolution 2325
(2016), which was adopted today by consensus here
in the Council and which my country co-sponsored
with a View to contributing to improving the effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

Panama is fully committed to strengthening the
disarmament and non-proliferation regime, regardless
of who may possess such weapons and their delivery
systems, because we believe that they constitute in and
of themselves an ongoing threat to peace, security and
humankind itself. We are honoured to belong to the
first nuclear-weapon-free zone, which was instituted in
Latin America and the Caribbean in 1969 through the
entry into force of the Treaty of Tlatelolco.

That commitment to non-proliferation was ratified
in 1999, when Panama acceded to the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, which is a key piece in the
disarmament and non-proliferation architecture. Twenty
years after its adoption, there is still an urgent need
for its universalization and entry into force through a
compromise reached by all States without exception. In
that regard, I am pleased to share that Panama has been
elected Chairperson of the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty Organization Preparatory Commission
for 2017, and in that capacity we will push for the
Convention's entry into force.

We pay particular attention to resolution 1540
(2014) because, as stated in the concept note before us
(see S/2016/1013, annex), it is currently the only legally
binding instrument available to us in the multilateral
structure, and in our case it is of high value to promote
strategic and secure trade and investments that avoid
having chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
material diverted to non-State actors for criminal
purposes. Panama does not produce, import, handle
and store nuclear weapons or other weapons of mass
destruction, but we are fully aware of the emerging
trends in the proliferation of scientific and technological
advances and in international trade and of their greater
democratization, which makes them more vulnerable
to the risk of possession and exploitation by non-State
actors. That is why Panama has just adopted and
strengthened practical measures at the global, regional
and national levels.

Given the importance of joint regional efforts and
their positive impact on the international community,
last September, alongside Spain, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the
Inter-American Committee against Terrorism of the
Organization of American States, Panama held a side
event to promote greater understanding of cooperation
in export control and how to promote safe and strategic
trade and investments by addressing the risk posed by
non-State actors in the collection, proliferation and
use of weapons of mass destruction. More recently, in
November, we organized a regional conference under
the rubric "Nuclear terrorism - a global challenge",
with the participation of some countries that are not
even from our region. The aim was to strengthen the
capabilities and cooperation we need to prevent, detect
and respond to nuclear terrorism. In 2017, my country
will assume the chairmanship of the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism, a platform we intend
to use to continue to strengthen the constructive and
cooperative work that we think is key to tackling this
terrible challenge.
At the national level, with a view to contributing to
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), we are
working on the effective regulation of dual-use material,
and we are also coming up with a national inter-agency
plan for prevention, preparedness and response with
regard to threats and incidents involving chemical,
biological, radioactive, nuclear and explosive agents.

We are also aware that our geographical position,
coasts on two oceans and the connection advantages
that Panama offers also pose a challenge when it comes
to security. We have worked to achieve a stronger
institutional structure and modern legislation that
enables us to prevent, combat and punish financing of
terrorism and financing of the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. Furthermore, Panama is part of
the Global Container Control Programme, an initiative
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and the World Customs Organization, which is being
implemented to enable sending international alerts and
to carry out joint operations to minimize the use of
containers at sea for illegal uses.

My Government strongly condemns the recent
nuclear tests. We have reiterated that the development
of weapons of mass destruction and their use are acts
against peace and international cooperation, which can
only aggravate tensions among countries and regions,
threaten their political stability and seriously jeopardize
peaceful coexistence between peoples.

Allow me to conclude by stressing that for my
country, it is an ethical imperative that we should live
in a world free of nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons, since their humanitarian impact is irreversible
and unquantifiable. We share the global responsibility
to progress towards a more peaceful and safer world
with a multidimensional approach to security tied to
human rights and development. The non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction through the effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is the
cornerstone for preventing disaster and for genuinely
sustainable development that guarantees a safer world.
The efforts of the Security Council and, even more,
the commitment of Member States are fundamental to
achieving a world free of the threat of radiation.

