Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): Allow me to
begin by thanking Mr. Mark Lowcock for his detailed
briefing, as usual.

Syria and its people are at a unique juncture, at
which the prospects for peace and stability are within
their grasp. As South Africa has stated previously, the
situation in Syria must be resolved through negotiations
and dialogue, and we continue to call on all parties
to exert every effort towards the full implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015). We see the recent launch
and first meeting of the long-awaited Constitutional
Committee in Geneva as an encouraging sign. However,
we must also remain cognizant of the impact of recent
developments along the Turkey-Syria border on the
progress achieved, both on the political track and on
the humanitarian situation.

South Africa remains gravely concerned about the
dire humanitarian situation in Syria and the negative
impact on the Syrian people of the recent hostilities.
Although we have noted the various peace agreements
and memorandums of understanding, and that the levels
of violence have decreased, clashes between parties
continue to further aggravate the dismal circumstances
that many civilians are already facing. The continued
threat of violence and destruction cannot be acceptable,
particularly with regard to the most vulnerable
members of society - women, children the elderly
and those with disabilities. South Africa reiterates
its call on all parties to comply with their obligations
under international law, particularly with regard to the
protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure.

The circumstances in which innocent civilians
find themselves behove us, as Security Council
members, to do more to ensure that their basic needs
and requirements are met. We must also ensure
that the recent developments in the north of Syria
do not jeopardize the United Nations cross-border
humanitarian operations. Let me take this opportunity
to pay tribute to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and its partners for the vital work
they do in challenging environments in order to ensure
that those in need receive the necessary, and in many
cases life-saving, assistance. The mandate for that
cross-border assistance is due for renewal at the end of
the year. South Africa will work with the co-penholders
and all interested parties to find common ground and
unity in that regard.

In conclusion, South Africa calls on all parties to
exercise the utmost restraint to ensure a de-escalation
ofhostilities, as well as for respect for Syria's territorial
integrity and sovereignty. We also look forward to
Special Envoy Pedersen's briefing on the progress
made in the work of the Constitutional Committee and
welcome the holding of the second round of talks at
the end of November. Every small step towards peace
and stability should be encouraged to the benefit of
all Syrians.

