Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you today,
Mr. Minister, as President of the Security Council.
We also congratulate Jordan on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council.

The General Assembly has designated the year
2014 the International Year of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People. The Russian Federation shares the
Secretary-General's belief that the year represents an
important stage in achieving the two-State solution
and stands ready to make every effort to ensure that
it becomes a reality. However, as in any quarrel, the
resolution of this out-dated dispute must be worked out
by the conflicting parties. We are carefully following
the Palestinian-Israeli settlement process, including
attempts - first and foremost by the United States
of America - to bring the parties towards an agreed
framework to define the future principles of the final
status solution.

Russia is in favour of a comprehensive, equitable,
long-term settlement to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
based on the well-known international framework
of the establishment of an integral, independent
Palestinian State within internationally recognized
borders, existing in peace and security with all of its
neighbours. Naturally, any solution must be acceptable
to both sides; imposed or inequitable solutions will
not last long. We continue to actively participate in
negotiations between the Palestinians and Israelis on a
bilateral or multilateral basis and, especially, within the
framework of the international mediators of the Middle
East Quartet.

In that context, we note the scaling-up of efforts at
the level of Special Representative, in which context the
most recent meeting took place in Paris on 12 January.
We believe that that meeting was most useful. It is our
continuing belief that the Quartet's efforts should also
draw upon the work of the League of Arab States. In
our contacts with Palestinians and Israelis, we continue
to urge both sides towards substantive negotiations on
all final status issues. In two days, my country will
welcome the President of Palestine, Mr. Mahmoud
Abbas, to Moscow.

We are extremely concerned regarding the situation
on the ground. Settlement construction continues,
effectively annulling even small good-will gestures,
such as the freeing of Palestinian detainees who had
been in Israeli prisons since the signing of the Oslo
accords. We are also concerned about continuing
raids by the Israeli military in the West Bank, which
have resulted in the killing and wounding of many
Palestinians, as well as rampant settler violence.

According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the number of Palestinians
evicted from homes that were demolished by Israel in
2013 totalled 1,100, representing a 25 per cent increase
over the previous year. We also adamantly condemn
the launching of rockets against Israeli territory,
whatever justification might be presented. Security
breaches along the Gaza Strip must cease. All of these
aggravating incidents are far from conducive to the
holding of negotiations.

The situation in the Gaza Strip is not improving; on
the contrary, the isolation of Gaza from the rest of the
world is growing, which only exacerbates the negative
social, economic and humanitarian consequences. The
problem of Gaza should be resolved comprehensively,
including through the full lifting of the Israeli blockade
and the restoration of a united administration in the
Palestinian territories. We remain convinced that
bridging the existing Palestinian split on the basis of
the Palestinian Authority's platform and the Arab Peace
Initiative would be in line with the aspirations for peace
for Israel and Palestine. Achieving a comprehensive
Palestinian-Israeli solution - and, even less likely,
consolidating its results - will clearly be impossible
without Palestinian unity.

We attach great significance to the launching
of talks between the Government of Syria and the
opposition, with the constructive assistance of the
international community. We support the Secretary-
General's responsible and principled approach in issuing
an invitation to participate in those efforts to all those
who could directly have an influence on the situation
in Syria, including Iran. Not ensuring the participation
of such key players would be an unforgivable error.
Those who would call into question that need are
clearly not interested in an equitable resolution of the
Syrian crisis. We call upon the National Coalition of
Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces, which
has decided to attend the Conference, and invite it
to cease the practice of imposing preconditions. We
find it unfortunate that the opposition delegation does
not include the participation of patriotic groups of
internal opponents, such as the National Coordination
Committee and a number of leading Kurdish groups,
which constitutes an attack on the credibility and the
representative nature of the opposition.

We would nevertheless like to note the intention
and full readiness of the Syrian Government to send
to Switzerland a representative and a fully mandated
delegation. We also note other measures taken by
Damascus, such as its response to the Russian appeal
concerning the humanitarian situation. That pertains
to the delivery of humanitarian goods in residential
areas in Guta and other areas, including Damascus
and Aleppo. In that regard, we have seen a willingness
to exchange civilians taken hostage by fighters in
exchange for prisoners in Government prisons. The
practical implementation of those measures requires
cooperation by the armed opposition in ensuring
safe access for humanitarian goods. We hope that the
Government, which has stood ready to do that, will be
met with similar steps by the opposition. We expect
that the pledges made in Kuwait will be honoured
soon. It is important that the United Nations streamline
the contributions and distribute the various types of
assistance that have been offered.

We continue to work tirelessly to bolster inter- Syrian
dialogue to finally put an end to the bloodshed, to stop
making Syria into a hotbed ofinternational and regional
terrorism, to ensure conditions for peace and calm,
and to ensure that the country retains its sovereign
territorial integrity and as a secular and an independent
State where all rights of ethnic and interreligious
groups are ensured.

