Mr. Yamamoto: The months since my most
recent briefing (see S/PV.7896) have been unusually
tense in Afghanistan. The deteriorating security
situation has brought to the surface underlying
political tensions. At the same time, the willingness
of the Government to take steps towards peace was
demonstrated by its successful holding in Kabul of
a meeting on regional peace and security earlier this
month, as well as the continuous implementation of the
political agreement with the former insurgent group
Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin). But without enhanced
efforts by the National Unity Government to increase
political inclusiveness, strengthen accountability and
improve the Government's credibility, particularly in
the security sector, we are likely to face more crises
in an increasingly fragile environment. The events of
the early morning of 20 June, when the Government's
attempt to remove the final protesters resulted in
violence, is a reminder of the need for caution, calm
and unity.

The most recent security and political crisis was
sparked by a terrorist bombing in Kabul's centre on
31 May. That was followed by large street demonstrations
protesting growing insecurity that turned violent,
followed by a suicide attack at the funeral of one of
those killed in the demonstrations. Chief Executive
Abdullah, Foreign Minister Rabbani and other senior
political officials were near the blasts at the funeral
but were thankfully unhurt. The political fault lines
that emerged are increasingly ethnic-based, which is
particularly worrying at a time when the Islamic State
is attempting to provoke sectarian strife in the country
through attacks against Shia Muslims.

During the anti-Government demonstrations on
2 June, we at the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) conducted extensive
outreach to leaders on all sides, particularly leaders of
political movements who were considering joining the
protests. We urged for restraint, warned of the negative
consequences that the loss of control would entail for
everyone and requested them to give time to allow their
grievances to be addressed without violence. Coupled
with the intensive efforts by the Government and
members of the diplomatic community, the immediate
risk of escalation was defused. We are grateful for the
subsequent acknowledgement from the Government
and political leaders outside the Government that
UNAMA's efforts contributed to calming the situation.
I remain concerned, however, that, without changes in
governance practices, we are likely to face future crises
that might be more difficult to contain.

What is the root of the problem? There have been
indications, since last summer, that Afghanistan's
broad political consensus is fraying. In recent months,
a growing number of political factions, some of whom
were formerly part of the National Unity Government
as well as a younger generation of political forces, has
begun to criticize and demand reforms be made to
the Government. They argue that it is not sufficiently
consultative or inclusive. The Government, on the
other hand, claims that opposition groups block
important reforms and stoke tensions by calling for
the Government to be replaced. Each side accuses
the other of acting against the national interests. It
appears to me undeniable that those perceptions have
contributed to the tensions that characterize today's
political environment. The existence of opposition
is natural in any political scene, but the amount of
mistrust is growing, while some increasingly resort
to uncompromising slogans and statements capable of
fuelling further violent protests. Efforts at inclusiveness
and building consensus for political stability are critical.

The suicide bomb of 31 May exploded just outside
the restricted diplomatic enclave in the middle of Kabul.
It took more than 90 lives and injured approximately
500 people - all of whom were Afghans. While there
were no serious international casualties, a number of
diplomatic facilities, including several United Nations
buildings, were badly damaged. Some Embassies have
had to evacuate staff while their facilities are repaired.
Despite those realities, it is imperative that the attack
not be allowed to undermine international support for
Afghanistan, including development and economic
assistance. The international community must not be
intimidated nor succumb to the terrorists.

The Government's ability to hold a high-level
meeting of the Kabul process on regional peace and
security in Kabul on 6 June, with the participation of
24 States and organizations, demonstrated its resilience
and the determination of the international community
to maintain its support for Afghanistan and the National
Unity Government. In his opening speech President
Ghani Ahmadzai stated,

"We are gathered in this conference because the
world community signed a promise that terrorism
would not be tolerated, and today we are demanding
that the world make good on this promise."

In that regard, I welcome the General Assembly's
endorsement of the Secretary-General's proposal to
create a new office on counter-terrorism headed by an
Under-Secretary-General.

The Afghan vision for peace is premised on the fact
that a stable Afghanistan would lead to a stable and more
prosperous region. Achieving that vision will require
the strong determination of all the States concerned,
particularly of the region and the neighbourhood. The
Afghan Government requested at the Kabul conference
that the international community address this issue in all
its facets. The nexus of crime, corruption and terrorism
eventually undermines all States and the State system,

which is why States must unite to combat it. The proof
of our commitment will be a stable Afghanistan.

On the Afghan side, the recent series of security
incidents has demonstrated the urgent need for reforms
in the security sector. I welcome the Government's
commitment to transparent, merit-based appointments
and credible investigations into the events of 31 May,
2 and 3 June and 20 June, and other reforms in the
Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry of Defence.

Afghanistan faces numerous internal challenges
in addition to fighting an insurgency that seems to be
gaining ground. They include deep-rooted political
tension, the difficulty of socially and economically
reintegrating the thousands of Afghan refugees who
return each day, an economy that is only very slowly
recovering after the international drawdown in 2014,
and pervasive corruption. The economy remains heavily
dependent on development assistance. The private
sector, as the biggest potential provider of employment,
suffers from a lack of investor confidence and
pervasive corruption. As a result, economic growth can
neither match population growth nor generate enough
employment for the many young Afghans entering the
labour market every year. Corruption undermines the
legitimacy of the State. It prevents a real economy from
emerging. It contributes to insecurity. Corruption is
at the heart of the problem of impunity, which itself
is at the heart of the ongoing human rights challenges.
Afghans alone are not to blame, but the consequences
of corruption disproportionately affect Afghanistan.

In April, UNAMA issued its first comprehensive
report on corruption in Afghanistan. I was gratified
by the intensity of the public's response to the report.
Afghans understand the effects of corruption and
impunity because they face them every day. The
National Unity Government has taken positive steps
to tackle this problem by. Reforms that have begun to
work in the Ministry of Defence are now being applied
to the Ministry ofInterior. The Anti-Corruption Justice
Centre is proving to be an effective instrument.

With regard to human rights, UNAMA remains
committed to provide credible data of the impact of the
conflict of civilians, especially women and children.
It continues to engage with all the main parties to
the conflict to support them in taking measures to
limit harm against civilians. UNAMA's report on the
treatment of conflict detainees for the period 2015 and
2016 was published in April to coincide with the second
periodic review of Afghanistan by the United Nations
Committee against Torture. UNAMA welcomes the
Government's renewed commitment to ratify the
Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture
and to take further steps to eliminate the torture
and ill-treatment of detainees. Those efforts must be
accelerated to increase accountability and public trust
in the Government.

The attack of 31 May and the events that followed
should serve as a clarifying moment. We are at a point
where we need to take conscious decisions to reverse
negative trends and seek stability, or face far worse.
The recent crisis has illustrated the dangers of pushing
narrow interests, be they domestic or international, in
Afghanistan's fragile context. There are two specific
issues in particular that we must focus on.

First, in the domestic sphere, preparations must
be accelerated for the next round of elections, both
parliamentary and presidential. Decisions must be
made regarding the use of technology and the role
and modalities of international electoral assistance.
Work must start on voter registration. The electoral
calendar must be made clear. From my discussions with
Afghan political actors, especially outside of Kabul,
it is clear that the lack of clarity on those issues is a
major component of the growing political mistrust. We
understand that the Independent Election Commission
will make an announcement as early as tomorrow
regarding the date for parliamentary elections. I believe
that announcement will contribute to allaying the
political tensions I have referred to in this briefing.

Secondly, as I have repeatedly stated in this forum
and elsewhere, a genuine peace process with the Taliban
is essential and urgent. In the 6 June Kabul meeting, the
need for a modus vivendi between Afghanistan and its
neighbours was stressed. At the same time, I encourage
the people of Afghanistan to begin an internal dialogue
on the meaning of peace and reconciliation. The
Government and the Taliban need to engage directly
with each other to define a political solution. In that
regard, the appointment of the new Chair of the High
Peace Council is a welcome development, but it is only
a first step towards the Council's revitalization and its
new role in driving the peace process.

UNAMA is doing all it can to help contain political
tensions, using its long-standing relationships and
experience. I have been tremendously proud of the
entire Mission and country team for those efforts.
I was honoured to welcome the Secretary-General
to Afghanistan last week, where his visit clearly
demonstrated his and the Organization's commitment
to Afghanistan, solidarity with its people and
perseverance in the pursuit of peace.

We also look forward to the results of the strategic
review that the Council has requested. We are hopeful
and confident that it will ensure that we have the tools
to continue to work for peace in Afghanistan. On the
eve of the important Muslim holiday of Bid, I wish to
reiterate my call for unity and to urge restraint, so that
families and communities can enjoy a peaceful end
of Ramadan.

