Mr. Sidorov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The delegation of the Russian Federation has
repeatedly expressed its serious concern over the
complicated and explosive situation in the Great Lakes
subregion. The current hotbed of tension has been
significantly exacerbated by the uncontrolled spread of arms
among civilians and refugees, which has created a real
threat to the peace and stability of all countries of the
region.

We are especially concerned by outside reports on
military preparations and the increasing incursions of forces
of the former Rwandan regime that are trying to destabilize
the situation in Rwanda, whose people have just begun to
heal their wounds after last year's unprecedented tragedy.
We fully share the opinion expressed by the Secretary-
General in his report of 8 August to the Security Council
that the inhabitants of Rwanda, who have suffered so
terribly, must not fall victim to yet another cycle of
violence.

The Russian delegation is firmly convinced that the
tasks of ensuring security and strengthening peace and
stability in Rwanda and throughout the region can be
fulfilled only through a careful and integrated approach to
the elimination of the causes of conflict and tension. It goes
without saying that the Government of Rwanda, especially
in the light of the imminent major reduction of the United
Nations presence in that country, should be allowed to meet
its own need for weapons within the limits of a sufficient
defence capacity.

At the same time, in the light of the fragile situation
in Rwanda and in a number of neighbouring countries, it
is important that this process take place under firm
international control and that it proceed in accordance
with an internal settlement and with the changes in the
military and political situation in the Central African
region.

Parallel with this, measures should be taken, in our
View, to bring about cooperation with the Governments of
the countries of the region to curb the illegal inflow of
weapons and to prevent their delivery to forces of the
former Government on the territory of States around
Rwanda and also within the refugee camps. An important
step in this direction might be the deployment of United
Nations military observers on the territory of those
countries, and also the rapid establishment of a
commission of inquiry into the illegal delivery of arms to
armed units of the former Government of Rwanda.

At the same time, we assume that these measures
will not have their full effect in terms of the long-term
strengthening of peace and security if priority is not given
to peace negotiations. In this connection, we fully support
the idea of rapidly convening a regional conference on
security, stability and development, and also of convening
a regional meeting to solve problems related to the
repatriation of refugees. It is extremely important to
develop dialogue within Rwanda, with the participation of
representatives of all sectors of the population of the
country, and also through the efforts of the Government
of Rwanda to strengthen conditions of stability and
confidence that would ensure the return of refugees from
neighbouring States. We think that it is precisely this type
of integrated approach that will ensure a genuine
settlement of the problems of Rwanda and of the
subregion.

In the Russian delegation's opinion, the draft
resolution we are now considering in the Security Council
is a balanced and careful text and fully responds to these
tasks. We are prepared to support its adoption.

