Mr. Semakula Kiwanuka (Uganda):
Mr. President, let me at the outset congratulate you
once again for making it possible for all of us to
address this very important subject.

The issue before us, namely the role of the
Security Council in the prevention of armed conflicts,
has assumed greater importance and urgency because
of the plague of conflicts, especially in the developing
world, including Africa.

Conflicts can be predicted and can therefore be
prevented. The Security Council must provide
leadership in this regard, with the political will to act.

Preventing conflicts is a long-term process.
Because of the multidimensional and multisectoral
nature of that process, it demands a wider variety of
tools. The tools and mechanisms that can prevent
conflicts within States are very much the same ones
that can prevent conflicts between States.

I have made reference to leadership. By
leadership we mean that the Security Council in
particular, the United Nations and the international
community in general must adopt a more aggressive
approach by giving prevention a higher priority on
their agendas. This can be done by adopting rapid-
response mechanisms to prevent conflicts before they
occur. Such mechanisms include the promotion of
democracy, human rights, the rule of law and gender
equality. Poverty eradication is a must, as poverty can
tempt unemployed young people to join wars, because
they have no other choices.

Conflicts and wars have their root causes.
Preventing them means that the conditions which give
rise to such conflicts must be addressed. Those causes
are not necessarily military. Hence to preclude military
intervention as a preventive measure, emphasis should
be placed on what we describe as preventive
development. There are two major components in the
preventive development strategy. They are political and
economic.

Root causes, as I have said, and the conditions
that give rise to armed conflicts need to be identified
and addressed. In this regard, the Security Council
should assist all efforts to build durable democratic
structures and institutions. The bedrock for all such
institutions is the protection of human rights for all, the
respect and guarantee of the rule of law and freedom of
the press and expression. These are the foundations of
democratic governance, because they cement
democracy and good governance.

Democratic governance includes the
decentralization of power, so as to embrace the greater
society and the creation of a civil society. It improves
government responsiveness and accountability.
Building and sustaining political, social, economic and
cultural institutions to provide for and cement
democracy will go a long way towards preventing
conflicts.

Human history has repeatedly shown that
political and economic exclusion are the major causes
of conflicts within States. On the other hand, policies
that emphasize inclusiveness and opportunities for
access by all to political power and economic resources
are major building-blocks for durable peace.

Allow me at this juncture to refer briefly to the
Ugandan policies of political inclusiveness, tolerance
and reconciliation. Since the National Movement
Government came to power, it has emphasized these
important aspects of democracy in order to create a
national consensus and to break Uganda's cycle of
revenge. We have not succeeded 100 per cent, but the
results have been gratifying. Today the country is more
united than ever before.

I have necessarily emphasized democracy and the
rule of law because conflicts are bred by political,
economic and sociological conditions. History has
shown that democratic countries do not normally fight
each other. This does not mean that they do not have
differences, but they resolve their differences through
institutional mechanisms, including the observance of
the rule of law. It is not an accident that the countries
of the West have grown and prospered since the Second
World War, because there has been an emphasis on
democracy as the core of their shared values.

I have also made reference to the economic
preventive strategy. In my view the Marshall Plan,
which transformed post-war Europe, was an economic
preventive plan to prevent Europe from receding into
fascism again or from embracing other ideologies.
Durable political institutions need to be buttressed by
growing economies whose development emphasizes
the improvement of the human condition. Poor
distribution of national resources, economic exclusion,
persistent poverty and social inequities fuel conflicts.
Before I conclude, let me return to the question of
leadership. Conflict prevention demands leadership
from the Security Council. Here, of course, I mean the
Member States, especially of the industrialized rich
nations, who should see the persistence of armed
conflicts as a threat to their own security and economic
well-being. The Security Council has a role to play in
all this because it is accepted today that this Council is
much more than a war council. This is why, at the
beginning of this year, the Council addressed the
horrific problems of HIV/AIDS. Therefore the
emphasis henceforth should be on human security.

In this regard, the Security Council of the twenty-
first century should see poverty as a threat to security
and democracy and sustainable economic development
as the most effective mechanisms to prevent armed
conflicts. For these to be put in place, resources will
have to be made available. The Security Council
should remain seized of the question of resources.
Otherwise the prevention of conflicts will remain a
dream, difficult to realize.

