Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the Secretary-General's
participation in today's open debate and his report
on his visit to the region. Perhaps the time has come
to implement Russia's proposal of four years ago to
establish a Security Council mission to Palestine and
Israel. Ifthat initiative had not been blocked at the time
by a particular member of the Council, who knows if
perhaps the current surge in violence might not have
been avoided?

We listened attentively to the statements by the
representatives of Palestine and Israel, which did not,
unfortunately but not surprisingly, give indications for
hope. The current situation in the Middle East is hardly
very propitious to a relaunch of the peace process. As
has happened more than once in the past decade, the
Israeli-Palestinian talks begun last year under American
auspices have reached a dead end. Israel continues
to expropriate Palestinian lands, thus reducing the
chances of arriving at a just two-State solution. The
situation is aggravated by the expansion of settlements
in the West Bank and particularly in East Jerusalem.
The recent events surrounding the Al-Aqsa Mosque
are seriously worrying. We urge both sides to exercise
maximum restraint and to refrain from unilateral action
on a problem that touches the feelings of millions of the
faithful around the world.

At the same time, we must all recognize that there is
no alternative to negotiations. The Russian Federation
supports continuing the indirect contacts between
Palestinian and Israeli representatives in Cairo, with
Egypt playing an active role with the goal of reaching an
agreement on regulating the situation around Gaza for
the long term. We believe that within the framework of
the Cairo contacts it is essential that an understanding
be reached that excludes any relapse into escalation in
the future. That task would be assisted by a resumption
of full-on Palestinian-Israeli talks on final status issues
for the Palestinian territories.

Today we are focusing on the serious humanitarian
effects ofthe tragedy that has been playing out in Gaza.
We welcome the decision to allocate $5.4 billion to the
reconstruction sector's needs, made during the course
of the international donor conference held in Egypt
on 12 October and in which Russia also participated.
If Gaza's ruined infrastructure is to be rebuilt, it is
essential that the ceasefire regime be strictly observed
and that all agreements on goods access to the area
under United Nations auspices be fulfilled.

It is vital in that regard that the authority of the
Palestinian Government of national unity extend over
the whole of Palestinian territory, including the Gaza
Strip. That is because, in our view, no alternative to
Palestinian unity exists. In order to continue the
negotiations and, especially, to implement an eventual
peace agreement, it is essential that there be a partner
on the Palestinian side representing the interests of all
Palestinian society, not its various parts. In that regard,
we support overcoming the internal Palestinian split
on the basis of the political platform of the Palestine
Liberation Organization and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Despite all the difficulties, we must never throw
up our hands. Russia is ready to work to reach a peace
settlement both through bilateral channels and in
multilateral formats. We think that not using the Middle
East Quartet more fully during the past few years
has been a mistake. We have always been in favour
of activating the Quartet and of involving it further
in dealing with the peace settlement process. We are
ready for substantive discussions during the Quartet
special representatives' meeting to be held in Brussels
on 24 October.

With regard to the draft resolution prepared by
Palestine and submitted to the Security Council by
Jordan, we would like to note that the text refers to the
well-known international legal basis for a Middle East
peace settlement and affirms the route of negotiations
for reaching a settlement with Israel. That kind of
approach merits our support.

The turbulent processes under way in the Middle
East that are often referred to as the Arab Spring are far
from complete, but attempts to draw lessons from what
has happened lead us to only one conclusion: there is no
alternative to a peaceful, non-violent resolution to any
crisis situation. The concrete facts show us that clearly
that the more brazen the intervention was in a given Arab
country, the more the process became unpredictable.
In Libya, after three years of illegal NATO bombing
and the ousting of Al-Qadhafi, the situation has only
deteriorated. The legitimate Libyan authorities are not
even capable of controlling the situation in their capital,
not to mention the rest of the Libyan territory.

Another example is Syria. Although there was no
direct military involvement, there was a very aggressive
attack by radicals on the legitimate Government
authorities. That is no secret. It occurred with the full
support from the West for the Syrian opposition. In
fact, for a long time, the West approved the actions
of terrorists because they formed the backbone of
the opposition to President Al-Assad. But do all ends
justify the means? The latest events in Iraq involving
the atrocities of the so-called Islamic State force us to
recall the terrible American invasion of 2003. At the
time, the United States destroyed that State's structures
and provoked a sectarian conflict from which the
country has still not recovered.

The Security Council should consider holding
a brainstorming session to consider the lessons of
the Arab Spring and make an in-depth analysis of
the deterioration of the situation in the Middle East.
Perhaps that could prevent us from making the same
mistakes in the future.

Today, it would seem that our Western partners
have once again made mistakes, and it is the countries
of the region that will have to pay for those mistakes.
Anti-terrorism efforts should be undertaken in
compliance with international law and be conducted
under the auspices of the Security Council, as the main
body responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Instead of that, we see air strikes
on Islamic State positions in Syrian territory without
the consent of the Government of Syria. The so-called
coalition has refused to cooperate with Damascus and
Tehran, which are logical allies in the fight against
terrorism in the region. Perhaps the campaign against
the Islamic State would have been more successful with
such support.

Against that backdrop, it is contradictory and
paradoxical that the United States and its allies are
providing arms support to the so-called moderate
opposition to help them overthrow President Al-Assad.
We have seen more than once how so-called moderate
oppositions become radicalized, and it then becomes
difficult to distinguish them from more extremist
organizations.

Russia continues to support constructive
intergovernmental relations with Syria, Iraq and other
States of the region, and we will continue to fulfil
our international obligations and to make efforts
to strengthen the capability of those States in their
courageous attempts to combat international terrorists
and extremists.

