Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to join my
colleagues in thanking the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina for his comprehensive and
frank briefing. We welcome the significant contribution
made by the Office of the High Representative to
stability, peace and sustainable development in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the European Union
(EU).

We are pleased to see that the security situation
continues to be stable. However, the past few months
have seen few positive political developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. On the contrary, unilateral
attacks on the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina and its
institutions have increased. There is a disconcerting
lack of readiness to compromise and to overcome
nationalist agendas.

In particular, Germany is concerned by the
announcement by the Republika Srpska that it will hold
a referendum on key State-level judicial institutions.
The attempt to undermine the judiciary is alarming.
Disrespect for the rule of law damages Bosnia and
Herzegovina's potential for EU accession. We should
be clear and unequivocal about that.

Germany welcomes and fully supports the current
initiatives taken by the European External Action
Service, the European Commission and the Office of
the High Representative to find a solution to the issue
of the referendum. If those endeavours fail, further
measures have to be considered. The High
Representative has Germany's full support. The
initiative to hold a referendum is an assault on the
political consensus rooted in the Dayton Accords, to
which we are all committed.

Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to form an
inclusive State-level Government as a matter of the
utmost priority in order to tackle the reform priorities
ahead. Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot afford to lose
more time if it does not want to fall behind in the EU
integration process. We will have to adapt the
cumbersome structures of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
Constitution and to bring them into line with the
European Convention on Human Rights and the
requirements of the EU integration process. Bosnia and
Herzegovina needs to be able to speak with one voice
when negotiating with the EU and in other
international forums. Germany will continue to provide
its support to Bosnia and Herzegovina in that field.

The current political crisis has again brought to
the fore the fact that some politicians in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are unwilling to place compromise and
the wellbeing of the country and its citizens above their
own nationalist agendas. Since Dayton, the policy
approach of the international community has
apparently not been sufficient to create incentives for
compromise in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Dayton must
remain the foundation of the State; But Bosnia and
Herzegovina needs to build a European house on it.
The Foreign Ministers of the EU have therefore
decided to reinforce the EU presence. That will create
positive incentives and leverage for the integration
processes, and will help it to react when Bosnia and
Herzegovina's stability is intentionally undermined.

Let me be very clear. For the EU, respect for the
rule of law and the stability of potential candidate
countries are crucial. We will not accept any
fundamental shortfall of such requirements. In March,
the EU's Foreign Affairs Council took a decision on
restrictive measures against individuals putting the
stability and integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina at
risk. If talks fail, the EU might feel obliged to consider
the application of such measures.

Finally, let me raise an issue relevant to the future
work of the Office of the High Representative and
other international organizations. To safeguard the
footprint of the Office in stabilizing Bosnia and
Herzegovina, a sustainable solution for the immunity
of present and former Office personnel needs to be
found.

A stable, economically prosperous and
democratic Bosnia, irrevocably proceeding along the
path of EU integration, is the best guarantor of
peaceful development in the region. Germany will
continue to provide assistance to such development.

