Mr. De Loecker (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The countries of Central and Eastern Europe
associated with the European Union - Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - and the
associated countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well
as Liechtenstein, European Free Trade Association
member country of the European Economic Area, align
themselves with this statement.

Above all, let me first thank Assistant Secretary-
General Hedi Annabi for reporting to us on the latest
developments on the situation in Kosovo. For several
months now, the attention and energy of the
international community have been directed at a major
development in the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999) - namely, the elections in Kosovo on 17
November 2001.

The European Union is pleased at the peaceful
and orderly manner in which the elections took place
and at the level of participation by the voters. This is a
decisive step in the democratic development of Kosovo
and a sign for the region as a whole that peace is won
at the ballot box - not at gunpoint.

We warmly congratulate all the candidates and
political parties on their results in the elections. The
elected candidates of Kosovo will now have to assume
their considerable responsibilities in the political,
economic, social and cultural fields. The European
Union calls upon them to exercise their new authority
with wisdom and responsibility, in scrupulous
compliance with resolution 1244 (1999) and within the
constitutional framework for provisional autonomy. It
falls to them, among other things, to ensure the
prosperous and stable development of their province,
while respecting and safeguarding the interests of all
the communities without exception. In this task, they
will have the support and assistance of the European
Union.

The Council has on many occasions been witness
to our appeals to all the communities to take part in
these elections. It is therefore with great satisfaction
that we have noted the turnout of all the constituent
elements of Kosovo society in the elections. That
participation is an essential condition for ensuring their
appropriate and effective representation in the new,
democratically elected provisional institutions. The
turnout of the Serb community of Kosovo, but also the
participation of those Serbs who voted from Serbia and
Montenegro, is significant. We expect them all to play
an active part in the work of the new institutions.

This turnout for the elections makes the coalition
of Kosovo Serbs the third largest group in the new
assembly. Such plurality of representation is turning
that assembly into the foundation for future
cooperation between all the ethnic groups in the
provisional institutions and augurs well for the
development of a multi-ethnic, tolerant and prosperous
society. In this regard, we should like to reassure the
Belgrade authorities, and President Kostunica in
particular, of our appreciation for the appeal they made
to the Serb community in Kosovo to take part in the
ballot.

We also welcome the signing of a joint document
between Belgrade and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
concerning cooperation in matters of common interest
that the elected authorities of Kosovo are called upon
to develop with the Mission and the Belgrade
authorities. With the support of that agreement, the
formation of the new assembly and the provisional
institutions will now enable us to look ahead and to
build a multi-ethnic Kosovo on a firm foundation in the
context of resolution 1244 (1999) and the
constitutional framework for provisional autonomy.

The questions of security, the return of refugees
and displaced persons (IDPs) and the search for
missing persons must also be resolved as quickly as
possible. Concerning the returns, some progress has
been achieved recently, but should be done, and done
better. Moreover, the improvement of the security
conditions is as indispensable for increased returns as
for the full participation of all communities in the new
institutions. The international community should
continue to focus its attention on this question.

Finally, the authorities elected on 17 November
should ensure a harmonious and democratic
development of the province for the benefit of all
communities of Kosovo but also of the stability of the
entire region of South-Eastern Europe. This
development should be consistent with the principle of
regional ownership following an approach that, thanks
to the concomitant action of the Stability Pact and the
stabilization and association process, should promote
regional cooperation and allow South-Eastern Europe
to move closer to the structures of the European Union.

Allow me to end my statement by congratulating
those who have made these elections a success, above
all the population of Kosovo, but also the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Hans
Haekkerup; all the UNMIK staff; the staff of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe;
and those who have contributed, either directly or
indirectly, to the organization of that important day.

