Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Ijoin Ambassador
Kuchinsky in thanking Mr. Oshima for his briefing.
Madam President, you have told us that in this meeting
we will not make any statements but have a question-
and-answer session. In that spirit, I would like to make
three points - my questions will be rolled into three
points.

The first point is that, as I was reading very
quickly the statement that I gave on this subject in
April of this year, I recalled that I quoted paragraph 67
of the Secretary-General's report, which said as
follows:

"Some 18 months have passed since I submitted
my first report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. I regret to note that only a few of
its 40 recommendations are so far being
implemented." (S/2001/33I, para. 67)

This is a statement the Secretary-General made
earlier this year. Has the situation improved since then
in terms of the actual implementation of the
recommendations? I make this point because the
trouble that we have on this issue is that we produce
thousands of words on the protection of civilians, the
protection of children and the protection of women.
But it is very difficult for us to find out whether or not
these words actually make a difference in terms of
deeds on the ground. The most specific question I have
is, when we next meet to review this subject, can we
get some kind of concrete information on what I call
"trend lines"? Are we moving towards a situation in
general where there is greater protection for civilians in
armed conflict or - if we look at the statistics and
what is happening in actual conflicts, whether in Sierra
Leone, Angola, Afghanistan or wherever - are more
civilians really being harmed, injured or killed? What
is the trend line? I think we need to have that the next
time we meet because unless we have this data, we
have no way of measuring whether or not our words
are having any impact. I hope that Mr. Oshima will
enlighten us as to whether it is reasonable or
unreasonable to request more specific indicators when
we next discuss this issue.
My second point is related to the first point.
Yesterday, we had a very good discussion on the
protection of children in armed conflict. We have had
discussions on women and peace and security. We have
talked about conflict prevention. You do not have to be
a rocket scientist to figure out that there are common
points made in each of these debates. In a sense, we are
repeating points on the protection of children and on
the protection of civilians. Can we do something useful
and constructive - try to cluster these
recommendations that we have so that we do not have
to repeat them four times, at every debate? There
would also be some degree of cost-saving because
perhaps we do not need four different debates, four
different reports and four different discussions.
Frankly, from the point of view of the smaller Missions
to the United Nations, we do not have to maintain four
different files that basically repeat the same points on
these issues. So, in the process of preparing the aide-
memoire or preparing the reports or in the workshops, I
wonder if we can see whether there are some common
traits that we can pull together and then say that it is
very clear that there are some common themes that
come out in all these reports. If this can be provided to
us, it would enhance our work enormously, especially
when we review this in November 2002, as Mr. Oshima
said.

My third point concerns the whole issue of non-
State actors. Yesterday we heard a very moving
statement from a young boy from Sierra Leone named
Alhaji Babah Sawaneh. Listening to him, it is very
clear that for someone like him there was no choice.
Basically, he was abducted while going to visit some
relatives and conscripted into a force, and he said he
had to do terrible things. He had to cut limbs, to burn
houses and to kill people. These were his own words.

Clearly, the norms that we are creating are
intended to change the behaviour of non-State actors
like these. It is one thing to say we should look at best
practices among nation-States, to carry them forward
and say "I will copy nation-State access policies". But
when it comes to non-State actors, how do you change
their behaviour or their norms?

Quite frankly, I wonder whether we have
reflected enough on this issue, and I wonder whether
Mr. Oshima has addressed it in the workshops. And,
frankly, if we do want to change the behaviour of such
groups, we may have to consider in some ways what I
call more drastic solutions, some of which have been
discussed in this Council. For example, to quote the
then Foreign Minister Axworthy of Canada, who spoke
last year,

"the protection of civilians requires strengthening
our disposition to intervene by force if
necessary". (S/PV.4127, p. 24)

In the final analysis, this whole question of
humanitarian intervention comes in. Has this ever
flowed into any of the discussions on the protection of
civilians, or is it considered taboo or out of the range of
our discussions? Similarly, when it comes to reaching
out to young people like Alhaji Babah Sawaneh, we
also have to look at things such as the root causes:
what is it that creates such conflicts, what creates such
young people, and what drives them to such
desperation? Is there some kind of discussion along
these lines in the discussions that the various agencies
are having?

A key point I wish to emphasize is that in all our
discussions on this subject I hope we will not just
concentrate on abstract points and principles but that
we will look at the realities on the ground in conflicts
existing today. We should ask ourselves how many of
the points we are making will apply to those situations,
and how civilians are being protected or are not being
protected by the words we produce.

