Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): Let
me start by thanking the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, for
his informative briefing today on the situation in Darfur,
as well as for his contributions over the past nine years
to the cause of ending impunity for the most serious
crimes of concern to the international community.

The United States is gravely concerned about the
situation in the Sudan and the role that continuing
impunity for crimes committed in Darfur has played in
forestalling a just and enduring peace for the people of
the Sudan and the region.

This is the Prosecutor's fifteenth and final report
to the Security Council on the situation in Darfur,
which the Council referred to the ICC in 2005. He has
come before us many times to describe the work of his
Office in seeking to address the atrocities suffered by
the victims of genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity in Darfur.

Indeed, since the adoption of resolution 1593 (2005)
and the initiation of these periodic reports, copious
evidence has been collected and arrest warrants sought
and granted. The most recent development has been
the arrest warrant for Minister of Defence Abdelrahim
Mohamed Hussein. Most important, promises have been
made to the victims that the crimes they suffered will
not go unpunished and the justice they seek will not go
undelivered.

But as of today, justice has not been served. The
ICC's prosecution of the key architects of the atrocities
in Darfur is critical. But, as the Prosecutor has stressed,
the individuals subject to the ICC arrest warrants in
Darfur continue to remain at large.
We have consistently called on the Government of
the Sudan and all parties to the conflict to cooperate fully
with the ICC and its Prosecutor. Yet there is persistent
failure to meet obligations under resolution 1593 (2005).
Local accountability initiatives, particularly those agreed
to in the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, remain
largely unfulfilled, and the violence continues in Darfur
and in other areas of the Sudan, where these patterns
repeat themselves and similarly go unaddressed.

Today's report offers us an opportunity to reflect
on what steps we can take to strengthen international
efforts to hold accountable those who have committed
atrocities in Darfur. We agree with the Prosecutor that
the lack of progress to date in executing the arrest
warrants and bringing those most responsible to justice
merits renewed attention by the Council.

We think it is a serious cause for concern that the
individuals subject to outstanding arrest warrants in the
Darfur situation remain at large and continue to travel
across borders. This is an area where cooperation is
particularly crucial.

To that end, we continue to urge all States to
refrain from providing political or financial support to
the Sudanese suspects subject to ICC arrest warrants
and to bring diplomatic pressure to bear on States that
invite or host these individuals. We stand with the many
States that refuse to welcome the ICC indictees to their
countries, and we commend those that have spoken out
against President Al-Bashir's continued travel, including
to next month's African Union Summit.

For our part, the United States has continued to
oppose invitations, facilitation or support for travel by
those subject to ICC arrest warrants in Darfur and to
urge other States to do the same. We would welcome
additional efforts by, and better coordination with, other
members of the international community on these issues.

We encourage the Council to consider creative
approaches and new tools. As members of the Security
Council, we can and should review additional steps that
could be taken to carry out the ICC's work in Darfur,
execute outstanding arrest warrants and ensure States'
compliance with relevant international obligations.
Continued impunity and a lack of accountability for
heinous crimes fuel resentment, reprisals and conflict
in Darfur.

We are deeply troubled by the increased violence
in three of the five Darfur states since the Prosecutor's
last briefing in December (see S/PV.6688). Once again,
we note that the Sudanese Government continues its use
of aerial bombardments, including of civilian areas, in
violation of resolutions issued by the Council. We are
also deeply concerned about sexual and gender-based
violent crimes there.

We are also deeply troubled that impunity continues
for those who attack peacekeepers from the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). Since the Prosecutor's last report, UNAMID
has been attacked four times, and three peacekeepers
have been killed in those attacks. We reiterate our
calls on the Government of the Sudan to investigate
the attacks and bring those responsible to justice. We
note the progress made in the two cases ongoing against
Darfur rebels, as described in the Prosecutor's report.

We are extremely concerned about the recurring
violence in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states.
Unfortunately, we have seen concrete illustrations in
those two areas that those who evade accountability all
too often contribute to further cycles of violence. As the
Prosecutor has reminded us, Ahmed Harun is the subject
of an outstanding arrest warrant for alleged crimes
committed in Darfur. Yet, rather than facing justice, he
has been entrusted by the Government of the Sudan with
the duty of serving as Governor of Southern Kordofan,
where he engages in inflammatory rhetoric reminiscent
of the kind he employed in Darfur, pursuing policies
that in recent weeks have led to the displacement of
nearly 700 people per day, while continuing to block
humanitarian access to those remaining. We will continue
to push for a credible, independent investigation into
violations of international law there and to demand that
those responsible be held to account.

We continue to urge the Government of the Sudan
to make good on its commitments in the July 2011
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur in order to make
local justice and accountability mechanisms a reality,
including by empowering its special prosecutor for
crimes in Darfur, establishing special courts for Darfur
and inviting observers from the African Union and the
United Nations to monitor the proceedings of those
courts.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our thanks
to Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo and his Office for the
work they have done to advance the cause of justice
for the people of Darfur. We call on the members of the
Security Council and the international community to
take concrete steps to ensure that justice in the Sudan
is indeed served and that the cycle of violence and
impunity there comes at last to a close.

