Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank our three
Secretaries-General for their briefings today. The three
organizations - the United Nations, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
European Union (EU) - are all playing a crucial role
to preserve peace and security in Europe, and we are
grateful for all of the work that they do.

Everything that we do in the Security Council has
come about as a direct result of conflicts in Europe.
More than seven decades since the Second World
War, we should be proud that Europeans now enjoy a
level of stability and prosperity that would have been
unthinkable to our grandparents' generation.

As we heard so clearly in the meeting on Ukraine
earlier this month (see S/PV.7876), instability and
insecurity persist in Europe. The borders of Europe are
threatened today in a way not seen since the Cold War.
The territorial integrity of your country, Mr. President,
has been flagrantly violated, leaving up to 10,000 dead
and millions displaced. At the heart of that disregard
for sovereignty lies the Russia Federation and its world
view that thinks Moscow's interest can and should
prevail over the sovereign and democratic choices of
independent countries. It is a world view illustrated by
Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea and continued
support for separatists in eastern Ukraine.

Only a few days ago, Russia recognized passports
from the so-called People's Republics in Donbas under
the guise of humanitarian assistance for a conflict that
Russia itself instigated. A more appropriate response
would be for Russia to honour its commitments under
the Minsk agreements, including by withdrawing
its troops and equipment from Ukraine and using
its influence over the separatists to implement the
ceasefire and heavy-weapons withdrawal agreement.
Until all such commitments are met in full, Russia will
remain under sanctions from the European Union and
Group of Seven States.

Put simply, we cannot stand idly by in the face of
such aggression. The Council has a responsibility to
sustain the peace won in Europe seven decades ago, to
ensure that the rules-based international order - most
notably the Charter of the United Nations - is respected
and upheld by all countries. We have a responsibility to
ensure that wars waged across battlefields are ended
through dialogue pursued across tables.

The three organizations from which we have heard
today are playing a vital role in those efforts. In the
face of great odds and escalating violence, the OSCE is
bravely monitoring the line of contact in Ukraine; the
United Nations is bringing vital aid and much-needed
relief to those suffering; and, through sanctions; and
the EU is bringing pressure to bear on Russia to meet
its commitments under the Minsk agreements. But
those organizations cannot do it alone. All sides must
step up and make a ceasefire a reality, implementing
the Minsk agreements in full.

Sadly, the need for a peaceful political settlement
extends far beyond the borders of Ukraine. In the
interest of time, I will not mention every single conflict
in Europe. The flashing light, after all, is meant to be
a sign to stop and not one of encouragement to keep
going. I should therefore like to just mention a few of
the other conflicts.

In Georgia, the conflicts in Abkhazia and South
Ossetia remain unresolved, with Russian pressure
showing no signs of dissipating. In Moldova, it is long
past time for a comprehensive peaceful settlement of
the Transnistrian conflict, one based on the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Moldova with a special status
for the Transnistrian region. In Nagorno Karabakh, a
peaceful settlement also remains elusive, owing to a
high level of mistrust and lack of any political will to
compromise. We support the efforts of the co-Chairs of
the OSCE Minsk Group.

Across the continent, the United Kingdom will
continue to be a force for peace in Europe through
our membership in NATO, the OSCE and, of course,
this Council. Our own security has long depended on
the strong partnerships of the Euro-Atlantic area, and
we are therefore committed to strengthening those
partnerships further, including by maintaining the
NATO target of spending 2 per cent of our economy
on defence. I strongly encourage all NATO allies to
meet that target. NATO has responded in a coherent,
comprehensive and measured fashion to Russia's
destabilization and provocation. It has modernized
its deterrence and defence posture as a balanced
response to the instability and insecurity that Russia
has attempted to sow, while also being open to dialogue
with Russia.

Three years since the Maidan protests, we speak
clearly in this Chamber today to reaffirm our total
support for principles of territorial integrity and
sovereignty as outlined in the United Nations Charter
and the Final Act of the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe, known as the Helsinki Final
Act. We speak clearly to say that we do and will not
recognize the illegal annexation of Crimea. I am proud
to do so again today on behalf of the United Kingdom.

