Ms. Rivas Franchini (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, on behalf of the Union of South American
Nations (UNASUR), over which Peru is honoured to
preside, I would like to extend my congratulations to the
Argentine Republic, in particular to President Cristina
Fernandez, on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council, an auspicious occasion for UNASUR
and Latin America as a whole. We wish them every
success in carrying out that weighty responsibility,
which we will follow with the highest of expectations.
I also express my warmest congratulations to you,
Madam President, for initiating this debate, as well as
my thanks for being invited to participate, which allows
UNASUR, as a regional body, to address the Council
for the first time.

I would like, at the outset, to emphasize that our
South American integration process is based on the
fundamental pillars of peace and democracy.

South America is a region where we can say that
there are no inter-State conflicts that constitute a threat
to international peace and security, nor situations of
extreme violence. However, the member States of
UNASUR recognize that peace and security must be
preserved permanently. All South Americans are fully
convinced that the best way to achieve that is by striving
for integration based on respect for the fundamental
principles of international law, whose chief purpose is
development with economic and social inclusion, the
daily strengthening of democracy and full respect for
fundamental rights and freedoms.

UNASUR's activities and its Constitutive Treaty are
fully consistent with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, and recognize the primary
role that the Charter entrusts to the Security Council in
the difficult task of maintaining international peace and
security. UNASUR also recognizes the complementary
role played in that regard by regional bodies. Likewise,
UNASUR attaches particular importance to respect for
the fundamental principle of the sovereignty of States.
Our members are convinced of the need for autonomy
for regional bodies with regard to States and bodies
foreign to them, in particularly with regard to security
matters.

In carrying out the responsibilities falling to
regional and subregional organizations, UNASUR
reiterates the need for such organizations to maintain
close cooperation with the United Nations, as well as
smooth communication channels with the Security
Council on the activities undertaken or contemplated by
those organizations in the maintenance of international
peace and security pursuant to Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations.

UNASUR was born as a distinct political body
compared to other regional forums. It also has an
important role in preventing conflicts and promoting
the peaceful settlement of disputes of any kind that may
arise in the region. Therefore, first and foremost, we in
South America believe in finding our own intraregional
solutions.

Since its establishment, in 2008, UNASUR
has conducted itself in full accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, with peace as its overriding purpose and
the aspiration of all its peoples, and its preservation
being a main element of our strategic vision for South
American integration. South American nations view
integration as a parallel process that is consistent
with strengthening multilateralism and promoting
full respect for international law, in a world where the
sovereign equality of States and the culture of peace
prevail and the use of force and non-legitimate means
of defence are excluded, including nuclear weapons and
weapons of mass destruction. One of the challenges for
UNASUR is therefore to promote total disarmament so
that the region is free of nuclear weapons and weapons
of mass destruction, a status that must be respected by
all States, in particular those with nuclear weapons, as
established by the Treaty of Tlatelolco and its Protocol
II.

As South America is a region with a vocation
for peace, the efforts of UNASUR are intended to
build links aimed at strengthening cooperation and
building trust among States. To that end, UNASUR's
structure provides for a specific body for consultation,
cooperation and coordination on defence, namely,
the South American Defence Council, a forum for
international and intergovernmental cooperation that
respects diversity and seeks dialogue and a common
identity on defence. In its short existence, it has been
able to make effective contributions to regional stability
and the cause of peace. It has no offensive purpose and
is not structured along the lines of external threats or
enemies. Its main areas of activity include exchanging
lessons learned in the peaceful settlement of disputes;
conflict early-warning; undertaking humanitarian
activities; establishing confidence-building measures;
developing various forms of cooperation for technology
transfer; developing institutional capacity and human
resources in the area of defence; and immediate
response to natural disasters.

In 2001, for the first time in the history of South
America, we adopted a registrer of defence expenditures,
which includes a specific methodology for the region.
We are making progress on a South American military
inventory, which in its experimental stage is developing
a South American formula for military inventories. We
are also developing a manual for the systematic and
efficient classification of procedures for implementing
confidence- and security-building measures. We
believe that those registers are complementary to
those maintained by the United Nations and allow for
an exchange of information that avoids duplication. In
that regard, it is in our common interest that the United
Nations and UNASUR cooperate to further strengthen
confidence and security.

In another area of activity, our countries are
participating with resolve in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, the Simon Bolivar
Brigade for Assistance and Humanitarian Aid and other
similar missions in other regions of the world. That
gives us an opportunity to carry out a fruitful exchange
experiences and to contribute to development.

The case of Haiti also serves to illustrate the
commitment of UNASUR to the cause of regional
solidarity with regard to the efforts of Haiti's
Government and society to consolidate stability,
strengthen institutions, carry out reconstruction
efforts and bring about sustainable development with
social justice. To that end, UNASUR has established a
permanent technical secretariat in Haiti and put in place
a solidarity fund to which its member States contribute.

In our own region, UNASUR reaffirms its full
support for the peace process between the Government
of Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia. This is a historic opportunity, fostered
by the environment of cooperation and dialogue that
prevails in South America. It is important to emphasize
the support provided by different countries in the
region to the process, in particular Venezuela, Chile
and Cuba. The success of the peace process, based on
the strength of democratic institutions we share, will
have far-reaching significance for Colombia and the
entire South American region, thereby allowing us to
concentrate increasingly on development.

An important step in reaffirming our commitment
to peace, democracy and socio-economic development
was the unanimous adoption by the representatives of
our region during the sixth UNASUR summit, in Lima,
Peru, on 30 November 2012, of the Lima Declaration,
designating South America as a zone of peace.
UNASUR member States expressed their firm resolve
to maintain South America as a zone of peace and to
fully support that goal through regional and bilateral
cooperation.

The establishment of the zone of peace, as
contained in that important Declaration, reflects
UNASUR members' respect for the principles and
norms of international law, including the international
treatises to which we are party and the Charter of the
United Nations. In particular, we confirm our States'
commitment to use peaceful means in the settlement of
disputes and to abstain from threats or the use of force
against the territorial integrity of another State.

The declaration of South America as a zone of
peace also affirms the goal of building confidence and
strengthening security and enforcement procedures
through tangible transparency action with respect to
military spending. The Declaration adopted in Lima
also includes strengthened efforts to establish South
America as a zone free of anti-personnel landmines in
the context of the obligations of States parties under
relevant international conventions and similarly focused
bilateral efforts. It also calls for continuing negotiations
under the South American Defense Council towards a
peace, security and cooperation protocol, which is a
Peruvian initiative, the complexity of which resulted
from thorough reflection and the gradual progress
made in efforts to achieve its ambitious goals.

UNASUR also spoke at the sixth ordinary summit
in Lima on the fight against terrorism by adopting
a special communique' to support the fight against
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. Through
the communique, the South American States reiterated
their strongest condemnation of that scourge as criminal
and unjustifiable in any circumstances, wherever
and by whomever committed, and because it poses a
serious threat to international peace and security and
to democratic institutions and values. They reiterated
their willingness to strengthen domestic legislation and
to take further steps to prevent terrorist activities and
acts that incite or encourage terrorism, and expressed
their commitment to preventing the cross-border
movement of terrorists.

Before concluding, I should like, in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Peru, to
briefly affirm my country's long-standing commitment

to peace and respect for international law and to fulfilling
its international obligations, as well as its commitment
to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Peru's contribution to international
peace and security and regional cooperation goes back
to the beginnings of the Republic. At that time, we also
participated in the establishment of the United Nations,
itself the most universal of forums in which Peru has
always firmly advocated in favour of the pillars of
peace.

I thank you again, Madam, on behalf of UNASUR,
for your invitation to participate in this important
debate, which reflects the Council's important
recognition of the work of our regional South American
organization in contributing to international peace and
security, particularly in ensuring conditions conducive
to strengthening and maintaining peace in South
America.

