Mr. Ruiz Cabanas (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank China for having convened
this public debate. I would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), my friend Ms. Sandra Honore'
Braithwaite, for her briefing, and especially for her
tireless work over the past few years. Mexico recognizes
in her an esteemed and dedicated international
civil servant. Her dedication to the Haitian people and
her efforts to bring about the peace and development we
seek at the Organization are exemplary.

The unanimous adoption of resolution 2350 (2017),
which provides for the conclusion ofthe United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti and to which Mexico
contributed a group of military observers, and the
establishment of the new United Nations Mission in
Support of Justice in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) in October
is a natural consequence of the favourable development
of the situation in the country. The strengthening of
the rule of law and national institutions and the full-
fledged pursuit of development with the support of
the United Nations and the international community
are signs of new times for Haiti, which is decisively
assuming responsibility for its future.

We welcome the General Assembly's recent
allocation of adequate resources to help MINUSTAH
ensure a responsible, progressive and prudent transition
to the new Mission, so as to avoid a security vacuum
and to lay the foundations for sustainable and lasting
peace in Haiti.

The United Nations is not withdrawing from Haiti.
Our presence in the country has evolved and, more
important, our conception of peace and development
has also evolved. The United Nations country team,
which will continue to be present on the ground and
from which we expect impeccable coordination,
coherence, efficiency and transparency, plays a
central role in supporting Haiti's economic and social
development, the strengthening of its institutions and
ensuring respect for human rights.

Mexico, as part of the Economic and Social
Council's Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti, has noted
the willingness of President Moise to promote a new
national dialogue that will give way to a future of
prosperity. The United Nations must support the Haitian
Government and be sensitive to its priorities. We must
encourage Haiti to focus its development - like all
other States - on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development so that its people can reap the benefits of
the fulfilment of the Sustainable Development Goals.

The United Nations has the unique opportunity in
Haiti to demonstrate that we face new paradigms and
a have a new way of working - that we have moved
from conflict management to sustainable development
coordination. In that connection, prevention and the
links between peace and security and development are
seen as concrete examples of the renewed framework of
sustainable peace. The new focus of MINUJUSTH and
its necessary coordination with the country team should
be seen as an opportunity for coordination - both on
the ground and at the Secretariat - of the efforts of the
Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and
all United Nations agencies.

The United Nations has a moral and economic
debt to the Haitian people. We have not yet found an
appropriate response to the problems caused by the
terrible cholera epidemic in order to properly care
for the families of the victims and those affected. We
can no longer postpone the implementation of a viable
solution that will allow us to close this sad chapter of
the United Nations presence in Haiti.

Mexico, together with Jamaica, co-facilitated
General Assembly resolution 71/314, entitled "The new
United Nations approach to cholera in Haiti", in which
the Assembly recognizes the responsibility of the
Organization to the people of Haiti with regard to the
devastating effects the disease has had for the Haitian
people. In that connection, we reiterate the call made
by the General Assembly for Member States to consider
the possibility of contributing the unencumbered
balances and income credits of MINUSTAH to the
United Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner
Trust Fund.

Before concluding, I would like to take this final
opportunity to thank and acknowledge the commitment
of all military and civilian officials who have been part
of MINUSTAH over the past 13 years. In particular,
Mexico pays tribute to all United Nations staff who lost
their lives in pursuit of a better future for the beloved
Haitian people. We will never forget them.

