The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Italy.

The agreement between all the Liberian factions at
Abuja on 19 August marks a turning point in the Liberian
crisis. The Italian Government wishes to express to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros-Boutros Ghali, and to his
Special Representative in Liberia, its appreciation for their
key contribution to, and support of, the Agreement. We
hope that it will lead to a final settlement of the deep crisis
that has ravaged the country for the last six years.

The war took a huge toll on the country: 150,000
people lost their lives in the endless cycles of violence;
800,000 people were forced to leave the country. But the
growing awareness that six years of war had been
completely in vain, the plight and weariness of the people,
and the deadlock between the factions, set the
groundwork for an agreement to be reached.

We share the Secretary-General's assessment in his
report that the prospects for peace are perhaps better now
than they have been at any time since the outbreak of
civil war. The main political leaders are directly
participating in the Council of State. The States members
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) have coordinated their policies towards
Liberia, a fundamental factor, we believe, in making the
peace Agreement possible. Credit is due first and
foremost to Ghana, Chairman-in-Office of ECOWAS, and
to Nigeria, which hosted the talks.

The schedule for the implementation of the various
stages of the 19 August Agreement is rapid and realistic.
Disengagement, disarmament and demobilization of the
troops will be crucial, as will be the reintegration of
combatants into civilian life.

We are also encouraged by the Secretary-General's
report of a significant expansion in humanitarian
assistance activities. The economic infrastructure of the
country must be rebuilt so that Liberia can once again
make full use of its rich natural resources. The
international community should not fail to provide the
assistance necessary to help set Liberia on the road to
recovery.

To conclude, it is our sincere wish and hope that the
developments in the upcoming months and the
consolidation of the process of national reconciliation,
which is still in its infancy, will make it possible for us
to remove Liberia once and for all from the agenda of the
Security Council.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration
of the item on the agenda. The Security Council will
remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 2.10 p.m.
