I thank the Special Adviser, Mr. Karim Khan, for his briefing. Tunisia welcomes the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) by the Security Council in September 2020, at the request of the Iraqi Government, demonstrating the Council's recognition of the cooperation efforts between Iraq and the Investigative Team, as well as our collective attachment to achieving accountability and holding all perpetrators of terrorist acts to account for their crimes. We also welcome the significant progress made during the reporting period, highlighted particularly through the entry of several investigative priorities into the phase of evidentiary consolidation and legal analysis, the identification of additional lines of inquiry, the expansion and diversification of the actors and victim communities involved, the deepening of relations with the national authorities and the provision of capacity-building and training to Iraqi officials. We recognize the impact of the coronavirus disease on the work of UNITAD, especially with regard to its field-based activities. However, we commend the Team for its efforts to find innovative ways to mitigate the impact of restrictions imposed by the pandemic, including through the use of advanced technologies. We are also glad to see tangible results being achieved, including the production of case briefs and case files, the adoption of a common mass graves excavation strategy, the completion of the construction of forensic laboratory facilities and support for ongoing domestic proceedings provided by other Member States. We continue to underline that, while terrorism spares no one from its atrocities, vulnerable groups are often subjected to more violence than others. At the same time, their specific needs are not always properly taken into account in the conduct of investigations and the provision of remedies. We therefore appreciate the gender- based and survivor-centred approach undertaken by the Team, which gives due consideration to the mental health and well-being of survivors while reiterating the importance of full collaboration with the Iraqi Government and the need to ensure respect for national ownership and priorities. In resolution 2379 (2017), the Security Council recognized the gravity of the atrocious crimes committed by Da'esh, which amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. In that connection, we continue to follow discussions in Iraq around the legislative initiative aimed at establishing a legal basis for such crimes. We note that the prosecutions and punishments need to reflect the gravity of the crimes committed, in accordance with Iraq's national framework and legislative philosophy. Tunisia expresses particularly its deep appreciation to the Government of Iraq for its invaluable and constructive cooperation with the Investigative Team. The report (see S/2020/1107) highlights the contributions of the Iraqi authorities in the collection of evidence related to crimes committed by high-level Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant terrorists through the provision of witness statements, case files, audio and video recordings and other documentary evidence. In that regard, Tunisia reaffirms resolution 2379 (2017), in which the Security Council stipulates that the relevant Iraqi authorities are the primary intended recipient of collected evidence and that the Investigative Team shall operate with full respect for the sovereignty of Iraq and its jurisdiction over crimes committed in its territory. We therefore look forward to the full implementation of resolution 2379 (2017) by moving forward with the trials, with the aim of serving justice for victims and survivors and ensuring accountability for those responsible for such hateful crimes. It is important that the Security Council remain united and supportive of the Government and the people of Iraq in that endeavour.
