The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a brief statement in my capacity as the
representative of Belgium.

As other colleagues have done, I would first like
to thank Mr. Holmes for his statement, which
illustrated great commitment and spoke to us all.

Belgium would also like to associate itself with
the statement to be delivered shortly by our German
colleague on behalf of the members of the European
Union.

In his briefing, the Under-Secretary-General
clearly illustrated that there is still a huge gap between
the diplomatic conception of the protection of civilians,
on the one hand, and reality on the ground, on the
other. In order to bridge that gap, Belgium favours a
more concrete, predictable and systematic approach
based on the provisions of resolution 1674 (2006) that
could provide a better mechanism to enable the
Council to carry out an effective policy in the area of
both prevention and recovery. It is clear that the
Secretariat has a clear role to play. We support all of its
efforts and urge it to continue to utilize all means
available to it to that end.
Belgium would also like to emphasize that it is
above all States themselves that must assume the
responsibility to protect civilians in situations of armed
conflict. If they do not have the capacity or the will to
guarantee adequate protection, then the international
community has the responsibility - and even the
duty - to respond.

Like Mr. Holmes, Belgium condemns in the
strongest terms the refusal to grant access to
humanitarian workers in conflict situations. He pointed
out that there have been several conflicts on the
Council's agenda in which such access has been
denied. We have also seen numerous instances of the
use of humanitarian assistance for political purposes,
which is unacceptable. The Council must use all of its
influence in order to guarantee total access in full
security for humanitarian staff.

Among the aspects of resolution 1674 (2006),
Belgium attaches particular importance to the fight
against violence, especially sexual violence against
women and minor children. We have noted how such
acts of violence become true instruments of war in a
number of conflict situations. It is imperative not only
to eradicate such practices but also to prevent them.

As the Under-Secretary-General has emphasized,
combating impunity is one component of protecting
civilians in armed conflict. In that connection, there are
a number of legal and reconciliation mechanisms in
place at the regional, national and international
levels - chief among them the International Criminal
Court - that can contribute to ensuring that justice is
done. Their effective functioning is clearly a deterrent
to those who intend to violate the rights of civilians in
armed conflicts.

I would like to assure Mr. Holmes of Belgium's
full support in the immense task he has before him.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of
Guatemala.

