Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian Federation requested that an
urgent, formal meeting of the Security Council be called
once again to consider the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the situation that has arisen from the
extensive bombing of Bosnian Serb positions by North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) aircraft. We wish
to repeat our earnest demand that an immediate end be
put to these acts of force.

Our approach to this matter is well known, and over
the last 10 days it has been expressed repeatedly to our
partners in the Contact Group, the heads of the Secretariat
of the United Nations, in consultations of the Security
Council and in meetings of the countries contributing
troops to the United Nations forces in Bosnia. Russia's
position was once again clearly expressed in the most
recent statements of President Boris Yeltsin of the
Russian Federation and statements made by its Foreign
Ministry. We are firmly convinced that NATO's
continuing air strikes and the Rapid Reaction Force's
shelling of the Bosnian Serbs is not strengthening but,
rather, undermining efforts to reach a political settlement.
They go beyond the decisions of the Security Council,
change the peace-keeping character of the United Nations
operation in Bosnia and involve the international
community in a conflict against one of the parties.

The only logic we can see in NATO's actions is a
punitive one. Can we call the daily, planned destruction
of the military potential of the Bosnian Serbs
"deterrence", as described in resolution 836 (1993), when
the military potential of the Bosnian Serbs has been
systematically destroyed over many days? The targets of
the bombings are not only military sites, but also
equipment and infrastructure - bridges and lines of
communication, including civilian ones. The delegation of
the Russian Federation has so far received no reply to
questions regarding either the damage or the casualties
caused by the bombings, including those among the
civilian population. We insist that the Security Council be
immediately informed of the facts.

 

As the Council knows, the reason for initiating this
action was the bloody incident in a Sarajevo market. I
should like to say quite clearly that we strongly condemn
any such terrorist act, no matter who carries it out. The
Security Council was informed that the investigation carried
out by the United Nations forces established that the
Bosnian Serbs were responsible. Taking this information on
trust, we had expected more detailed clarification of the
grounds for such a conclusion, particularly since we read
items in the press that cast some doubt upon it.

I should like to recall that in the case of a similar
incident in a Sarajevo market, on 5 February 1994, which
was also used as a pretext for using force against the
Bosnian Serbs, Members of the United Nations were able,
albeit belatedly, to know the results of the investigation: the
culprits of the crime could not in fact be identified. Strikes,
however, were still carried out. In the light of that
experience, we confirm and reiterate our demand that the
Security Council be immediately informed of the details of
the most recent investigation.

I would particularly like to emphasize that the
procedures agreed upon in the Security Council for the use
of force in Bosnia and Herzegovina were seriously violated
this time. First, the necessary consultations were not held
with members of the Security Council, as stipulated in
resolution 844 (1993). Nor were the members of the
Security Council informed in timely fashion of the actions
that had been taken. This is particularly inadmissible since
the actions taken clearly represent a qualitative change in
the nature of the use of force. I repeat that the members of
the Council, unlike in previous instances, were informed
only after the event.

Secondly, the bombing and shelling this time were
disproportionate and extensive, whereas hitherto there had
been a different understanding in the Security Council in
that regard. We know the decision on disproportionate
response was adopted in the NATO Council. However, the
Security Council took no decisions on changing the
principle of proportionality regarding the use of force.

Thirdly, we were astonished to learn, literally a few
days ago, from responsible members of the Secretariat of
the United Nations, that recently there had been a
qualitative change in the "dual-key" procedure, and that
now the United Nations had no opportunity to put an end
to the use of force without NATO's agreement. It would be
interesting to know when and by whom such a decision was
taken, because it runs counter to the most recent
clarification of the Secretary-General, who in his letter of
1 August to the President of the Security Council
(document S/1995/623) clearly indicated that, regarding
cooperation between the United Nations and NATO in the
use of air power,

"These 'dual-key' arrangements remain in place."
(S/1995/623, second paragraph)
As the Council knows, those arrangements gave the
United Nations the right to independently put an end to
the strikes. For us, as for other Members that contribute
troops to the United Nations forces and who are not
NATO members, this is an extremely sensitive and
important issue, since we are here talking about, among
other things, the safety and security of our own peace-
keepers.

Fourthly, we recently learned from the media and
from statements made by the representatives of
UNPROFOR that a certain memorandum of understanding
exists between NATO and the United Nations on the use
of air power under the new conditions. Neither the
Security Council nor the troop-contributing countries -
at least, not Russia - were informed of that
memorandum, although, as the press made quite clear
once again, according to that memorandum the region in
which force would be applied falls outside the boundaries
of the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina and in fact
overlaps into neighbouring States as well. This is in direct
violation of resolutions of the Security Council.
Furthermore, as we understand it, this memorandum also
contains a number of other fundamental changes in the
approach to United Nations operations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In View of the extreme importance of this
question, we would also request that the text of the
memorandum be immediately made available to members
of the Security Council.

Fifthly, the active participation of the Rapid Reaction
Force in neutralizing Serbian positions clearly exceeds its
mandate as set out in resolution 988 (1995). This is no
longer about protecting United Nations personnel and
humanitarian convoys; it is a Virtual participation in
military action against one side. I wish to quote from a
document distributed by the NATO secretariat at a
meeting of the Political Committee of the North Atlantic
Cooperation Council:

"In the evening of 5 September, firing was
observed in Sarajevo. According to the United
Nations evaluation, an exchange of fire, initiated by
the forces of the Bosnian Government, had taken

 

place between the two belligerent parties. The Rapid
Reaction Force fired warning shots towards the forces
of the Bosnian Serbs. The commander of the local
forces of the Bosnian Government received a letter
containing a warning."

This approach, I think, very clearly illustrates the fact that
the Rapid Reaction Force is no longer impartial, although
it remains an integral part of the United Nations peace-
keeping operation in Bosnia.

One wonders, therefore, about the entire United
Nations operation in Bosnia. We have pointed out that the
most recent ultimatum to the Bosnian Serbs essentially
contained demands which were previously addressed by the
Security Council to both parties in resolution 987 (1995).
Thus, the Security Council demand that both parties
implement the mutually agreed demilitarization of the safe
areas was ignored, as was its call for a cease-fire and a
cessation of hostilities. Furthermore, in the same resolution
the Security Council called on the parties to cooperate with
UNPROFOR in the implementation of these agreements.
However, since that resolution was adopted the Security
Council has been given no information whatsoever on how
UNPROFOR has carried out its instructions to promote
negotiations between the parties. Instead, as we all know,
UNPROFOR issued an ultimatum to one of the parties.

Such developments may have very serious
consequences, not only for the prospects of a peace
settlement in Bosnia, but also for peace-keeping activities
of the United Nations as a whole and its relationship with
regional organizations and arrangements.

We were very pleased to hear the heartening news
from Geneva that agreement has been reached on a Bosnian
settlement between the Foreign Ministers of Yugoslavia,
Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina under the aegis of the
international Contact Group. The logic of peace is making
headway, not thanks to but in spite of the mass bombings.
Incidentally, as is known, the Bosnian Serbs had agreed to
participate in the negotiations as part of a single delegation
with Yugoslavia even before the NATO strikes started. It
is important that the Contact Group' s proposals, which have
been in existence for over a year, including not only the
map of territorial delimitations, but also the very principles
of an equitable constitutional framework for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, have, following the Geneva meetings, been
accepted by all parties.

The outcome in Geneva, we believe, creates an
important positive impulse for an intensified political
process on the basis of concerted efforts on the part of all
parties concerned. The Russian initiatives, as put forward
by President Yeltsin, are also directed along these lines.
Let us hope that the logic of war will finally yield to the
logic of peace.

