Mr. Manalo (Philippines): First of all, allow me
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
also congratulate Bulgaria on its presidency last month.
We further wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Dhanapala for his presentation this morning.

Mr. President, I wish to express my delegation's
appreciation for your having convened this very
important meeting. The proliferation and uncontrolled
spread of small arms and light weapons pose a serious
threat to peace, safety and security and disrupt
sustainable economic growth and social development.
The excessive accumulation and unregulated
distribution of firearms further aggravate conflicts. My
country has experienced terrorism and the consequent
loss and displacement of innocent civilians and the
commission of heinous crimes due to the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons.

In this regard, the Philippines notes that the
report of the Secretary-General on small arms presents
not only the recent initiatives of the Council but also
recommendations and observations regarding an
expanded role for the Council in its two primary tasks:
arms embargoes, and the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) of ex-combatants. The
recommendations are noteworthy and would serve well
in the development of both short-term and long-term
strategies to counter the dangers that the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons poses to peace and
security.

With regard to DDR, my delegation maintains its
view that this should not be merely a post-conflict
peace-building measure. With respect to low-intensity,
long-running conflicts, this practice may not be very
effective and could even be counter-productive as
combatants turn to crime, piracy, acts of terrorism or
other similar activities. Combatants, therefore, should
have a viable and practical opportunity to remove
themselves from an ongoing conflict and for their small
arms to be collected. The availability of DDR before
conflict ceases may in fact hasten the resolution of
conflict. My delegation is gratified that this element
has been incorporated in the United Nations
Programme of Action, and we welcome the
recommendation contained in the Secretary-General's
report to include it in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

As part of a long-term strategy, the Philippines
strongly supports the decisions adopted by the Security
Council in its resolutions 1314 (2000) and 1379 (2001),
relating to the protection of children in armed conflict.
In recognition of the humanitarian costs and
consequences of small arms proliferation and abuse,
the Philippines is undertaking a comprehensive
programme for children in armed conflict, with three
components - prevention; advocacy and mobilization
to save our children; and rescue, rehabilitation and
reintegration. Measures for prevention are approached
through livelihood programmes, educational assistance,
health care and nutrition services, food security and the
provision of basic facilities and infrastructure.

Of the total recorded crimes committed with
firearms in the Philippines last year, 85 per cent were
committed with unlicensed or illegally possessed
firearms. The Programme of Action adopted by the
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons is, therefore, a major step in the right
direction in addressing this problem. The statement
issued by the Security Council President on 31 August
last year called on all Member States to take required
measures to implement the recommendations contained
therein. The Philippines has undertaken initiatives to
implement the United Nations Programme of Action.

The Philippines hosted a regional seminar on
implementing the United Nations Programme of Action
in July 2002, co-sponsored by Canada. Delegates from
eight member countries of the Association of South-
East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and from Australia,
China, Japan and Republic of Korea, together with
representatives from civil society and the arms
industry, participated in this seminar. Observers from
some European Union countries and the United States
of America also participated.

This seminar aimed to promote awareness of the
United Nations Programme of Action in Small Arms
and Light Weapons at the regional level. The
discussions focused on capacity- building, training in
law enforcement, customs and airport control,
collection and destruction programmes and DDR.

The report of the seminar Co-Chairmen
concluded that developing a regional arrangement to
deal with the problems of illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons is crucial, and it proposed that the
following principles be taken into consideration. First,
there should be respect for and commitment to
international law and the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. Secondly, such an arrangement
should be balanced, realistic and implementable, with
the primary objective of ensuring that arms transfers
are made solely by States. Thirdly, such arrangement
should take into account the right of each State to
manufacture, import and retain small arms and light
weapons for its self-defence and security needs.
Fourthly, such arrangement should take into account
the role played by civil society in raising awareness of
the danger associated with the illicit trade in and
uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light
weapons.

Simultaneously with this seminar, a symbolic
arms destruction ceremony was held to coincide with
the first anniversary of the 2001 United Nations
Conference. More than 1,000 confiscated, seized and
surplus small arms and light weapons were destroyed
during the ceremony.
Finally, my delegation appreciates the political
impetus that the Security Council has given to the issue
of small arms and light weapons. We believe this
reflects recognition that the proliferation and abuse of
small arms and light weapons is a threat to
international peace and security.

