Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank Mr. Soren Jessen-
Petersen, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for the constructive efforts that he is making
in Kosovo and for his technical assessment and the

progress that has been achieved in connection with
standards for Kosovo.

The situation of Kosovo depends on the effective
participation of Albanian and Serb leaders in this
process, as the region is at a critical juncture with
respect to forging a better future for itself. All
categories must participate in the dialogue in order to
ensure its legitimacy and sustainability. The
international community must support these efforts and
this process.

The Kosovo of the future will be stable and
prosperous only if it is based on a recognition of multi-
ethnicity. For that reason, national reconciliation and
the participation of all of the parties in the process is a
crucial element to ensure a multi-ethnic Kosovo. As a
result, the participation of non-Albanian minorities in
all of the workings of the State and society remains
pivotal. To that end, the Government must continue its
efforts to ensure governmental participation of
minorities. Belgrade must also facilitate their work in
the context of those institutions. That would be
reassuring for the inhabitants of Kosovo, who would be
returning in a climate of security.

We would like to know what measures are being
taken to facilitate the return of refugees and displaced
persons, and how financial support could improve the
situation on the ground.

While the Special Representative has, in past
assessments, pointed out the slow pace of standards
implementation, his current assessment is more
positive and indicates that a great deal of progress has
been made in standards implementation during the
period covered by the Secretary-General's report. We
share his hope that the Provisional Institutions will
sustain their current commitment, which will make it
possible to accomplish even more in the months to
come.

There is no doubt that the total commitment of
the new Government and of the new Prime Minister,
Mr. Ceku, to standards implementation, as well as the
high priority given this process, will allow progress to
be made in the implementation of the eight standards.

We commend the role that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in Kosovo is playing in supporting the Provisional
Institutions, in the fight against crime and in adapting
those structures so as to make them more competent
and to promote a political settlement.

