Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, we would like to welcome you,
Sir, and the delegation of Qatar, who will be presiding
over the Security Council in December - the last month
of the year. We would like also to thank the delegation
of Peru, which held the Council's presidency in
November, for having effectively discharged its duties.

Our delegation would like to express its gratitude
to Mr. Egeland for his update on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We are grateful to Mr.

Egeland for the efforts he has made in his post and
wish him every success in his future activities.

Unfortunately, not a day goes by without our
learning of more murders, abuses and other types of
violence against civilians in armed conflict. Despite the
existence of a myriad of instruments in the area of
humanitarian and human rights law, in many of today's
conflicts civilian casualties and the destruction of
civilian infrastructure are not simply the costs of
waging war, but the result of premeditated actions.
Like direct Violence, the destruction of medical and
social protection infrastructure during hostilities also
causes loss of life from disease and starvation. This
past year has been no exception in that regard, and was
marked by further conflict that caused human
suffering. This once again underscores the importance
of a prompt response by the United Nations to cases of
violence against innocent civilians and to the
destruction of civilian infrastructure during armed
conflict. This subject has taken on increasing
importance in the humanitarian agenda of the United
Nations. It calls for systemic measures at the
international, regional and national levels. The key
points in this connection are streamlined coordination
and a clear division of labour, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.

Against that backdrop, we call for the greatest
prudence when dealing with documents and concepts
worked out without coordination with all United
Nations Member States or without any general
discussion in the United Nations. We urge that they not
be promoted as being widely recognized under
international standards.

In that context, it is to be expected that the
concept of the responsibility to protect has not yet
become a reality today specifically because in its
present form it does not enjoy sufficiently broad
support from Member States. In our view, it would be
wiser to talk about the implementation of the more
acceptable option enshrined in the 2005 Summit
Outcome, namely, the responsibility to protect civilians
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. We would once again like to
emphasize that, under this concept, the primary
responsibility lies with national Governments, whose
efforts must be supported by the international
community without undermining State sovereignty.

We expect the Peacebuilding Commission to take
specific steps to assist in the stabilization of post-
conflict situations.

In the context of conflict settlement, we note the
growing importance being given by the Security
Council to problems affecting civilians as part of its
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security. Resolution 1674 (2006) was a further step in
the Council's efforts in that regard. We are certain that,
at this point, it is important to focus on the
implementation of existing Council decisions to protect
civilians, including those that highlight the subject of
women and children, and not to dissipate our efforts by
generating new documents in this area. The main goal
should be to ensure the practical implementation of
existing legal norms and the decisions already taken.

Our delegation attaches great importance to
eliminating impunity and to the prosecution of all
persons guilty of crimes against civilians. In that
regard, we would note the role of the International
Criminal Court.

When it comes to protecting civilians, it is
necessary to ensure the security of humanitarian
personnel themselves, whose effective work is crucial
to providing assistance to civilians. At the same time,
we would like to underscore the importance of having
humanitarian workers comply with the principles of
independence, neutrality and impartiality.

In conclusion, we would be remiss if we were to
fail to refer to the importance of preventing armed
conflict, which calls for eradicating the root causes of
conflict. In that connection, we fully agree with our
Chinese colleagues. As a first step, it is important to at
least avoid creating situations that are fraught with
violence against civilians. Such a goal can be achieved
only through the joint efforts of the entire international
community. The United Nations is meant to play a
leading role in that regard.

