Mr. Guehenno: Let me at the outset thank all the
members of the Security Council for the strong support
they have expressed for our efforts and the joint efforts
we conduct with the Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS). Let me also thank the
members of the Council for their own national efforts.
Several Council members have described the
programmes they have developed for their national
military. These programmes are very important for us.
Peacekeeping often occupies just a moment in a
military career; therefore it is essential that the
partnership that I was describing become part of the
programmes that are developed at the national levels,
apart from what happens within the context of
peacekeeping. Those programmes provide the
background and foundation for an effective effort once
troops are deployed in a peacekeeping context.

The issue of data has been raised by several
delegations. I think we have to recognize that,
unfortunately, there is still a general lack of reliable
information on HIV rates in conflict and post-conflict
countries. As one would expect, statistics are
particularly weak in countries that have been afflicted
by severe conflict. That makes it very difficult to judge
the exact impact of a peacekeeping operation on
national HIV prevalence. We believe this is an area
where we have to make progress. That is why we are
developing survey tools, with UNAIDS, such as the
knowledge, attitude and practice questionnaire that I
mentioned in my briefing. We believe that this will
help us evaluate, with greater accuracy, the levels of
awareness and risk practices in the field and also the
levels of efficiency and effectiveness of our own
programmes. That will also allow us to answer one of
the questions raised by Ambassador Cunningham,
namely, comparing the respective impacts of focal
points versus HIV policy advisers. HIV policy advisers
have so far been deployed in missions that were bigger
than the missions where the focal points have been
deployed. As we gather more statistics we will be in a
good position to assess what are the most effective
programmes that we conduct and also the most
effective structures that we deploy in the field.

Focal points usually are medical personnel whose
work covers a range of medical issues, and HIV/AIDS
is one of those issues. Obviously they probably cannot
have the same impact that a full time HIV policy
adviser can have.

Ambassador Cunningham also raised the issue of
the question of what would happen to the Headquarters
HIV/AIDS policy adviser who is presently funded
thanks to a contribution from Denmark, raised by
UNAIDS. The existing funding will cover the post
until December 2004. I think this gives us time to
discuss with UNAIDS how to pursue what we consider

a very important and useful function in the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO).

Let me conclude by saying that I think this
discussion shows how important it is for us to have a
very close and practical interaction with the Security
Council and with the troop-contributing countries on
the question of HIV/AIDS. We will not be successful
against this devastating pandemic if we do not join our
efforts and closely coordinate. Working in isolation
will not succeed, but if we work as a team, I think we
have a chance to succeed.

