Mr. Miyet (spoke in French): The report of the
Secretary-General of 9 August 2000 (S/2000/785),
which is now before the Council, was submitted
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1312 (2000), of
31 July 2000, in which the Council authorized the
establishment of the United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) until 31 January 2001,
with an initial deployment of 100 military observers
and the necessary civilian support staff.

The same resolution requested the Secretary-
General to pursue the planning of the Mission and to
begin to take the necessary administrative measures to
organize it. In this regard, the report of the Secretary-
General provides a concept of operations and
recommendations for the expansion of the Mission.
Additionally, the report gives an account of the
political and humanitarian developments that have
taken place since the report contained in document
S/2000/530 was issued, on 2 June 2000.

With regard to the political situation in the area,
members of the Council will no doubt remember that in
his report of 30 June the Secretary-General informed
the Council that Ethiopia and Eritrea had signed at
Algiers on 18 June an Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities under the auspices of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU). At the OAU summit held from
10 to 12 July at Lome, the heads of State or
Government encouraged the parties to continue their
negotiations on outstanding matters under the auspices
of the OAU, with a view to achieving lasting peace. In
this regard, the parties engaged in indirect talks at
Washington at the beginning of July on modalities for
the delimitation and demarcation of the border, as well
as on the issue of compensation. As the report of 9
August notes, the talks adjourned without a formal
statement concerning the outcome of the negotiations.

I now turn to the humanitarian situation. It is
clear that the armed conflict between Ethiopia and
Eritrea has had tragic effects on the affected
populations. In June 2000, the number of displaced
persons on Eritrean territory surpassed 1.1 million.
Moreover, some 94,000 Eritreans have taken refuge in
the Sudan since the resumption of hostilities in May
2000. Since the conclusion of the 18 June Agreement
on Cessation of Hostilities, there have been
spontaneous returns of Eritreans who wished to return
before the end of the planting season. However, the
immediate return of many refugees and displaced
persons will be impossible due to the lamentable state
of housing and basic infrastructure, the loss of personal
property and farming implements, the lack of social
services and the risks posed by mines.

Those conditions are aggravated by the fact that
the rainy season has begun, and the depletion of food
stocks by September 2000 is an extremely worrisome
possibility. Given this dramatic situation, it is essential
for the international community to respond generously
and immediately to the January 2000 humanitarian
appeal, which was revised last July, and to contribute
the estimated $87.3 needed to address the humanitarian
needs of 1.1 million war-affected Eritreans.

At the same time, the conflict has resulted in 500
civilian deaths and 750 orphans in the Tigray region of
Ethiopia. In addition, almost 650 civilians are reported
missing. As the Council is aware, this situation created
by the war has been compounded by a disastrous
drought that has afflicted Ethiopia and brought the
number of people needing emergency food aid to about
10 million. Four agricultural seasons have been lost,
over 70,000 hectares of arable land have become
uncultivable, and a large number of Ethiopians are
unable to return to their villages in the border areas due
to the presence of unexploded ordnance and mines.
Once again, massive humanitarian relief is required
there in order to assist the affected Ethiopian
population.

In June, an assessment mission organized by the
United Nations team in Ethiopia was dispatched for the
first time to the contested areas of Badme and Zala
Ambesa, where, due to intermittent fighting, people
have been deprived of all humanitarian aid for two
years. The assessment mission focused its attention on
the ways of meeting the immediate needs of the
population, the rehabilitation of devastated zones and
the diagnosis and treatment of sexually transmitted
diseases following massive population movements and
military occupation.

I should now like to address in greater detail the
concept of operations to be put into effect by the
United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea. As the
report of 30 June notes (S/2000/643), the Secretary-
General dispatched a reconnaissance mission to the
area from 4 to 18 July 2000 to discuss with the OAU
and the two parties modalities for possible United
Nations assistance in implementing the Agreement on
Cessation of Hostilities. Also, as planned, in the first
phase the United Nations deployed a team of five
liaison officers to Addis Ababa and Asmara to
undertake preliminary consultations with the parties
and the OAU, and to prepare for the initial deployment
of the 100 military observers and civilian support staff
authorized by resolution 1312 (2000).

With respect to the second phase, during which
the first 100 military observers and the support staff
will be deployed, preparations are under way for the
deployment beginning at the end of this month. The
activities envisaged in the course of the second phase
pursuant to resolution 1312 (2000) are described in
paragraph 44 of the report of the Secretary-General
now before the Council. In the meantime it will be
essential to dispatch as soon as possible a mine
clearance team, in accordance with the Agreement of
Cessation of Hostilities and resolution 1312 (2000). At
the end of last week, I wrote a letter to the two
Ministers for Foreign Affairs in an effort to speed up
that team's deployment.

The mandate envisaged for the United Nations
Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea, the full deployment of
which might take place in a third phase once it is
authorized by the Security Council, is described in
paragraph 15 of the Secretary-General's current report
(S/2000/785). The provisions of the mandate of the
Mission were drawn up in accordance with the
Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities and on the basis
of the conclusions of the reconnaissance mission that
visited the region from 4 to 18 July. As indicated in the
report, the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea would be headed by a special representative of
the Secretary-General and would be made up of a
number of components specializing in the political,
military and administrative areas, as well as in mine
clearance and information.

The military component of the Mission would be
headed by a Major-General. The Mission would
operate in the temporary security zone and adjacent
areas. As described in paragraphs 45 and 46 of the
report, the Mission would work in close coordination
with representatives of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) to carry out the envisaged tasks and to
facilitate the implementation of the Agreement on
Cessation of Hostilities.

Moreover, according to the Agreement, the
United Nations and the OAU will establish a Military
Coordination Commission that includes representatives
of the two parties; its task will be to coordinate and
resolve matters, particularly military ones related to the
implementation of the mandate of the Mission. It is
clearly important that the Commission be set up as
soon as possible. Moreover, it is envisaged that the
United Nations Mission will coordinate its activities
with the local and international humanitarian agencies
in the temporary security zone and the adjacent areas
by setting up a civilian and military coordination centre
especially created for that purpose.

As pointed out in paragraph 18 of this report, to
ensure that the Mission can effectively implement its
mandate as proposed, the special representative and the
force commander would maintain offices at Addis
Ababa and Asmara. Regional headquarters would also
be established at Mendefera in Eritrea and at Mekele in
Ethiopia to maintain close links with the local
authorities. For operational reasons, the main, but not
sole, logistics support base would be established in
Asmara, given its proximity to the Mission area of
operations.

The area of operations of the United Nations
Mission would be divided into three sectors: Sector
West, Sector Centre and the Sector East. Regional
sector headquarters would be established in Barentu in
the west, Adigrat in the centre and Assab in the east.
Each sector's personnel will be composed of a military
observer group and an infantry battalion.

The Secretary-General invites the Security
Council to consider the proposals contained in his
report related to the expanded mandate and structure of
the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea. As
indicated in paragraph 48 and spelled out in detail in
paragraphs 26 and 27 of the report, the deployment of a
military force of 4,200 military personnel, including
220 military observers, 3 infantry battalions and the
necessary support units has been proposed. Discussions
are under way with the parties in this regard, and it is
important that they show an open mind and the
necessary flexibility to allow for the establishment of
this force.

In his report, the Secretary-General again pays a
tribute to President Bouteflika and the Organization of
African Unity for having facilitated the Agreement on
Cessation of Hostilities between Ethiopia and Eritrea.
We welcome the decision taken by the OAU at the
Lome summit to call on President Bouteflika to
continue his efforts to bring about lasting peace
between the two countries. The Secretary-General also
expresses his appreciation for the fact that the United
States and the European Union have effectively
supported his mediation efforts. Moreover, we count on
the Ethiopian and Eritrea authorities to fulfil the
agreements undertaken in the Agreement on Cessation
of Hostilities and to cooperate unreservedly with the
United Nations Mission in the fulfilment of its
mandate.
In the coming days it will be vital for the two
parties to cooperate actively to ensure that the
temporary security zone can be quickly established and
that the necessary information can be made available to
the Mission to allow the start of mine clearance
activity, vital preconditions for beginning work in the
zone.

