Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting and for
deciding to organize it in order to take action on the
proposal submitted by the non-aligned caucus of the
Security Council. It is my distinct honour to submit the
draft resolution on this subject contained in document
S/2001/270 on behalf of the members of the Non-
Aligned Movement caucus - Colombia, Jamaica,
Mali, Mauritius, Singapore and Tunisia - and on
behalf of my own delegation, Bangladesh.

The subject being taken up for action today has
been before us for quite some time. Members of the
Council will recall that on 7 October 2000 we in the
Council adopted resolution 1322 (2000), which called
for the cessation of violence and condemned the
excessive use of force against Palestinian civilians.
From then on, this issue has been of primary
importance to the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Arab Group, and in the minds of the general
membership of the United Nations.

In December, the non-aligned caucus made a
proposal to send a United Nations observer force to the
region so that the ongoing violence there, which still
continues, could be contained. That force was meant to
ensure the safety and security of Palestinian civilians.
It was, however, not possible for the Council to adopt
that proposal or a draft resolution to that effect.
Subsequently, the Arab League and the Non-Aligned
Movement made a request to hold an urgent meeting of
the Security Council to consider establishing a United
Nations force for the protection of Palestinian civilians,
which was in line with what the Non-Aligned
Movement caucus had proposed earlier, in December.

After the open debate held by the Council, in
which not only the members of the Security Council
but also a large number of the Members of the United
Nations not members of the Council participated, and
at which the issue of establishing a United Nations
observer force for the protection of Palestinian
civilians emerged as the single most important point
made by delegations in their statements, the non-
aligned caucus of the Security Council decided to
revive its own draft resolution and submitted, on
20 March, a text containing appropriate adjustments for
the establishment of a United Nations observer force
for the protection of Palestinian civilians. That
proposal was ultimately "put in blue" and was made
available to the members of the Council on 23 March.

We in the Non-Aligned Movement caucus have
been anxious to work on that text with the support of
the other members of the Council. In that context, we
received with an open mind a draft resolution
submitted by the four European countries members of
the Council. That text attempted to broaden the scope
for support of the idea of a protection force for
Palestinian civilians. As I said, with an open mind and
in good faith, the Non-Aligned Movement caucus
engaged in the negotiations on the European text,
providing our own ideas and suggestions. Our objective
was to prepare and articulate a draft that would have
the broadest possible support of the Council. We
believed that if an observer force were to be
established, it had to have the broadest support of the
Council. During that exercise we also had in mind the
Arab Summit scheduled to take place in Amman on
27 and 28 March. We emphasized time and again that it
was necessary for the Security Council to act on the
proposal for an observer force before the
commencement of the Summit.

This subject 4 the protection of Palestinian
civilians - is one of the items on the agenda of the
Arab summit; the Arab leaders were looking forward to
our action. The draft resolution had contained a
mandate for the Secretary-General to undertake
consultations with the parties on the issues appearing
in the draft resolution, and we had thought that while
he was in Amman to attend the Arab summit it would
be appropriate for him to receive the Council's
mandate to start his consultations with the parties
concerned. That is why the timeframe of the Arab
summit for action on the draft text was absolutely
essential. Time and again the Non-Aligned Movement
had made that point very clear to our colleagues with
whom we were engaged in negotiations on a draft text.

Intensive negotiations had been taking place for
the past five days. The non-aligned caucus and our
European colleagues, subsequently joined by the
United States, had engaged in long hours of
consultations and negotiations on the text. And, to
show our good faith, we set aside our own text, and
worked on the European text, hoping that broad-based
positive support for that agreed text would be possible.
That was one of the main objectives of our work. We
thought this exercise would articulate broad support in
the Council for the role of the United Nations, and that
of the Secretary-General, on the Middle East question
and on the question of Palestine. We thought it would
also send an appropriate message from the Council to
the Arab summit so that the Arab leaders who are
directly involved in the issues could be engaged in the
matter. Also, of course, our objective was to take action
on the draft resolution by Sunday so that the Arab
summit, which started today, could benefit from the
action of the Council.

The Non-Aligned Movement caucus was hopeful
from the beginning that it would be possible to work
out a text which would command the broad support of
the Council. Such a text was drawn up this afternoon,
and the Non-Aligned Movement caucus was ready for
action. We thought the text which had emerged after all
those hours of negotiations had the possibility of
broad-based support. We worked until five o'clock this
morning, and we have been working since then. When
the text, which had seemed to have such a broad base
of support, was ready, we were hopeful that action
would be taken this evening, so that, even if the
summit had started in Amman, the leaders would
benefit from the text for the final day of the summit,
tomorrow. Late in the evening, we were advised that it
was not possible for us to agree on action on the text
which we had worked out. In that situation, in order to
be able to take a Council decision in time for the
conclusion of the Arab summit, the Non-Aligned
Movement caucus requested of the presidency of the
Council that a vote be taken on the draft resolution
originally proposed by the non-aligned caucus. That is
the draft resolution which I referred to, and which is
contained in document S/2001/270.

Members of the Non-Aligned Movement caucus
fully cooperated with other members of the Council to
reach agreement on the text, which was negotiated over
long hours. We had approached those negotiations in
good faith and in total transparency. We had shown
flexibility time and again to accommodate the views of
all sides, the basic intention being that this observer
force proposal would have the broadest possible
support in the Council.

So we come to the Council requesting action on
our text, feeling frustrated that it was not possible for
us to take action on the broad-based draft resolution
which was negotiated and which emerged this evening.

We hope that the proposal contained in our text,
for the establishment of a mechanism for the protection
of Palestinian civilians, will receive the broadest
support from the Council, and we hope that the Council
will be able to act in such a manner that the safety,
security and protection of the Palestinian civilians are
ensured.

