Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank and congratulate the President and his
team for their able leadership of the Security Council
during the month of February. Our programme of work
during the month was busy, with very important issues
and considerations. The consensus agreements on draft
resolutions regarding the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea and the cessation of hostilities in Syria were
the crowning achievement of all our efforts. We would
like to make the following observations on the different
issues before the Council this month.

First of all, we would like to comment on the open
debate on the working methods of the subsidiary bodies
of the Security Council (see S/PV.7620). We welcome
the positive results mentioned in the briefing and the
publication of the note by the President contained in
document S/2016/l70 on 22 February. We express our
gratitude to the Venezuelan delegation for its initiative
in that regard. We stress the importance of this note
by the President and the need to have it implemented
in practical terms. This is a joint responsibility of the
leadership of the subsidiary bodies, their members
and their secretariats, particularly in terms of the
transparency of the work of these bodies and the need
for an objective vision of promoting sanctions regimes
as one of the methods available to the Security Council
that enhances its credibility and ability to realize the
purposes and principles of the Charter.
Secondly, in the open debate in respect of
the purposes and principles of the Charter (see S/PV.762l), many countries and groups of countries
presented important ideas, particularly in terms of the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
would like to state the importance of the political will
to respect the Charter and its provisions and for the
United Nations to bear its responsibility to develop and
improve its ability to play its role. Otherwise, it will
have to withdraw from the international arena, with
reliance on it gradually decreasing.

Thirdly, the open debate on the comprehensive
review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
considered a number of important issues, most
importantly the prevention of conflict from a political,
social and development perspective. The Council thus
shouldered its responsibilities in this regard through
a commitment to the letter and the spirit of Chapters
VI and VIII of the Charter, giving precedence to
preventive diplomacy and cooperation with regional
organizations with a view to the peaceful settlement
of disputes. Egypt hopes that these positive ideas will
be reflected in the current negotiations on a draft joint
resolution of the Council and the General Assembly on
the review process.

Fourthly, as concerns Syria, the crisis there was
once again at the top of the Council's priorities. The
developments we have witnessed recently have been
marked by the positive step of having reached an
understanding on the cessation of hostilities in Syria.
We call on all Syrian and non-Syrian parties to remain
committed to this agreement and to the continuation of
the Geneva talks, as well as to beginning negotiations
between the Syrian Government and the opposition,
under the auspices of the United Nations.

Furthermore, while military operations have
intensified, members of the Council have witnessed
positive developments in terms of access to humanitarian
assistance. We encourage all parties to continue to do
their utmost to alleviate the suffering of the civilian
population and stress once again that the Vienna
process for a political settlement, which resulted in the
International Support Group as well as the adoption of
Security Council resolution 2254 (2015), has opened a
new and historic window of opportunity for a peaceful
settlement in Syria that may not reappear for years.

The Security Council bears the responsibility of
guaranteeing the implementation of the plan of action
and preserving the consensus ofthe Council as reflected
in its resolution without selectivity or preconditions.
Negotiations over a transitional period and access to
humanitarian assistance, as well as fighting terrorism,
are all parallel tracks that should be approached without
delay, taking into account the importance of reaching a
political settlement of the crisis as the ideal way to put
an end to the suffering of the civilian population and to
fight terrorism.

Fifthly, February was also busy with consultations
on the question of Palestine, particularly concerning
the humanitarian suffering and the continued violations
of the rights of the Palestinian people. We would like to
reiterate that the question of Palestine is at an extremely
delicate stage, since Israeli settlement policies, the
confiscation of Palestinian lands and the destruction of
their homes have almost destroyed every prospect for a
political settlement based on the two-State solution. We
have two options: either the international community,
including the Security Council, takes action to defend
the rights of the Palestinian people and put forward a
two-State-based solution, or we should start seriously
considering how to deal with a policy of imposing the
reality of a one-State solution.

Sixthly, on Burundi, February was also busy with
diplomatic efforts with regard to the political crisis
in Burundi, following the visit paid by the Council
to Bujumbura and Addis Ababa and the visits by the
Secretary-General and the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, as well as the high-level
delegation of the African Union to Burundi, expressing
the concern of the international community and its
interest in putting a speedy end to the conflict. However,
we would warn against any attempts motivated by a
specific vision of the settlement of the crisis and the
means of its implementation, as well as of the role of
the United Nations and its nature, without consultation
with the Burundi Government and members of the
peaceful opposition, as well as civil society and the
other regional parties concerned.

We believe that the Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General on Conflict Prevention, including in Burundi,
should be given the proper mandate to deal with this
crisis and to preserve the gains that we have achieved
since the Arusha Agreement entered into force. We call
on the Security Council to listen to the different views
of and assessments by the various parties that have
visited Burundi to arrive at a proper strategy to deal
with the crisis. We reiterate our readiness to effectively
contribute to our consideration of this crisis.

In conclusion, we wish you every success,
Mr. President, and we also wish success to the
next presidency.

