Ms. Novotna (Slovakia): My delegation joins
previous speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on
conducting the business of the Security Council with
great skill and wisdom. The same compliments go to
the German delegation, which presided over this body
in the month of February.

We appreciate the decision of the Security
Council to provide the floor to the wider United
Nations membership to express their views in today's
open debate. Slovakia has aligned itself with the
statement of the Greek Presidency of the European
Union. Nevertheless, we have asked for the floor to
make a few additional comments in our national
capacity on the issue of the utmost gravity before us:
the situation in Iraq.

We deeply regret that diplomacy on Iraq has
failed and that the Council was unable to bridge its
divisions on such a crucial issue. We are convinced
that, although the situation is serious, it is not
permanent. Like others, Slovakia wished that political
tools had made the difference and enabled us to avoid a
crisis. We regret that the path of unity in the Security
Council, which provided so well for the international
community nearly five months ago, could not be
followed.

At present, our foremost priority should dwell on
dealing with the immediate humanitarian needs of the
Iraqi population. My delegation is pleased to note that
the parties involved have recognized the crucial role
that the United Nations and its system should play in
coping with the humanitarian situation in Iraq. Now is
the moment for the Security Council to renew its unity
and put aside the differences that have marked its
consideration of the issue of disarmament.

The most urgent consideration should be given to
the proposals made by the Secretary-General regarding
necessary modifications to the oil for food programme
in order to make the proceeds from Iraqi oil available
for specific humanitarian purposes. This would be
precisely in line with the principle that the natural
resources of Iraq should be used strictly for the needs
and benefits of the Iraqi people. We encourage the
Security Council to swiftly proceed with negotiating
and adopting a decision that would enable the
Secretary-General to effectively manage the oil for
food programme in order to satisfy the humanitarian
situation that is rapidly evolving on the ground.

The people of Iraq are facing a difficult period
today. They are confronted with the consequences of
policies they have not had a real chance to influence.
The Iraqi regime undoubtedly placed political
objectives before humanitarian concerns. Slovakia
believes that the people of Iraq deserve a better future
than what they have experienced so far. Their interests
will be best served by their being able to live in
conditions of political and economic stability and
peaceful and friendly relations with their neighbours in
the region, while ensuring that the country's natural
resources are truly used for their own benefit. Such a
prospect would enjoy broad international support and
respect. In this regard, we stress the utmost importance
of the continued commitment of the international
community to the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Iraq.

Slovakia, for its part, is ready to contribute to
solving the current crisis in Iraq and alleviating the
plight of the people of the affected region. On the basis
of a bilateral agreement concluded with the Kuwaiti
Government, we dispatched to Kuwait a unit of experts
highly skilled in the detection of and protection against
biological and chemical agents, as well as other types
of weapons of mass destruction. The unit has been
given a clear mandate: to assist in humanitarian and
rescue operations in cases when weapons of mass
destruction are used or their use is suspected.

In conclusion, I would like to subscribe to the
View that the United Nations must continue to play a
central role during and after the current crisis. We
commend the ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General
to actively engage the relevant parts of the United
Nations system in early humanitarian contingency
planning.

