Mr. Djangone-Bi (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): The delegation of Cote d'Ivoire wishes first,
through me, to express heartfelt congratulations to you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and its sincere best wishes for
success. We also thank you for including our
delegation in today's debate on the sensitive and
important subject of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

The Secretary-General has recently issued, once
again, an edifying report (S/2004/431) on this item,
eloquently presented by Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, in his
introductory briefing. We thank them both for
persevering in their noble effort to keep the Council
and Member States focused on this issue, safeguarding
which is a basic component of international peace and
security.

As a party to the Charter and the Geneva
Conventions, as well as all other international
instruments relative to international humanitarian law,
human rights and refugee rights, Cote d'Ivoire, a
country with a long-standing tradition of hospitality
and despite the vicissitudes of its recent history, has
always upheld the protection of the lives and the
property of its people and its visitors. As it says in our
national anthem, in peace, freedom is restored. Ivorians
feel the unshirkable duty of conscience to persevere in
their noble ambition to forge, united in their new faith,
a homeland of genuine brotherhood, and, as the
national anthem also says, to be a model of mankind's
promised hope.
The treacherous war that has been imposed on
Ivorians since 19 September 2002 serves only to
confirm that obligation, and the international
community, headed by the Security Council, remains
mobilized in contributing to the resolution of this
crisrs.

Moreover, the crisis and the concrete assistance
provided by United Nations Member States have also
provided Ivorians with some lessons, some of which I
would like to share with Council members within the
context of this debate on the protection of children in
armed conflicts.

The most common armed conflicts of recent
decades have been defined as internal. They generally
pit States against armed groups made up mostly of
national and foreign mercenaries. Even in a worsening
domestic security situation following the outbreak of
conflict, States are bound to respect and to implement
the conventions and treaties relative to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict to which they are parties.
But the same does not seem to be true for rebel groups.
That asymmetry is problematic, and I believe it
requires of the United Nations and the Security Council
prompt humanitarian intervention, which I would
categorize as being for maintenance and restoration,
when conflict breaks out, as called for by the
Secretary-General.

It seems to me that we must then proceed to the
determined implementation of the action plan, of which
the Council adopted an updated version on 15
December 2003 (see S/PRST/2003/27). Finally, we
need to take and strengthen effective measures and
approaches for the prevention of armed conflict, for
which the Secretary-General has been calling for
almost six years. Even if international criminal
tribunals do eventually provide justice to civilian
survivors of such conflicts, they cannot bring back the
dead or make the physically and psychically
handicapped whole again. We are all familiar with the
popular and universal saying that an ounce of
prevention is worth a pound of cure.

After armed conflicts, the sustainable protection
of civilians must be integrated judiciously into post-
conflict reconstruction, carried out and gradually
achieved in conjunction and long-term harmonization
with the relevant comprehensive actions and resources
of States and the international community, and always
proportionate to need. The strategy of political,
economic and social post-conflict reconstruction must
include a cultural, civic and ethical dimension as a
fundamental component, rather than as a mere
ritualistic afterthought. The overall costs of these
substantial measures are so high and their effects are of
such unproven social utility and duration that they
recall us to our fundamental obligation to prevent
armed conflict.

Implementing all the measures articulated by the
Secretary-General in his memorable report of 7 June
2001, contained in document S/2001/574, which
member States have always collectively supported in
this Chamber, could make a positive contribution to
conflict prevention. The safeguarding of international
peace and security, more than its mere effusive
promotion, is the highest priority accorded to the
Security Council in the United Nations Charter by "we
the peoples" and requires a vigorous and voluntary
conflict prevention programme wisely wedding
collective actions to scrupulous respect for State
sovereignty.

