The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Chad.

I would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her statement and to congratulate her on the quality
of her report, which takes stock of the deterioration in
the security situation in Darfur in 2014 and in particular
of the negative effect it is having on civilians.

During the reporting period, the Prosecutor's Office
noted a decrease in aerial bombardments, although tribal
violence over land and natural resources has grown and
has had a serious impact on innocent civilians. There
have also been reports alleging 42 incidents of rape of
340 women, for 300 of whom Government forces and
militia are presumed responsible. On the question of
the alleged cases of rape of 200 women in the village
of Thabit, in view of the fact that the Government is
totally denying it and in the absence of confirmation
from other independent sources, we believe that only a
more thorough independent and impartial investigation
can clarify the situation.

Various cases ofviolations ofhuman rights have also
been cited, including, among others, arrests of political
party leaders and students. In our view, their release
could help clear the political atmosphere and improve
dialogue between the Sudanese Government and the
opposition. In that regard, we urge the Government
to make the achievement of a comprehensive solution
to the crisis a priority. We regret that humanitarian
personnel continue to be a target for armed individuals
and encourage the Government of the Sudan to pursue
the perpetrators of attacks on peacekeeping forces and
bring them to justice.

Not only has the situation of civilians not improved;
in some cases it deteriorated during the current
reporting period. We condemn the violence, regardless
of its origins and whatever the circumstances, and the
perpetrators must answer for their actions. We take
note of the Sudanese Government's efforts to improve
the situation and urge it to maintain its commitments to
its citizens by guaranteeing them security and justice.
It is important to recall that in order to put an end to
the civilian population's suffering, the war in Darfur
must be stopped. In that regard, we emphasize the
importance of supporting the peace process under way
under the auspices of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel for the Sudan and South Sudan,
led by President Mbeki. The international community
should put pressure on both the Government and the
rebel groups to advance national reconciliation and
dialogue.

Finally, we invite the Council to consider the
situation in Darfur in the context of the overall situation
in the Sudan, taking into account all the agreements
signed by the various parties to the conflict, as well as
the mediation efforts being conducted through regional
organizations, particularly the African Union.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at11.40 a.m.
