We thank France for convening today's meeting. We further thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and other briefers for their contributions to today's discussion. The topic of child protection is of paramount importance to the Russian Federation. The Secretary-General's report (S/2020/525) confirms that children in different countries around the world involved in armed confrontations continue to encounter brutal violence. One of the main reasons for their plight is that parties to armed conflicts ignore the rules of international humanitarian law and armed groups make open use of barbaric methods of warfare. The Security Council cannot remain indifferent and should make unfailing efforts to protect children in armed conflicts. Almost 15 years ago, the Security Council adopted the milestone resolution 1612 (2005), with a noble aim: to protect those most vulnerable in armed conflict - children. The Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, created by that historic decision, is a unique mechanism, which has facilitated more effective protection for children in conflict. We would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the hard work for the sake of children trapped in various conflicts all over the world. Efforts by the Group would be incomplete without the crucial work done by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We would like once again to express our sincere appreciation to Special Representative Gamba de Potgieter for her hard daily work in pursuing her mandate and making a tangible difference for children in situations of armed conflict. We are open to further cooperation between the Russian Federation and the Office of the Special Representative in the field of the protection of children in armed conflict. Russia continues to support her important initiatives - raising awareness of the problems of child victims of armed conflict, information campaigns on the reintegration of children, and preventing their recruitment, among others. In various countries around the world engulfed in hostilities, children continue to endure brutal violence and hardship. And now their plight has become even harder due to the unprecedented global health crisis posed by the coronavirus disease. Unfortunately, even this crisis has not led to the rejection of unilateral coercive measures, which affect essential health care services, social infrastructure, food security and other aspects of life. These affect ordinary people, especially children, directly, despite all the reassurances about so called "humanitarian exemptions" that we have heard so many times in the Council. We regret that the Secretary- General has not mentioned this key issue in his report. We call on the Secretary- General and Special Representative Gamba de Potgieter to pay special attention to the detrimental effect of illegal political sanctions on children in armed conflict and include a relevant section in future reports. Terrorists present a major threat to children in armed conflict. They do not shy away from using even small children and bringing them into their ranks. No child caught in such a devastating maelstrom should be marginalized by society. Children have the right to, and should, become full members of society once again. Their rehabilitation and reintegration are a crucial aspect of the children and armed conflict agenda today. The Russian Federation fully supports and concurs with the Secretary- General's call on all Member States concerned not yet having done so to take steps for the voluntary repatriation of children stranded in conflict zones, including children actually or allegedly associated with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. We understand the importance of reintegrating children affected by conflict. Since 2018, the Russian Federation has ensured the return of Russian children from battlegrounds in Iraq and Syria, and their ongoing rehabilitation. More than 150 Russian children have already successfully been evacuated from Iraq and Syria. Although the current pandemic has slowed down this work, it will be continued. Our hope is that there will be more examples of the successful reintegration of child combatants, addressing the plight of children in conflict and better protecting their lives. Our overall efforts in the Security Council should foster progress to that end and develop strategies to prevent grave violations for the benefit of children and our future.
