The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of C6te d'Ivoire, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djangone-
Bi (Cote d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council
table.

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure and with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, the Council has agreed to extend an
invitation to His Excellency Mr. Aziz Pahad, Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa, who is
accompanied by Ms. Mojanku Gumbi.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Aziz Pahad.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Pahad
(South Africa), took a seat at the Council table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Alan Doss,
Principal Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Cote d'Ivoire.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Doss to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/ 186, which contains the fourth
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire.

At this meeting, the Security Council will first
hear a briefing by Mr. Alan Doss, Principal Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
C6te d'Ivoire. I now give him the floor.


