Ms. Adamson: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

I would like to thank the Kazakh presidency of
the Security Council, and in particular its Minister
for Foreign Affairs, for convening this debate, which
provides a good opportunity to share views, best
practices and experiences on a very topical subject,
as well as to take stock of initiatives, both planed and
ongoing, that support international peace through
regional cooperation.

The EU and Central Asia have a common interest in
Afghanistan's security and prosperity. International and
regional support to an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
inclusive peace process is essential. In that respect, the
contribution of the countries of Central Asia, as direct
neighbours, is crucial for the success of any meaningful
peaceful settlement of the conflict in Afghanistan. In
our view, any stabilization strategy requires a solid
regional approach. The EU stands ready to support
the Afghan stakeholders themselves in providing a
conducive environment for an intra-Afghan peace
process. The EU supports the Afghan Kabul Process
on Peace and Security, of which the next meeting is
planned for 28 February. From that meeting, the EU
would expect tangible progress on the way forward
towards a peaceful settlement with the Taliban.

Reinforced regional cooperation is key to lasting
peace and stability in Afghanistan and the region.
Such cooperation is indispensable for sustainable
development. Afghanistan continues to engage with
its neighbours through international forums, such as
the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process and the Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan.
The EU strongly supports such regional forums to
facilitate economic and political cooperation among all
regional stakeholders.

We believe that the United Nations Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia in Ashgabat
has an important role to play in supporting countries in
the region, including Afghanistan, in dealing with the
common challenges related to security and development.
In that context, connectivity, which is also part of the
EU's global strategy, is key to success. The EU supports
efforts by Central Asian countries to facilitate trade and
provide energy resources to Afghanistan. Afghanistan's
own infrastructure and connectivity programme aims
to develop transit and connectivity.

The Lapis Lazuli Corridor railway, between
Afghanistan, Turkmenistan, Azerbaijan, Georgia and
Turkey; the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-
India pipeline; the Central Asia South Asia Electricity
Transmission and Trade Project; and the regional water
management and cross-border water management of
the Kunar River basin are all important connectivity
projects for Afghanistan. They will have an important
long-term positive impact and are also in the interest
of the international community. Indeed, better
connectivity for Afghanistan and its citizens could lead
to improved economic development and infrastructure.
That will eventually allow for a reduction of both
international development aid to the country and the
influx of migrants and refugees to the region and
beyond. Politically, it could help to bring regional
partners to engage positively in Afghanistan and to
contribute to a more stable and peaceful Afghanistan.

The EU remains determined to counter all forms
of terrorism, including the growing threat posed by
affiliates of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), as well as violent extremism, as fundamental
threats to regional and international peace and stability.
In that regard, in 2017, the EU decided to provide
more support to Central Asia in the area of counter-
terrorism. A new regional project is being launched
on conflict-sensitive reporting to support local media
in positive action in favour of peace and security
and against radicalization attempts and narratives.
Similarly, there is a need to enhance data protection
and internet governance. Terrorists use information
and communication technologies to recruit, finance,
intimidate, and disseminate their messages. A crucial
element in counter-terrorism policies is finding a
sustainable balance between freedom and security in
order to prevent the re-emergence of ISIL affiliates.
That is also important in Central Asia and Afghanistan.
The EU is committed to achieving both. However, the
debate on security versus freedom remains a work
in progress.

Threats from the nexus between terrorism and
organized crime, including drug trafficking used for
the financing of terrorism affecting all countries of
the region, can be confronted only through increased
political, economic and security cooperation. The EU
is supporting the regional programme of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime that covers
Afghanistan, Iran, Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic,
Pakistan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.
The EU also supports Central Asian partners in
the fight against drugs through a regional Central
Asia drug action programme and a transregional
programme, namely, the EU Action against Drugs and
Organised Crime.

Finally, the EU has been supporting regional
cooperation at the level of border guards in order to help
Afghanistan to foster regional cooperation and facilitate
secure trade links with its neighbours, especially Central
Asia. In that context, the EU Border Management
Northern Afghanistan project assists Afghan border
police in better securing the country's northern border
in order to improve cross-border cooperation, reduce
crime and improve legal trade, travel and commerce
along Afghanistan's border with Tajikistan, Uzbekistan
and Turkmenistan, complementing similar programmes
in Central Asia.

