Mr. Jorda (spoke in French): Let me for a brief
moment speak to you directly, Sir - not in your
capacity as President - to express my satisfaction at
hearing France conclude this very rich exchange of
views by stating that it is here that political issues are
settled, not in The Hague or in Arusha.

I shall nonetheless attempt to respond to those
questions relating to criminal policy, because the
representative of the Russian Federation touched upon
them, as did, more indirectly, the representative of
China and, in a more general manner, other speakers.

Secondly, I shall group together a number of
comments. I apologize beforehand to speakers who had
wished to enrich this debate - to which I have
attempted to contribute the comments of my
colleagues - in case I am not able to respond to all of
their comments.

Thirdly, let me comment on the establishment of
a working group, which I think has been agreed to
unanimously around the table. Although, of course, I
do not have to express a View, because it is not my
place to do so, let me say that personally I believe it
can only work to our advantage. The reason is that
many aspects of the proposals, as representatives have
indicated, definitely require deeper reflection. You, Mr.
President, mentioned several of these aspects with
respect to the concrete proposals I had the honour to
put forward.

I do not wish to take up too much time, but,
having made those three preliminary comments, let me
attempt to cluster my responses concerning the
political issue, which I think was raised by several
delegations, in particular by the representative of
Russia. I should like perhaps to offer certain
clarifications regarding the ad [item judges and the pre-
trial proceedings. This may seem to be a more
technical issue, but it does require clarifications
beyond those that the Council's working group is to
provide. 1 think also that the recommendations
submitted by the Expert Group to the Council require a
certain amount of clarification - and here I am
thinking of the statement made by the representative of
Canada. I shall spare the Council the list of 46
recommendations, but I will provide an overview.

I think that there is a fourth issue that includes
Rwanda and the Appeals Chamber, which was of
interest to several delegations. Finally, concerning the
working group, perhaps I could ask the Council one or
two questions, if the President does not deem it too
impertinent.

The political issue has come up again and again
since the establishment of the Tribunal, when it was
said that it was a political tool. Consider the nature of
an international tribunal that theoretically is established
by a political body. However, the issue of this
Tribunal's having been set up by a political body has
been put to rest by its decisions, in particular - and here
I would recall what was mentioned by the Ambassador
of Russia - with respect to the Tadic affair.

I think that it can be acknowledged around this
table that there are two bodies in the Tribunal that work
independently. There is the Prosecutor, who is
independent, organizes his own work and, above all,
has an opportunity to prosecute. As I understand it,
prosecutors in all countries have the opportunity to
prosecute. I even have the impression that this is
currently the case in Russia.

Then the impartiality of judges, I think, is
something that should not be called into question
because - let me recall it here - the numerous
indictments made by the Tribunal on political questions
also go through a judge. I will refer later to sealed
indictments.

In order to give the Council a more specific
answer - and without interfering with the policy that
Ms. Del Ponte described to the Council - I would
simply say that it is true that figures speak eloquently.
It is also true that of the 68 current indictments, 45 are
of persons of Serb origin. But I would also like to say
to the representatives who touched on this question that
it has never been written anywhere into the rules of
procedure nor into the statute that the atrocities were
committed in equal proportion throughout the
territories in which they occurred. Nor was the number
of accused persons ever to be automatically the same in
the three groups.

But I would especially like to point out something
that serves as a response to a question asked of Ms. Del
Ponte by the Council, namely, the problem of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) vis-a-vis a report
she herself made public a few days ago, specifically on
13 June. I would say that prosecution is one thing -
and I was a prosecutor for a very long time during my
career - but it is evidence that guides prosecution. A
prosecutor cannot undertake a prosecution unless he
has evidence. But in an international jurisdiction
evidence is not made available by national
investigators, police or police inspectors. It is provided
through the cooperation of States. In this connection,
we must note that the countries that complain the most

about the partiality of the Tribunal - and I am
thinking especially of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia - are the weakest when it comes to
cooperation.

For example, I can tell the Council that of the
current 28 fugitives, 27 are of Serb origin. Moreover,
of the 27 of Serb origin, 22 were accused without
sealed indictments. I will refer later to the issue of
sealed indictments. If 22 Serbs were not indicted under
sealed indictment, then that demonstrates that the
International Criminal Tribunal at some point had to
deal with serious matters relating to coercion and the
carrying out its decisions. I would emphasize that
nothing in the statute or the regulations prohibits the
use of sealed indictments, provided they are, like other
indictments, confirmed by a judge. In other words, the
Prosecutor must not only initiate the giving of evidence
that would lead a judge to agree to an indictment -
and that applies to all indictments - but he must,
above all, show that it is useful to keep the indictment
secret. I do not wish to go further into details because
there are other questions to be addressed.

Let me touch upon the issue of ad [item judges
and their status from the perspective of the conditions
of their service and their costs. These questions have
been raised. With regard to costs and the status of the
judges, this is something that is obviously within the
domain of the working group that the Council will set
up. Moreover, the Council itself, and we judges, have
tried to move forward the thinking process on this
issue. In this regard, someone - I do not remember
who - said that the judges were not unanimous. That
is not true. The judges are unanimous on the principle
of using ad [item judges. In fact, as the Council has
seen from the document that has been distributed to it,
in the course of a whole day of meetings almost half of
the judges agreed on some very important points.

I think the working group will be addressing
many of those points, including the matter of elections
or nominations and the drawbacks and advantages of
the two methods. Appointment is faster. I would also
point out that it is also legitimate. It exists in other
international jurisdictions, where ad hoc judges are
appointed. It even exists in the Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia itself. When a judge dies or
stands down he is replaced through appointment by the
Secretary-General, upon the advice of the Presidents of
the General Assembly and the Security Council. This
has occurred at least five times since 1993 including, I
must say, in my own case.

The question of costs will also be a subject under
the purview of the working group. We did not want to
go into a very detailed cost analysis. But we
nevertheless thought that the matter of cost depends on
the number of ad [item judges that are employed, which
would also depend upon the formula chosen. In this
regard, the opinion ofjudges is divided. I will point out
that a slight majority - and, at any rate, thinking on
this is evolving at The Hague - felt there should be a
mix of permanent judges and ad [item judges. I
mention this so that it may add to the Council's
examination of the issue. In other words, when a three-
judge Chamber has concluded with its work, it can then
break up and then one or two permanent judges could
be paired with an ad [item judge to respond together to
questions related to the training of the ad [item judges
and their ability to deal with the various very specific
areas of international humanitarian law and
jurisprudence that may come up. I think that in this
way training would occur in a very natural way,
perhaps even better than in the past.

But we also do not hide the fact that whenever
new judges are appointed or elected, those judges
arrive at a court that is in the midst of activity; nor that
new judges are obliged to become engaged
immediately in trials. I am thinking in particular of the
three latest judges, who joined the Tribunal in 1997.
They did not have the luck - or the bad luck - that I
had in the same situation in 1993, of arriving in a court
where there were, as I mentioned earlier, no accused
persons, a situation which is currently completely
different.

The question of preparations for hearing - a
problem that I believe the representatives of France and
the United Kingdom have both touched upon - is one
that makes it possible for me to express our thoughts.
As the statute sets out in article 65 and others,
preparations for hearing at the International Criminal
Tribunal have nothing to do with the pre-trial chamber
and do not deprive the judge of any of his jurisdictional
functions. As a jurist I salute the establishment of a
pre-trial chamber in the future permanent court, but
especially for the efficiency it will bring to that court.
If I recall correctly, the pre-trial Chamber will have
numerous jurisdictional powers. In particular, it will be
able to exercise control over indictments and make
decisions on rules, petitions, inquiries and so on. For
those who have practised law in countries on the
continent, the pre-trial Chamber established in the
Rome Statute is a jurisdictional chamber similar to an
indicting chamber. The same is not the case in
preparations for hearing.

Preparations for hearing are a judicial and
administrative mechanism aimed at speeding up trials.
I will even go so far as to say that I believe that the
future Court will need to put in place a pre-trial
mechanism. Trial preparation activities focus directly
on preparing cases.

I would like to point out that our Rules of
Evidence and Procedure currently give trial preparation
judges certain jurisdictional powers but place them
under the control of the chamber to which he belongs.
Those powers have never been, and will never, be
delegated to the judges. One could ask, what use is
that? Well, it is useful in many ways because, as things
stand now, a chamber is assigned about four cases.
Currently, Chambers 1, 2 and 3 of the Tribunal have
four cases each. There are now four trials under way at
The Hague. But each Chamber also has three other
cases, so I would say that trial preparation activities are
carried out every day. The parties must be convened
every day. Motions have to be reviewed every day.
Attempts must be made daily to reach agreement and to
determine who the witnesses are that the parties plan to
call. This is the kind of work that I refer to as human
costs, and that kind of work means that the trial
preparation judge, who would be a trained professional
having from 15 to 20 years of professional experience,
would be a contribution to the Chamber in the form of
support to the judge in carrying out trial preparation
activities. We do not wish to take away any
jurisdictional powers, to the extent that whenever a
dispute or contentious point arises, a trial preparation
judge must report them to his chamber.

I think that the Council's working group will
work on this question, but it seems to me that there is
really no danger, and there will be even less danger
once this question has been dealt with. I remind
members that we are a Tribunal most of whose current
members are from common law systems. I can tell the
Council that this matter has been taken up. This trial
preparation phase was conceived before 1998 and
institutionalized in 1998, and it has just been improved
following the recommendations of the Expert Group;
the judges all agree and recognize that the preparatory
phase must be suitably carried out if a trial is to be
carefully studied and based on the real legal and factual
aspects of the case.

I would like to refer to the Expert Group. I do not
wish to go into excessive detail, but let me say that the
Expert Group concluded its work in the period of
November-December 1999. It took a long time to have
it translated into the various languages. On 30 March I
signed a response, on behalf of my colleagues, relating
to the recommendations of the Expert Group. In
response to the speaker who said that there should be
another expert group - there is the informal working
group established by the President - but I do not think
that a new expert group needs to be established. The
Expert Group, mandated by a General Assembly
resolution of 18 December 1998, analysed the Tribunal,
the entire range of its operations. To our great
satisfaction, the Expert Group did not have any major
criticism of our institution.

In response to the representative of Canada, there
are 46 recommendations stemming from the Expert
Group's work. Of those 46 recommendations, I can
state - and provide the proof if there is enough
time - that all those relating to expediting trials were
anticipated by the Tribunal. They were even
acknowledged by the Expert Group as being judicious.
They were all immediately implemented. The main
ones are those relating to the contamination of judges,
which is a very complex matter when there are only 14
judges, or really 9, since 5 are in the Appeals Chamber.
But a recommendation was made, and we immediately
put that into our Rules of Procedure and Evidence. We
have recast the trial preparation procedure. We have
also reduced the number of excessive petitions, and
most judges of the Tribunal are trying to cut back oral
petitions.

I do not wish to take up too much time, but to the
Ambassador of Canada I will say that I am prepared to
write a letter to give clarification on the number of
provisions. One or two were not acknowledged by the
Tribunal judges, those that are excessively authoritative
or peremptory provisions - the Deputy Registrar will
correct me if I am wrong - on remuneration of the
defence counsel. It is a very delicate matter. The Expert
Group faces a considerable problem, which is that the
overall system does not lead to expeditiousness, but to
slowness. When positions are polarized, the parties do
not think about the cost that this represents in terms of
investigative resources for the prosecution or for the
defence. It is a very delicate issue. The Expert Group
has made a proposal, and we have submitted it to the
standing committee on amendments to the Rules of
Procedure and Evidence. I will not conceal the fact that
opinions are divided to such an extent that I have
decided to put this matter on the agenda of our next
plenary meeting, on 13 and 14 July.

I wish to address the next-to-last point, which is
Rwanda and the Appeals Chamber. I have not talked
about Rwanda. I am not the President of the Rwanda
Tribunal. I do not think the President of that Tribunal
would have been happy had I done so. But we did take
up the Rwanda question in a way that concerns me very
directly, as President of the Appeals Chamber. It is true
that we met in plenary meeting, since we form part of
the Rwanda Chamber. Ambassador Scheffers will
remember that in February we convened a plenary
meeting of the judges of Rwanda and The Hague with
the five judges of the Appeals Chamber. We felt
unanimously that the proposal of the Expert Group that
two more judges should be added to the Chamber
would be the best remedy, or one of the best remedies,
to deal with the considerable caseload. I will give an
idea of the considerable caseload. The Rwanda Appeals
Chamber has 15 or 16 interlocutory appeals and 6
substantive appeals relating to very highly placed
leaders in the country. The ICTY has fewer
interlocutory appeals, because we have a better system
of selecting appeals, but there are 6 or 7 substantive
appeals. Obviously, the caseload is very heavy, since
they are the same five judges.

There are many problems in the Appeals
Chamber, relating to the number of cases and more
important matters that the recommendations of the
Expert Group could help us resolve. It is a problem of
stabilizing the so-called Appeals Chamber. Our
Appeals Chamber is not stable as far as its composition
is concerned. It is not worthy - and I say this
publicly - of a great international system of justice.
Please be assured that this is not intentional. We have a
problem of contamination in cases related to historical
and political matters. Justice and politics eventually
merge. Unless all those accused of a given act are
arrested at the same time, the trials begin one after the
other, and after a time, since they are dealing with the
same context and the same criminal area, the judges
have to recuse themselves or are called upon by the
parties to recuse themselves. So there is an increasing
number of judges who are contaminated. This is a
considerable problem for the Appeals Chamber.

I will give another example. I am the President of
the Appeals Chamber. After I was elected on 16
November, I was almost immediately contaminated
vis-a-vis all the ICTY cases because I had participated
in those cases at different levels. I had to ask another
judge to be the fifth judge in the Appeals Chamber.

The problem is the normative role of the Appeals
Chamber. If we are to expedite procedure, we must
have jurisprudence available in the Appeals
Chamber- for example on the idea of internal or
international armed conflict. Something of this sort
should be carefully defined by the Appeals Chamber.
But the changing composition of the Chamber - not to
mention our Tribunal's legibility, which, I agree, is not
very good- means it cannot always agree on its
normative role. That is why we think the proposal of
the Expert Group is a judicious one. We also find it
judicious from another point of view: how, at the dawn
of the third millennium, can we say that the Rwanda
Tribunal cannot participate, in one way or another, in
appeals as long as the judges are not contaminated?
Therefore, I think the proposal for two additional
judges is a reasonable one.

Regarding whether ad [item judges should be
used, there is flexibility in that solution. If the principle
of ad [item judges is included in the statute, then the
principle may have to be followed even in the Appeals
Chamber. But I do not think so, because if ad [item
judges make a meaningful contribution, if the mandate
of the Tribunal concludes in 2007, then I think the
current 14 judges would be able to finish the cases
before them without reinforcements.
I am not sure if I have answered everyone. I am
sorry ifI have spoken at length.

Let me conclude on the working group. I support
the Tribunal in that initiative, which I think would be
the most productive one. We need the Council. I think
the Council knows that. It established the Tribunal. We
have become increasingly clear, legible. I say this for
those who may have made critical remarks about our
Tribunal.

Let me digress here. Those who criticize the
Tribunal should come to The Hague and hear the cries
of the victims who are turning to us. They should go to
the universities to study how the immense body of
jurisprudence that we have developed at the Tribunals
in The Hague and Arusha has opened up an entire
scientific universe of progress in the evolution of
international humanitarian law. I had yet another
demonstration of this yesterday morning when I spoke
before the preparatory committee for the rules of
procedure.

Yes, we do need the Security Council. I am not
asking merely for more and more money. That is not
what I am saying. What I am saying is that we could
perhaps use some additional funds, but on the condition
that they be included in a forward-looking plan. We
cannot implement never-ending reform. It is easy for
judges to ask for an additional Chamber, as we did in
1997, but of course we had reasons then to act that
way. Today, however, I cannot come to the Security
Council for an additional Chamber without offering
some forward-looking context for these three
additional judges, only to return two years hence to say
that it is not enough and that we want yet another
Chamber. That is not my vision of my role as
President. I believe that the work of the Security
Council's informal group should be forward-looking;
that, I believe, is how progress can be made.

In conclusion, let me make two points. As to the
timetable, I believe that it should be quite tight,
because any change in the statute takes time. Members
of the Council know that better than I do. Moreover,
these amendments must be coordinated with the
budgetary schedule, which is very heavy. There must
be a degree of harmonization in that regard. Let me
recall that there is another factor that will have an
impact, but that should prompt us to get down to work
quickly: 2001 is an election year for judges. Judges
involved in a trial who are not re-elected by the
General Assembly or who wish to stand down and
leave the Tribunal must conclude their trials. That is
what happened in 1997. That must be taken into
account when costs are being assessed.

That is why I wish to offer this modest bit of
information. I believe that the idea of the ad [item
judges is that they would get involved before the
election ofjudges in 2001, whose terms of office will
come to an end in November. I wonder Whether I shall
have to come to ask the Security Council, as I did in
1997, to anticipate those elections. Why? The
Chambers are working full time. In February, Chamber
I, for instance, will have concluded two trials and
started a third. Those judges will have to remain at the
expense, worthy as it is, of the Tribunal. That is why I
would say that the timetable of several months which
the Council is setting for itself to consider and, I hope,
validate our proposals is a good thing.

Lastly, I would like to risk saying that we should
be very grateful if the Security Council were to consult
us on technical matters as it progresses in its work. The
history of the Tribunal has frequently been marked by
texts or decisions, the consequences of which have not
always been carefully considered by the various
parties.

I apologize to some speakers for not having
responded to their questions. I wish to thank all those
who have offered their unreserved support not to me,
but to the Tribunal. I shall convey it to my colleagues. I
emphasize that I am very much alive to all the
constructive criticism that has been expressed in this
very beautiful and prestigious Chamber.

