Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I wish at the outset to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Soren Jessen-Petersen, for his insightful and
comprehensive presentation on the report of the
Secretary-General on Kosovo. I avail myself of this
opportunity to renew the expression of Brazil's support
for the excellent work he is doing at the head of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK).

As Kosovo approaches a unique, decisive
moment, with consequences for the entire Balkan
region, we are encouraged by the indications of
increased awareness on the part of Kosovo's people
and leadership about the effort that lies ahead. Growing
commitment by the Provisional Institutions to meet the
conditions necessary to start the talks on the final
status is a welcome sign of political maturity. The
Secretary-General's report and the briefing by the
Special Representative highlight that a significant
proportion of the Priority Standards Goals have been
achieved. This enhances the prospects for launching of
the status talks this year.

Fortunately, since the regrettable outbreaks of
violence last year, the Provisional Institutions have
intensified their efforts to implement the standards.
Consistent efforts to improve the situation of minority
communities in the province were made, with a View to
fulfilling an essential precondition for advancement
towards the process to determine Kosovo's status.

The dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade was
also somewhat improved. We welcome the resumption
of the work of the working groups on missing persons,
energy, the return of displaced persons and transport
and telecommunications. As to much-needed economic
reform, steps made in the privatization process and
with respect to economic integration into the region are
encouraging. Much remains to be done, though, given
the dire economic situation of Kosovo, which has still
to deal with an unemployment rate higher than 60 per
cent.

In spite of all the positive elements, the
temptation to offer an excessively positive assessment
of the situation should be avoided. The Secretary-
General warns in an unequivocal way that none of the
eight standards has so far been entirely fulfilled. The
situation of minorities is still a reason for concern,
especially regarding freedom of movement and access
to justice. Also, refugees and displaced persons still
face a desperate predicament, as the slow pace of the
returns process is hindering the achievement of the
related standard. There is also much to be done
regarding the prevalence of the rule of law, the reform
of local government and the full enjoyment by all
citizens of their fundamental rights.

Responsibility for the process must not be put
entirely on the Kosovo Government's shoulders.
Minorities, especially the Serb minority, have the
fundamental obligation of engaging fully in the quest
for solutions by taking advantage of all opportunities to
participate in Kosovo's institutions. The Serbs must be
encouraged by Belgrade to do so.

The Security Council must remain committed to
resolution 1244 (1999) and to the "standards before
status" policy, under which definitive progress in
standards implementation is a precondition for the
determination of final status.

We believe that the intention of the Secretary-
General to appoint a Special Envoy to lead the
assessment process, starting this year, will indicate the
road ahead. By carrying on consultations with the
parties and the international community, the Special
Envoy will be able to make an independent evaluation
of the work done se far. The assessment of the level of
attainment of the standards will help determine
whether the conditions for final status talks have been
created.

More than ever before, any freezing of the current
situation in Kosovo would lead to further deterioration
of already difficult political, social and economic
conditions. The review process, therefore, should be
carried out with great seriousness. Above all, its
conclusions and results must not be anticipated or
taken for granted. None of the parties should be
allowed to unduly influence the results of the review
with threats of any kind, and the Council must make it
clear that the resurgence of violence will not be
rewarded.

The persistent efforts to achieve dialogue and
understanding between the parties through the
mediation carried out by the Contact Group have been
instrumental in pushing the whole process forward.
Peace in Kosovo should ultimately rely on winning the
hearts of the people. Healing the wounds of the past
and rebuilding bridges between the various
communities will create an environment more
favourable to tolerance. All parties must be ready to
work towards a compromise capable of turning Kosovo
from a source of instability into a model of peaceful
inter-ethnic coexistence.

