Ms. Webster (Ireland): In the interests of saving
time, I propose to give an abbreviated statement; the
full text will be circulated to delegations shortly.

Ireland aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the head of the European Union (EU) on
behalf of its member States.

Our focus today reminds us of the importance of
together adopting a holistic approach to tackling

 

climate change. I will therefore focus my remarks on
the security implications and the outlook of two areas
driven by climate change. These give us ever-
increasing cause for alarm: first, the seemingly
inexorable rise in sea levels and, secondly, food
insecurity. The latter is all the more germane today, the
day on which the Secretary-General declared a famine
in the Horn of Africa - the first such declaration in 30
years.

The security implications of the negative impact
of climate change and its role as a threat multiplier are
evident and have been referred to by many speakers.
Consequences include forced migration, permanent
resettlement, greater competition for ever more scarce
resources, land degradation and food insecurity. As we
know, these factors have repeatedly led to conflict and
have served to exacerbate already difficult conditions,
including in fragile States. This surely undermines
peace and peacebuilding.

As observed by the Secretary-General, rising sea
levels present the ultimate security threat to those
Member States whose very existence is at stake. The
dire projections are no less shocking with repetition: by
2050, 200 million people could be displaced by rising
sea levels and drought.

A stark illustration of the grim and present reality
of rising sea levels was brought home to us earlier this
year in Dublin at a conference of women leaders on
climate justice. Speakers from Papua New Guinea's
Carteret Islands described the unprecedented high tides
which rapidly covered their land, destroying its soil for
food production and menacing the safety and security
of the islanders. As a result, all 1,500 islanders were
evacuated to Bougainville. So we find that
statelessness and loss of territory, with their related
security implications, have become a reality rather than
a theoretical possibility.

The United Nations can foster a truly global
response to such phenomena, one that is rooted in
social justice and equality, one that demands strong
political leadership from all countries, particularly the
major emitters in the developed world. The European
Union is leading the way in this by deciding to reduce
its emissions by at least 20 per cent by 2020 compared
to 1990 levels. We have also made a conditional offer
to increase that target to 30 per cent, subject to
commitments from other developed and developing
countries.

 

Global warming has already hindered the
fulfilment of the human rights of millions of the
world's poor to life, security, food, health and shelter.
Ireland strongly believes that we, the international
community, need to work together to address the
related needs of developing countries, especially the
Pacific small island developing States and the least
developed countries. We strongly echo the call made
by Honduras for us all to work together in that regard.
The most vulnerable will need help in reducing their
susceptibility to future shocks. We are convinced that
mitigation and adaptation are two sides of the same
risk-management coin.

Climate change is now identified as a growing
global challenge, and perhaps its greatest impact will
be an increase in the scale and intensity of hunger and
food insecurity. We are today witnessing harrowing
scenes from Somalia and the rest of the Horn of Africa.
Millions of people are at risk of starvation in some of
the most hostile conditions imaginable. More than
78,000 Somalis have fled their country in the past two
months - 61,000 last month alone. This is putting an
enormous strain on neighbouring countries such as
Ethiopia and Kenya, which have opened their borders
to the influx of the displaced and starving.

But hunger stalks many lands: the grim reality is
that almost a billion people are undernourished
worldwide. The security implications of this climate
change are more frequent and more extreme weather
events, coupled with failing yields and escalating food
prices, with incidents of social protests, unrest and
riots inexorably increasing in several countries.

With these concerns in mind, Ireland's
development programme supports efforts to increase
the capacity of local communities to become more
resilient to the vagaries of climate and environmental
degradation. Our engagement involves a pledge to
spend at least 20 per cent of our aid budget on hunger
and related areas by 2012.

The concept note prepared by the Pacific small
island States is clear and compelling. It proposes the
case for the Security Council to clearly recognize the
threat of climate change to international peace and
security. In the meantime, however, Security Council
work on climate change is already supported by
existing instruments.

Ireland supports the case for a clear mandate for
the Security Council to request the Secretary-General

 

to report contextual information to the Council. This
would be focused on drivers of conflict, and it is clear
that climate change is undoubtedly one such key driver.

In the interests of brevity, I will conclude by
adding that, last February, the Security Council
encouraged Member States, particularly those actively
involved in governance structures of the United
Nations, to promote coherence in the United Nations
work in conflict and post-conflict situations. This
exhortation was echoed in the Secretary-General's
report on climate change (A/64/350), where he called
for strengthened efforts to mainstream climate change
within United Nations activities. The one UN approach
on this key challenge is clearly vital.

