Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation wishes to thank Ambassador Ellen
Margrethe Loj, Chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), Ambassador Cesar Mayoral,
Chairman of the 1267 Committee, and Ambassador
Peter Burian, Chairman of the 1540 Committee, for
their briefings. We would like to commend them for the
work they are carrying out at the head of these
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council.

Peru has zero tolerance for terrorism. We strongly
and unequivocally condemn terrorism, in all its forms
and manifestations, wherever and by whomever
terrorism is committed. No ideological, political or
religious reason justifies those who commit, contribute
to, finance or make apologies for terrorism. My
country therefore supports the strengthening of the
Security Council's counter-terrorism efforts.

With regard to the work of the 1267 Committee, I
would like to reiterate the importance that my
delegation attaches to improving the quality of the
Consolidated List. The recent approval of a procedure
to respond to requests for the delisting of deceased
individuals is a step forward. However, there are other
important issues that need to be addressed.

For example, it is essential that we have as much
information as possible regarding the identification of
individuals and justifying listing requests for those
individuals. All requests should comply with the
standards set by Interpol for inclusion in its database.
Difficulties in identifying individuals and entities on
the Consolidated List pose a challenge to the
implementation of sanctions, in particular with regard
to respect for human rights and to the efficiency and
credibility of the Committee itself.

In that context, my delegation believes that the
review of the procedures for inclusion on the
Consolidated List and for delisting is relevant here.
The Committee will be considering that issue shortly;
it is of great importance for my delegation, and we
commend Ambassador Cesar Mayoral for his work in
that regard. We acknowledge the expectations both
inside and outside the United Nations with regard to
the review process, and we believe that the Committee
should take this opportunity to address the existing
limitations of the current system, bearing in mind once
again that any effort to combat terrorism must be based
on full respect for human rights, including due process.
Of course, we will cooperate fully with Ambassador
Mayoral in the complex process that he will be
heading.

When States face difficulties in implementing
sanctions and request assistance, the Committee should
be in a position to respond to those requests in a timely
and appropriate manner. In particular, if the Committee
is consulted by a State, it should be in a position to
determine the identity of an individual, either using the
information it has on file or, if that should prove
insufficient, by asking for additional information from
the State requesting inclusion.

With regard to the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), my delegation continues to look
forward to the transition from the reporting regime to
the preliminary implementation assessment regime. As
mentioned by Ambassador Loj today, that new tool is
still being tested by the Committee.

The proper application of that new tool should
enable the Committee to gain a deeper and more
complete knowledge of the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), thereby establishing a solid
foundation for the better understanding of national
situations, improved dialogue between the Committee

S/l'V.5446

 
and Member States and, on a case-by-case basis, the
best approach to follow.

With regard to strengthening the Committee's
working relations with international, regional and
subregional organizations, we believe that due
attention should be accorded to the mandate of each of
those organizations and to the work that they are
already carrying out in the area of counter-terrorism,
bearing in mind that efforts must not be duplicated. As
for the facilitation of technical assistance and other
activities of the Committee, such as visits, the
cooperation should be broad, and no actor should be
especially favoured, because a single technical
assistance model may not necessarily be the best fit in
all cases.

Respect for human rights is central in the fight
against terrorism. The Counter-Terrorism Committee
and its Executive Directorate must continue to convey
that crucial message. The Committee's recent approval
of policy guidelines for the Directorate on human
rights was an important step in the right direction.

My delegation also believes that it is important to
keep all Members of the Organization constantly
informed about the work of the Committee. In that
regard, we welcome the recent informal meeting
between the Chairperson and Member States, as well as
her intention to organize such meetings on a regular
basis. We invite Member States to participate in those
meetings and to take advantage of the opportunity they
provide to discuss matters with the Chairperson and the
Executive Directorate.

We would also like to mention the participation
of Ambassador Loj in the Pacific Islands Forum
meeting. Her participation proved very useful, not only
in disseminating information about the work of the
Committee, but also in learning about the progress
achieved in that region and the possibilities for
regional cooperation in counter-terrorism efforts there.

Peru underscores the importance of the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). Terrorist non-State actors must be prevented
from acquiring weapons of mass destruction - that is
a real concern. Peru favours the promotion of measures
to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, as well as support for disarmament
measures.
My delegation is therefore participating with
interest in the negotiations under way to adopt the
Committee's programme of work for the next 12
months. We believe that it should continue the pattern
followed to date, that is, it should compile and
disseminate information, promote dialogue, provide
assistance and facilitate cooperation. As stated in
resolution 1673 (2005), it should also continue to
consider aspects covered in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of
resolution 1540 (2004).

In my delegation's view, the dissemination
activities carried out by the Committee and the way in
which States implement the relevant resolutions of the
Council are of great importance. That is why, as
Ambassador Burian recalled, Peru will host a regional
seminar this November on the follow-up to and the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

With regard to the exchange of information, we
wish to note the establishment of a database on
national measures. The database will help States
continue to improve their legislation aimed at
strengthening monitoring measures.

In his briefing, Ambassador Burian also referred
to State reports. Appropriate consideration of such
reports will undoubtedly enable the Committee to
identify areas in which States need technical
assistance. The Committee should assist States in
preparing their reports and, if necessary, in considering
legislative reforms needed for the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) in the context of respect for the
rights and obligations of States parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the
Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological
Weapons Convention.

I wish to reaffirm the importance of improved
cooperation and coordination among the three
Committees and their expert groups.

