I would like to welcome you, Minister Maas, and the Honourable Ministers from Viet Nam, Belgium, Estonia, the United Kingdom and Tunisia to this important meeting. I would also like to thank the briefers for their insightful presentations. Across the globe, we are increasingly witnessing the adverse impacts of climate change as they affect people, ecosystems and livelihoods. Among those impacts, sea level rise, extreme weather events and drought are causing food insecurity, habitat loss and species extinction. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has warned that the costs of climate change are likely to increase over time. Against that backdrop, I would like to outline three points with regard to the topic of this open debate, namely, climate and security. First, the linkage between climate change and security risks is highly context- specific. I thank Mr. Mahamadou Seydou Magagi for providing context to this discussion through the example on the Sahel. While climate change was never the only driver of conflict, there is evidence to suggest that it has multiplied existing risks known to contribute to insecurity. Yet that linkage depends on many other factors, including availability of resources and the capacity to adapt. Therefore, it is important to understand this relationship through informed analysis that takes into account local context and up-to-date climate information. I concur with Assistant Secretary-General Jenea that we must put people at the centre and learn from daily experience in addressing the consequences of climate change on security. It is only through understanding the precise relationship between climate and conflict that we can come up with effective and efficient policy recommendations. The Security Council has discussed climate and security issues at various meetings. It has also integrated language on climate-related security risks into country-specific resolutions. In that context, itis also important to give attention to strengthening the capacity of affected countries to adapt and mitigate the impact of climate-related security risks. The Climate Security Mechanism has also been established to provide assessment of climate-related security risks and their management strategy. It is useful to strengthen the Mechanism, including through capacity-building and linkage with the international research community. Secondly, we should mainstream climate change considerations throughout the whole peace continuum, from conflict prevention, peacemaking and peacekeeping to peacebuilding and post-conflict recovery, on a case by case basis. That includes integrating climate analysis into risk assessment and considering climate-related impacts on peace processes and peacekeeping operations, as well as designing climate-sensitive peacebuilding interventions in countries affected by conflict. Embedding climate issues in conflict prevention and peacebuilding could contribute to preventing the triggering and escalation of conflict due to the impacts of climate change. Priorities must be established in countries and situations where climate risks intersect with fragile politics. It is crucial to assist those countries to build adaptive capacity and enhance resilience based on their needs and priorities. Thirdly, we should enhance cooperation and information-sharing. The United Nations systems must work in synergy, according to their respective competencies and mandates. Climate change and its related security impacts are a very complex area, rendering a response by any single actor impossible and unrealistic. It is important to enhance cooperation and the exchange of information across all United Nations entities to ensure effective response strategies. Efforts to address climate- related security risks should take advantage of and mobilize existing expertise and capacity and take into account the needs of affected communities. Lastly, if the coronavirus disease pandemic has taught us something, it is that national interest alone cannot result in a solution to common global challenges. I would therefore reiterate that it is crucial to enhance international cooperation in addressing climate change. To that end, Indonesia believes that discussion and consideration regarding climate-related security risks can be beneficial only if they lead to eventual action in addressing climate change appropriately through robust mitigation and adaptation action. The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change continues to be the leading forum to address climate change, and it remains crucial to uphold the Paris Agreement and for countries to meet their nationally determined commitments. For its part, Indonesia stands ready to contribute to the global efforts to combat climate change, including by addressing its relationship with security challenges.
