Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let me
begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of November. I would also like to pay a tribute
to the Permanent Representative of Nigeria, Ambassador
Gambari, for the excellent manner in which he guided the
work of the Council during the last month.

 

Today, the Security Council is, once again,
considering the situation in the former Yugoslavia. Unlike
its previous meetings on the subject, the Council has
adopted today two important resolutions following
yesterday's peace agreement in Dayton, an agreement that
could, it is hoped, be the basis for the establishment of
peace and tranquillity in the region.

Since the beginning of the crisis in the Balkans, we
have witnessed the tremendous sufferings of the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in dealing with foreign aggression.
Numerous documents of the United Nations, as well as the
television pictures of the horrors inflicted upon the Bosnian
people by the Serbs, testify to the magnitude of the crimes.
The rape, murder, mass killings, wanton destruction of
properties and "ethnic cleansing" have been persistently
practised against Muslims in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
fact, the conscience of the whole world is wounded by the
level of these atrocities.

That was the reason behind the establishment of the
war crimes Tribunal for former Yugoslavia. Therefore, the
world has the right to expect that, regardless of political
considerations, the perpetrators of these grave crimes
against humanity and the violators of international law will
be brought to justice as soon as possible.

The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina has
always sought a peaceful settlement of the crisis and the
achievement of peace and justice in that country, and has
shown the utmost flexibility in the negotiations. Yesterday's
Agreement proves once more the desire of the Bosnian
Government to achieve a peaceful conclusion to the conflict
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We share the sentiment
expressed by Bosnians that, although the Agreement is not
just it is a move towards preventing further bloodshed in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We believe that despite its many
shortcomings every effort should be made to implement the
Agreement, which, inter alia, guarantees the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina with a
unified capital, and gives refugees and displaced persons
the legal right to reclaim their homes or receive
compensation.

What is needed now is supervision by the international
community of the implementation of the Agreement in
order to maintain the unity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
to restore lasting peace and security to that country. Events
of the past have demonstrated that the Bosnian Serbs have
not honoured their commitments. The Security Council has
to ensure compliance with the Agreement and must
immediately take the necessary measures in case of non-
compliance.

An overwhelming majority of Member States have
on numerous occasions called for the lifting of the arms
embargo against the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and have affirmed the non-applicability of resolution
713 (1991) to that Republic. Now, with the signing of the
Ohio Agreement and its Annexes and the adoption of a
new resolution by the Council on lifting the arms
embargo, we hope that the defence requirements of the
victim will be adequately addressed so that future
aggression against Bosnia is prevented.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
responsibility of the United Nations with respect to the
operation of the international force to be dispatched to
monitor the Agreement. We believe that the United
Nations should have the final say in the operation, and
that any arrangement in this regard should have the clear
endorsement of the Security Council. Furthermore, the
international force should embrace all those who are
willing to offer troops to it.

