Mr. Merimee (France) (interpretation from French):
The three resolutions which our Council has just adopted
are of major importance, for two reasons. It has been
decided both to continue the United Nations presence in the
former Yugoslavia and to give the existing force a new,
differentiated, structure, while preserving the unity of
political and military leadership.

The Council adopted these three resolutions
unanimously, and I wish to say that my delegation fully
appreciates the spirit of cooperation that characterized the
discussions between the sponsors and their Council
partners.

My delegation welcomes the fact that the Croatian
Government has finally accepted the continuation of the
United Nations presence on its territory. This presence is
essential if we are to avoid a resumption of hostilities and
to foster negotiations with a view to a political settlement.
The resolution we have just adopted defines the broad
outlines of a new mandate which should permit the United
Nations Confidence Restoration Operation in Croatia

 

(UNCRO) to carry out several missions that we regard as
essential: implementation of the Cease-Fire Agreement of
29 March 1994, the application of the Economic
Agreement of 2 December 1994 and the monitoring of
Croatia's international borders, which reflects the
Council's concern to ensure that its sovereignty and
territorial integrity be preserved. The mandate will have
to be spelled out in order to be implemented, and in this
connection we await the next report of the Secretary-
General. Until the new mandate is implemented,
transitional arrangements are contemplated to ensure the
continuation of the principal missions of the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in Croatia and to
allow the necessary redeployment to begin.

It must be clear to all that the goal of UNCRO's
presence is to help reach a political settlement. We call
upon the Government of Croatia and the local Serb
authorities to continue their negotiations on confidence-
building measures and to resolutely commit themselves to
a negotiated settlement, for which the United Nations, the
European Union, the Russian Federation and the United
States have all striven.

UNPROFOR's mandate in Bosnia and Herzegovina
has been renewed. Here again, it is a matter of the Force's
continuing to carry out essential missions, whether
overseeing the implementation of cease-fire and cessation
of hostilities agreements or allowing humanitarian
assistance to continue.

My delegation reminds the Council that keeping
UNPROFOR in Bosnia and Herzegovina is not an end in
itself. We must be seriously concerned by the recent
increase in serious violations of the cease-fire and
cessation of hostilities agreements, and we ask the parties,
as the agreements are about to expire, to exercise the
greatest restraint; it is imperative that the agreements be
extended. It is up to the parties to show their desire to
reach an overall political settlement. The sole purpose of
UNPROFOR's presence is to facilitate a conclusion. We
call upon the Serbs of Bosnia, once again, to accept the
proposals presented by the Contact Group as a starting
point. Without such acceptance, no settlement will be
possible.

I would now like to express the satisfaction of my
delegation with regard to the renewal, under a new name,
of the United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
(UNPREDEP) in The Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. We welcome the fact that the Macedonian
Government has clearly indicated its desire to see the

 

United Nations preventive deployment maintained, which
contributes significantly to the maintenance of peace and
security in the region.

Allow me now to the return to the new configuration
of the United Nations presence in the former Yugoslavia.
UNPROFOR has just been restructured into three distinct
operations. We are satisfied with the solution chosen, which
preserves the unity of command and of political leadership
over the entire theatre, as well as the logistical and
organizational interrelationship of the three Forces. We
regard this as essential. We believe that respect for this
principle of unity strengthens both the security of the troops
deployed and the means available to the United Nations to
facilitate negotiations in a theatre where the problems are
closely intertwined, in particular between Croatia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this connection, we would like
to emphasize that the theatre commander must continue to
exercise full authority over all the Blue Helmets deployed
throughout the territories of successor States to the former
Yugoslavia. This means that the civilian authorities under
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General will not
assume responsibilities within the chain of military
command, and that the theatre commander will have full
responsibility for the implementation of the three mandates
entrusted to the United Nations Forces.

Finally, I should like to pay tribute to the
UNPROFOR personnel, who over these past three years
have displayed exceptional courage and dedication, and
particularly to those who have fallen in carrying out their
duties.

