Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish, at the outset, to thank Ambassadors Peter
Wittig, Hardeep Singh Puri and Baso Sangqu for their
informative briefings and the great skill and dedication
with which they guide the subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council under their respective leadership.

Such joint meetings as this are very useful
in considering terrorist threats from a broader
perspective. They also contribute to the strengthening
of coordination and coherence of actions throughout
the system.

This year, the General Assembly carried out the
third review of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. That exercise reaffirmed both that
we all share the same goal and the particular importance
for the three subsidiary bodies of the Security Council
continuing their close cooperation with the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force and its working
groups.

With regard to the work of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011), we welcome the improvements effected
by the Committee regarding procedural guarantees
and the consideration of applications for listing and
delisting. However, that remains a work in progress and
much remains to be done. We trust that we will find
a path by which to harmonize political processes with
legal standards. We await with interest the forthcoming
negotiations on the renewal of the mandate of the
Committee, which will provide an opportunity to
improve and strengthen the credibility of the sanctions
regime.

That brings me to the work of the Ombudsperson,
whom I should like to congratulate. We wish to voice
our great admiration and respect for the independence,
professionalism and courage with which the
Ombudsperson has carried out her work. Reassured by
that experience, we are interested in specific proposals
to strengthen the mandate of the Ombudsperson. We
look favourably on the document prepared by several
delegations addressed to the Council (S/2012/805). We
would be particularly interested to see the mandate of
the Ombudsperson broadened to cover all sanctions
Committees. We would also like there to be greater
access to information with regard to the reasons leading
to the addition of a person or institution to the list.

We also welcome the frank and extensive exchange
ofviews that the Committee held with Mr. Ben Emerson,
Special Rapporteur for the Human Rights Council
on the protection and promotion of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the fight against terrorism.
The recommendations contained in his report are
still being carefully scrutinized, but they will surely
provide input for our deliberations on strengthening the
mandate of the Ombudsperson.

With regard to the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
we believe that for us to continue to make progress,
we have to continue with the preliminary assessments
regarding the implementation ofresolution 1373 (2001).
We now have a revised version that will help us in our
task and reduce "report fatigue" that many Member
States face. It will also allow for more detailed recording
of information provided for follow-up and evaluation.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate deserves a special word of praise for the
contribution it makes in helping States to stay up to date
with the evolving risks and threats posed by terrorist
acts, in identifying shortcomings and gaps regarding
their obligations under resolutions 1373 (2001) and
1624 (2005), and in proposing new practical means to
ensure that those resolutions are fully implemented.

We also encourage the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate to continue its capacity-building activities
and providing technical assistance mechanisms to those
countries that request it. It is particularly important for
there to be even greater emphasis on the conditions that
can provide a breeding ground for terrorism and its
propagation. We believe that the effectiveness of our
counter-terrorism efforts depends upon our ability to
successfully tackle the economic, social and political
conditions that often fuel terrorism.

With regard to non-proliferation, we commend the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for the work it has carried out, in particular
regarding the provision of assistance, cooperation and
outreach activities. We believe that the Committee
and its group of experts must continue to promote the
further intensification of activities by the international
community in order to combat the risks and threats
of proliferation. Likewise, we believe that the
Committee must continue its work as far as possible
in close cooperation with the other such international
organizations as the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, so as to avoid the duplication of
efforts.

We take note of the Committee's programme of
work and welcome the steps taken to ensure that the
work of the Committee is more systematic.

We particularly welcome the emphasis on
cooperation between the Committee and international
organizations, including the Security Council
committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1373 (2001). We believe it is important to
pursue those efforts.

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) has proven itselfto be a crucial mechanism in
strengthening support and assistance to Member States
in promoting and continuing to develop their capacities
to counter such threats. Guatemala acknowledges and
commends that work. With respect to assistance and
capacity-building, we welcome the organization of a
number of regional workshops, seminars and round
tables by various Member States.

As for the role of the group of experts of the 1540
Committee, its work as set forth in resolution 1977
(2011) is of paramount importance. Without the support
provided by the experts to Member States, in particular
the developing States, it would be very difficult for many
of them to develop action plans, submit national reports
and progress on measures necessary to implement
resolution 1540 (2004). In that respect, we welcome
the fact that the issue of the selection of experts was
resolved with the adoption in June of resolution 2055
(2012). Six experts are already working, and we trust
that the remaining three will soon begin to do so.

In that context, we reiterate our position on the
criteria for the selection of experts under resolution
1977 (2011). In particular, we highlight the need
for broad geographical representation to meet the
legitimate expectations of the international community
for equitable and fair representation. Resolution 1977
(2011) contains clear criteria for the selection of experts.
It is important to meet those criteria in order to ensure
the legitimacy of the 1540 Committee.

To conclude, over the past decade the role of
the Security Council in combating terrorism has
quickly grown and evolved. Guatemala trusts that
the subsidiary bodies of the Council will continue to
promote cooperation among Member States and to
assist them in overcoming obstacles to implementation
of the relevant Council resolutions. In addition to
enjoying our gratitude, the Permanent Representatives
of Germany, India and South Africa can also rely on
our full support for their work.

