Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The nineteenth of August 2003 was for us a day of
shock and sorrow. A violent terrorist attack struck the
United Nations headquarters in Baghdad, resulting in
heavy casualties. The Chinese Government strongly
condemns this heinous attack against United Nations
personnel.

China's President, Hu Jintao, has issued a
statement on this incident and has conveyed, on behalf
of the Chinese Government and people, our
condolences to the bereaved families and our sincere
sympathy to the wounded. The Chinese Foreign
Minister, Li Zhaoxing, has also sent a telegram to the
Secretary-General.

Of particular sadness to us is the fact that this
incident caused the unfortunate death of Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. In his service of more than 30 years
to the United Nations, Mr. Vieira de Mello worked
tirelessly for the maintenance of peace. His passing is
indeed a huge loss for the United Nations. However,
his dedication, courage and pursuit of peace and justice
will always be remembered by people throughout the
world.

The Chinese mission listened attentively to the
statements made by the Ambassadors of the United
States and the United Kingdom. We thank them for
their briefings pursuant to Security Council resolution
1483 (2003), which will help us follow more closely
the latest developments in Iraq.

The attack against the United Nations
headquarters in Baghdad and the bombing of the
Jordanian embassy in Iraq earlier this month prove
once again that security remains the primary issue in
Iraq today. The lack of security impedes the normal
process of humanitarian assistance and political and
economic reconstruction in Iraq. The early restoration
of peace and stability to Iraq has become the most
urgent priority. As the Secretary-General pointed out in
his report of 17 July,

"the Coalition Provisional Authority, not the

United Nations, was responsible for

administering Iraq, for providing for the welfare

of the people, and for restoring conditions of

security and stability". (5/2003/715, para. 105)
We hope that, with active efforts on the part of the
relevant parties, stability will be restored to Iraq at an
early date and the security of United Nations personnel
effectively ensured.

We welcome the active measures adopted by the
Governing Council since its establishment to restore
sovereignty, such as appointing administrative
department leaders and laying the grounds for the
formulation of a new constitution. We hope that these
measures will be conducive to the early establishment
of a broad-based new Government supported by the
Iraqi people. It is our consistent View that
reconstruction efforts in Iraq cannot succeed without
the extensive participation and active cooperation of
the international community. The United Nations
should play an active and effective role in Iraq's
reconstruction.

Despite the attack on the United Nations
headquarters in Baghdad, we are convinced that the
United Nations mission in Iraq will not be brought to
an end. We hope that resolution 1500 (2003), adopted
by the Security Council last week, will mark the
beginning of a substantive United Nations role in Iraq.
I wish to reiterate that China will continue, alongside
the rest of the international community, to support the
United Nations important role on the Iraqi issue and to
help the Iraqi people restore stability and order as soon
as possible.

