Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in English): I
would like to start by presenting the apologies of our
Permanent Representative, who is currently receiving
His Royal Highness Prince Moulay Rachid, who will
address the General Assembly in a few minutes.

(spoke in Arabic)

I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
for presiding over this meeting and for convening
members to consider this very important subject. All of
us are trying to maintain peace and security and settle
conflicts in a peaceful manner and counter all forms of
extremism.

We would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his enlightening briefing. We appreciate the great
efforts he has made to raise awareness about the need to
maintain peace and security and to counter extremism.

We are meeting at a time when the international
community is celebrating the seventieth anniversary of
the Charter of the United Nations, which emphasizes
the need to respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States and the importance of finding
peaceful resolutions to conflicts. The current conflicts
spreading across the world and the absence of peaceful
solutions via dialogue and consensus pursuant to the
Charter have contributed to igniting conflicts among
brothers who had previously lived in harmony and
peace and served the interests of their nation and their
prosperity.

We cannot talk about maintaining peace and
security without discussing the question of Palestine.
In that regard, we are concerned at the escalation that
Israel has opted for in dealing with Al-Quds, especially
since 13 September 2015. Israel is committing grave
violations against the Al-Aqsa Mosque and carrying out
incursions against, and abuse of, worshippers in blatant
violation of the sensitivities of millions of Muslims
and in defiance of many international conventions
and agreements. Israel is also trying to undermine the
status quo of Al-Quds Al-Sharif.

The Kingdom of Morocco is playing a role in
these issues through His Majesty Mohammed VI at
the head of the Al-Quds Committee, which supports
the Jerusalemites and upholds the Palestinian cause.
We will continue to support our Palestinian brothers
in creating their independent State with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital. We urge that Israel withdraw
from all the Palestinian occupied territories to the 1967
borders.

Following Israel's acts ofaggression, the Committee
was convened without delay under the auspices of
His Majesty, who has also met with Mr. Mahmoud
Abbas to consider the grave situation. Through the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation Ministerial
Contact Group on defending the cause of Palestine
and Al-Quds Al-Sharif, which defends the Palestinian
cause, we met on 26 September on the margins of the
seventieth session of the General Assembly. At that
meeting, we adopted a declaration that condemns the
Israeli Violations, which constitute an unprecedented
provocation of the sensitivities of hundreds of millions
of Muslim worshippers in the world and which could
lead to additional interreligious and sectarian conflict.
Such Violations undermine all efforts to reach a two-
State solution and only serve to increase extremism.

The Kingdom of Morocco will continue to be
true in its support for the Palestinian people and
their inalienable rights, the foremost of which are the
creation of an independent State with East Jerusalem as
its capital on the basis of the June 1967 borders, in the
context of a two-State solution by which it would live
side by side in peace and harmony with Israel.

All prospects before us are at an impasse. Crises
are unfolding before our eyes, especially in Syria, but
also in Yemen and Libya. This situation fuels terrorism,
which continues to spread in the Middle East. Since
June 2014, Daesh has occupied many regions in Iraq,
Syria and Libya. Boko Haram is prevailing in West
Africa, as is Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb. These
organizations are fragmenting States and are now
controlling parts of them. They have enslaved women,
carried out rape, kidnapped children and the elderly,
and committed massacres that are tantamount to war
crimes of and a blatant violation of international law,
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
They have also destroyed places of worship - mosques
and churches, principally - and have oppressed many
minorities, even going so far as to destroy their heritage.
These terrorist groups are also stalking conflict areas in
order to be drawn into the fighting and thereby attract
more youth to these hot spots.

According to United Nations reports, there are
more than 25,000 foreign terrorist fighters from at least
100 States, especially in Syria and Iraq. These fighters
are being attracted by many means: their poverty is
being exploited, and the Internet, particularly social
networks, is being used to tempt them. In that context,
if youth finds itself before closed doors, if political
and economic setbacks are all they know, if there is
no governance, if there is despair and deprivation,
increasing numbers of them will be tempted to ride the
waves of clandestine migration. They will be exploited
by the mafias specializing in human trafficking. This
tragedy unfolding before us, including the drowning
of people, demands that we quickly find a solution.
We must find a way to provide people with decent
livelihoods so that they do not turn into massive armies
of terrorists.
My delegation condemns terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. Terrorism cannot be attributed
to any religion, ethnic group, nation, culture or
civilization. It is a criminal act. Since the attacks
of 11 September 2001, Morocco has participated
in international efforts to fight terrorism. We have
cooperated with various United Nations agencies in
devising strategies to fight terrorism. In particular, we
have tried to promote the implementation of resolution
2178 (2014), on foreign terrorist fighters, and resolution
2199 (2015), on the financing ofterrorism. We have also
been actively involved in the Global Counterterrorism
Forum, which last September adopted the Hague-
Marrakech Memorandum on Good Practices for a More
Effective Response to the Foreign Terrorist Fighters
Phenomenon. Together with the Netherlands, we
co-chair a working group on foreign terrorist fighters.
Furthermore, the Moroccan city of Al-Jadida hosted a
conference with the United Nations on foreign terrorist
fighters. We have also adopted a security strategy and
modernized and updated our legal framework as a part
of our national human development initiative.

Morocco has always been involved in peace-loving
efforts. We have been part of many United Nations
peacekeeping operations all over the world, especially
in Africa. We have supported all constructive
approaches to lifting countries out of crisis. His
Majesty King Mohammed VI has sponsored peaceful
solutions in many regions, especially in the Mano River
Basin. Morocco has also hosted many dialogue sessions
among Libyan parties. We hope that an agreement will
be adopted and signed soon. When that occurs, we will
have helped the people of Libya to give form to their
deepest desire since they achieved their independence.

