I would like to thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing. The Dominican Republic reiterates its deep concern, already expressed several times, regarding the Israel-Palestine conflict and its enormous consequences for the civilian population and for the stability of the whole Middle East region. And now, with the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the well- being of many people with long-standing vulnerabilities is threatened even more. With cases already confirmed, we may, sooner rather than later, be dealing with the consequences of years of neglect and inaction that have made this one of the most serious protracted humanitarian situations in the world and have already caused the loss of many generations. Therefore, urgent concerted action among States and humanitarian organizations is needed to address the needs of the affected population in a dignified and sustained way. The conflict that persists in the occupied Palestinian territory, as well as the further deterioration of the humanitarian and socioeconomic situation there, exacerbates the level of uncertainty about the future of the peace process in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. At the root of that conflict remains the unresolved issue of the right of the Palestinian people to their national independence and sovereignty. The Dominican Republic considers that, at this particular juncture, it is imperative to redouble conciliation efforts between the parties, with the support of the international community, in order to open the door for meaningful and constructive discussion that addresses the challenges they face together. We must avoid at all cost unilateral actions that could create deeper wounds and further enhance the already deep resentment and mistrust that prevail in this conflict. The COVID-19 pandemic is a common enemy for both Israelis and Palestinians and, as such, the only way they can fight it is through collective and joint action based on solidarity and a common sense of humanity. Meaningful and fair dialogue around the numerous obstacles that threaten the two-State solution must continue with the realization of the indisputable interdependence of the two countries, the need for collaboration and, on the basis of international consensus, the fact that the only way forward for Palestinians and Israelis is to negotiate a two-State solution in order to live in peace, side by side. Therefore, we encourage all parties to immediately end all actions that undermine support for the two-State solution and ultimately hinder peace. We are pleased to learn that, following an agreement with the Palestinian Authority, the State of Israel has reopened a number of crossings - in a move that allows thousands of Palestinians in the occupied West Bank seeking employment opportunities to return to work. We encourage that type of coordination between the Israeli and Palestinian authorities, as it can promote the much-needed dialogue to relaunch negotiations towards a peace plan and, ultimately, alleviate the living conditions of the affected populations. As an international community, we believe that our collective action must be aimed at supporting the parties in an impartial and effective way towards real and sustainable solutions. To conclude, we reaffirm the need to increase our efforts to continue working tirelessly until we can resume a meaningful and constructive dialogue, based on mutual respect and on the internationally agreed parameters. That will pave the way for a new stage towards building a true peace between Israelis and Palestinians. Women, children and young people on both sides deserve a future of peace, progress and justice. Let us be the ones who helped them achieve their aspirations.
