Mr. Adom (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes this debate on one of the most
worrisome issues of today - the prevention and fight
against the financing of terrorism. I would like to
congratulate all the excellent speakers we have heard
so far on the quality of their statements.

At the outset, I would like to underscore that Cote
d'Ivoire associates itself with the statement to be made
by Ambassador Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the Africa Union to the United Nations.

In view of the interest and importance that your
country, Madam President, attaches to this important
issue, my delegation welcomes the adoption by
consensus of resolution 2462 (2019), which comes at a
time when the constantly changing threat of terrorism
is at the heart of our concerns.

Today, despite the remarkable progress we
have made, humankind is still unfortunately under
the constant threat of this phenomenon, which is
continuously evolving and creating new challenges for
our world. By taking advantage of loopholes in financial
regimes and current regulations and exploiting informal
channels and technological innovations, terrorist
groups continue to have access to significant resources
to finance their destabilizing activities.

The African continent has not escaped that global
scourge; indeed, it has been ravaged by it. Various
studies have shown that terrorism in Africa is fuelled
by trafficking of all kinds, owing to the weakness of
States and the high level of poverty. Those sources of
funding are essential to the activities of such groups,
which sometimes even abandon their traditional donors
and become actors in the production of wealth and
capital accumulation. It is therefore essential that the
international community tackle the root of the problem
by drying up all sources of terrorist financing.

The magnitude of the threat requires a collective
assessment of our current control strategies and
normative frameworks in order to provide a more
appropriate and better coordinated response that
will eliminate any gaps or dysfunctions that could
be exploited by terrorists. In our View, that approach
involves measures at the international, regional and
national levels.

At the international level, combating the financing
of terrorism is a global security priority that requires
mobilizing all stakeholders, harmonizing legal
frameworks and pooling resources. In that context, the
United Nations has a leading role to play in promoting
the values of multilateralism and international
cooperation. In that regard, better synergy among United
Nations entities is essential, along with improving
their cooperation with States and with regional and
subregional organizations. My country would like
to take this opportunity to once again commend the
high-level International Conference on Combating
the Financing of Da'esh and Al-Qaida, held in Paris
on 25 and 26 April 2018 on the theme "No money for
terror", and to reaffirm its support for the conference's
outcomes. In the face of a threat that knows no bounds,
and in a spirit of complementarity and solidarity,
countries should also promote multifaceted cooperation,
particularly in the justice, police and financial sectors.
As the sharing of information and best practices is a
key strategic element in this fight, particular attention
should be paid to establishing formal cooperation
mechanisms between the customs services of various
countries and increasing border surveillance.

At the regional level, the Intergovernmental
Action Group against Money Laundering in West
Africa constitutes a major response and a contribution
by the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) to fighting money-laundering. That
specialized agency works with States, Governments
and financial institutions operating in ECOWAS
countries to strengthen their capacity to combat
money-laundering and the financing of terrorism.
ECOWAS's support has enabled member States to
adopt legislation to combat the financing of terrorism,
establish corresponding institutional frameworks and
strengthen cooperation among their national services
and international partners.

At the national level, my delegation is of the view that
it is incumbent on States to strengthen their legal tools
for countering terrorism, especially by criminalizing
terrorism financing and fully implementing United
Nations sanctions. With that in mind, beginning in 2015,
C6te d'Ivoire's National Assembly enacted a terrorism
suppression law that criminalizes a number of actual
terrorist acts as well as related offences, including
recruitment, association, incitement and provocation
to commit terrorist acts. In 2018, we strengthened our
counter-terrorism system by criminalizing the provision
or collection of funds for financing terrorism-related
objectives and the organization on our national territory
of travel by persons to another State in order to enable
them to participate in the commission, organization or
preparation of terrorist acts, provide or receive terrorism
training or participate in other activities that facilitate
terrorist acts, including recruitment, in accordance
with resolution 2253 (2015). As part of its strategy for
combating terrorism financing, in November 2016 C6te
d'Ivoire enacted a law on combating money-laundering
and terrorism financing, in accordance with the relevant
directive of the West African Economic and Monetary
Union. With the support of the World Bank, we plan
to conduct a national money-laundering and terrorism-
financing risk assessment, in line with the obligations
of the West African Economic and Monetary Union.

Cote d'Ivoire has also signed and ratified the
main regional and international legal instruments
on combating terrorism. In addition, we have begun
the process of drafting the provisions of a uniform
national assets-freeze law and have already adopted
a law on the freezing of funds in accordance with
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1267 (1999). We have also
provided for the establishment of an administrative
freeze advisory committee by decree. Under article 5
of our law No. 2016-992, non-profit organizations are
now subject to anti-money-laundering and terrorism-
financing obligations.

Following the tragic terrorist attack in March 2016
in the coastal city of Grand-Bassam, Cote d'Ivoire
strengthened its anti-terrorism measures, taking steps
to increase its vigilance in order to prevent further
terrorist attacks by stepping up intelligence; improving
the operational capabilities of counter-terrorism units
by strengthening material resources, training and
international cooperation; and raising public awareness
on what to do in the event of a terrorist attack. In
addition, our national financial information processing
unit, created in 2006, is fully operational. We have
also strengthened identification procedures for mobile
telephone operators. Lastly, in partnership with France,
Cote d'Ivoire launched the International Counter-
Terrorism Academy, with a ceremony attended by
Minister Le Drian, on 18 October 2018 in Jacqueville,
30 kilometres outside Abidjan.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire is of the view that
preventing and combating the financing of terrorism
requires mobilization and collective efforts at all levels
in order to make better use of the tools at our disposal
and to implement new measures. We are ready to play
our full part in that regard.

