Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): France
fully associates itself with the statement to be made
shortly by the Ambassador of Spain on behalf of the
European Union.

The situation in the Middle East is exceptionally
serious. The highest authorities in France today
expressed their deepest concern at the tragic turn
events have taken. France calls for the immediate
cessation of all forms of violence and terror, the
cessation of hostilities and the conclusion without
delay of a ceasefire between Palestinians and Israelis.

France asks Chairman Arafat to take all necessary
measures to put an end to violence and acts of terror.
France asks Prime Minister Sharon to put an end
without delay to the military operations carried out by
the Israeli forces, which should begin a withdrawal.

Nothing can justify the killing of innocent
civilians. The Netanya attack and the Jerusalem attack
today should be condemned with horror. As the
Secretary-General has recalled on several occasions,
terrorist attacks are morally repugnant and hateful. We
express our compassion and deep condolences to all of
the victims and to their families.

The Palestinian Authority has the responsibility
to do everything in its power to combat terrorism, but it
can do so only if its capacities are maintained and it is
not weakened. Yasser Arafat can act only if one gives
him the means with which to act.

The French authorities are convinced that the
reaction of Prime Minister Sharon and of his
Government in response to the attacks is leading to a
disastrous cycle of violence and to a tragic impasse.
All-out repression, the excessive use of force,
collective punishment against an entire people - a
people that has been enclosed and humiliated - and
the relentless harassment of Yasser Arafat, who is the
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, is
fuelling an endless spiral of violence. Those acts are
unacceptable.

The action that began this morning in Ramallah
and several other West Bank towns must cease. Israeli
forces must begin their withdrawal. The physical
integrity and personal safety of the President of the
Palestinian Authority must be protected, and his full
freedom of movement must be restored. Action against
humanitarian and medical institutions and personnel
and especially against ambulances is unjustifiable. All
must be guaranteed access to medical care and
emergency medical services.

France has said, and we repeat, that peace cannot
be attained by force of arms. There is no military
solution. To cling solely to a security approach is an
illusion and a trap. The situation will remain at an
impasse as long as the Israeli Government refuses, in
parallel with its security measures, to undertake
political negotiations leading to the creation of an
independent, viable and democratic Palestinian State.
Security aspects and the settlement of political must be
addressed head-on. Terrorism must be combated as if
there were no peace negotiations; peace negotiations
must be conducted as if there were no terrorism.

The highest French authorities welcomed the
Arab summit statement adopted yesterday at Beirut,
entitled an Arab peace initiative and inspired by the
proposals of Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia.
That statement is a historic contribution to a peaceful
future for the Middle East. It outlines the prospect of a
comprehensive and lasting peace based on the
normalization of relations between all Arab States and
Israel in exchange for a complete end to Israeli
occupation of the territories conquered in 1967, in line
with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 1397 (2002) and with the principle of land
for peace.

For the immediate future, France urgently calls
upon the parties to demonstrate wisdom. Leaders on
both sides have a cardinal responsibility to put an end
to the escalation of violence and to pursue peace. The
international community must help them to achieve
this. We welcome and encourage diplomatic efforts
undertaken on all sides; these should be stepped up. We
hope that the United States will re-engage itself still
further. The European Union is increasingly active,
particularly in the context of the "quartet", which is
tirelessly pursuing its efforts in the region.

Two weeks ago the Security Council adopted
resolution 1397 (2002) which, inter alia, demanded
immediate cessation of all acts of violence. That
resolution must be implemented. Arms must not have
the last word; the parties must return to the path of
reason and the path of peace. In these tragic
circumstances, the Security Council must forcefully
remind them ofthis.

