Mr. Ramos-Horta: I am very grateful for the
opportunity to share once again with the members of
the Council our views on the situation in East Timor.

Before proceeding further, I would also like to
note and express my sincere appreciation for the
presence at the meeting this morning of the Prime
Minister of Australia, John Howard. His presence here
underlines Australia's commitment not only to the
United Nations and international cooperation, but also,
and in particular, to the people of East Timor. The
Australian Government and people have been very
generous and committed in a multidimensional way to
the well-being of East Timor, providing for their needs
with regard to security, economic well-being,
reconstruction and so on. We are very touched that the
Prime Minister of Australia took the time to be here
this morning.

We would also like to express our sincere
appreciation to Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and to the
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of Ireland,
Ms. Liz O'Donnell, for their presence. We wish to ask
the delegation of Ireland to convey to the Minister our
sincere appreciation, and to ask the Australian
delegation to convey to the Prime Minister our most
sincere appreciation, for their presence.
In addition, we bring to the members of the
Council the warmest greetings of Mr. Xanana Gusmao;
Mr. Mari Alkatiri, Chief Minister; and the two Bishops
of East Timor, Monsignors Carlos Belo and Basilio do
Nascimento.

I would like to express to you, Mr. President, our
special appreciation for your country's role over the
years in support of our struggle for self-determination.
We have a particular admiration for the way Mauritius
has succeeded in building its economy and a multi-
ethnic society into a prosperous country. Mauritius has
managed to develop its economy from one based
largely on agriculture to a healthy, middle-income,
diversified economy with growing industrial, financial
and tourism sectors. I hope that East Timor will be able
to follow that example. Perhaps with Mauritius's help,
we will succeed in doing so.

Since I last addressed the Council, much has
happened in East Timor. I can only add that we can
verify positive news in many sectors, notably in the
security sector. As Sergio Vieira de Mello reported,
there have been hardly any incidents along the border
between East and West Timor; the last reported
incident occurred in June last year. Credit for this is
due partly to the Indonesian authorities, who have
taken a firmer stand in disarming the militias and also
in encouraging and supporting the return of the
refugees to East Timor.

Because Sergio Vieira de Mello made such a
comprehensive statement, I believe that most of the
content of the speech I had prepared has already been
covered. Therefore, I will share informally with the
Council some of my personal observations on the
situation in East Timor.
First, I would like to respond to a comment by the
representative of the United Kingdom. We take it that
what he suggested is that the development plan we are
trying to put in place be made available to the donor
countries in a timely manner, before the donors
conference. We will do our best to see that each donor
country has the document well in advance of the
conference.

The process of designing a blueprint for the
economic development of East Timor is quite a unique
experiment in our country. It is probably one of the few
exercises in national planning and development in
which civil society, represented by the churches, non-
governmental organizations and intellectuals, have the
opportunity, together with the Government, to reflect
on the priorities and needs of the country before such a
development plan is approved and implemented. That
is what we are trying to do in East Timor. The process
is a partnership between the United Nations, the World
Bank, the United Nations Development Programme,
the East Timorese Government and a civil society
commission, led by Mr. Xanana Gusmao himself.

As I mentioned earlier, the rate of reported crime
in East Timor continues to be among the lowest in the
world. In a recent conversation, the Police
Commissioner of East Timor reported that throughout
2001 there were only four reported cases of murder,
none of which was politically motivated. This is in a
country where unemployment is very high and poverty
is rampant - a country still recovering from the
trauma of past violence.

However, one area that is not encouraging is that
of domestic violence, in particular against women. East
Timorese leaders are puzzled that our society was able
to conduct itself with great civility during the election
process in July and August, without a single violent
incident, and that the crime rate is among the world's
lowest, while the rate of domestic violence is
surprisingly high. Perhaps this increase actually
reflects the higher rate at which such crimes are now
reported in the police and justice system, and that
domestic violence had existed previously but had gone
unreported. With a dynamic press in East Timor today,
with institutions and with more trust in the police and
justice system, women are coming forward to report
cases of violence. We will work hard in the coming
days, weeks and months to eradicate this shameful
aspect of our reality in East Timor.

We are very pleased at some developments in the
preparation of our police force. There are now 1,400
trained police officers deployed all over East Timor.
Their presence throughout the election process in July
and August, in particular on the day of the election, 30
August last year, was very illustrative of the successful
preparation of the East Timor Police Service. However,
this is also the case with the East Timor Defence Force.
The East Timorese people are very proud of the fact
that today we have a battalion that was competently
and professionally trained by Portugal and Australia,
with significant contributions from New Zealand, the
Republic of Korea and the United States.

Recently, the naval component of our Defence
Force took possession of two modified Albatross patrol
boats donated by Portugal. We do not intend,
obviously, to have a navy. The need for these boats is
very clear. We are an island; we have a large economic
zone; we have rampant illegal fishing in our waters;
and we also have an obligation to contribute to the
region in terms of preventing piracy, human smuggling,
drug trafficking and so on. Thus we are making
enormous efforts to try to set up a modest navy
component to control our waters.

Although the downsizing of the peacekeeping
force is a positive indicator of our progress a as has
been mentioned, by May there will be no more than
5,000 members of the peacekeeping force in East
Timor - we are still concerned, and here we have to
be realistic, about the ability of some former militia
elements to destabilize the country. We are thus very
pleased with the proposal made by the Secretary-
General in his report to continue the present
peacekeeping force and civilian police in East Timor
for some time to come.

There has been much progress also on the
refugee-return front. There are still 40,000 to 70,000
refugees living in camps in West Timor. Mr. Vieira de
Mello's assessment is an accurate one in terms of the
reasons why there are still so many thousands of
refugees in West Timor. There are still some rumours
circulating about retaliation against refugees when they
return, which is absolutely untrue. In the past two
years, since 2000-2001, there have been four or five
reported cases of returning refugees being assassinated
out of the almost 200,000 who have now returned. We
are doing our best to educate and inform our people in
West Timor about the reality in the territory.

On the question of justice and reconciliation, it
has been widely reported that last week members -
National Commissioners - of the East Timorese
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation
were sworn in. This is an important task. They have an
enormous responsibility to establish the truth about the
human rights violations that occurred between 1974
and 1999. We emphasize that the Commission will look
back as far as 1974, before Indonesian intervention in
East Timor. Crimes did not occur only after Indonesian
intervention in East Timor.

I have said repeatedly that the East Timorese side
must have the courage and humility to acknowledge
our own responsibility for the tragedy that befell our
people. It would be far too easy to look only at the
alleged crimes and the violence that took place after
1975. So from the very beginning we have argued that
the work of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
should go back to 1974.

We are also optimistic and pleased with the work
of the Serious Crimes Panel. Although it had major
problems with funding and personnel, the Panel has
done outstanding work in terms of indictments and
charges. Some have argued - and if we believe my
friend Sergio Vieira de Mello's propaganda - it has
been more successful than better-funded war crimes
tribunals elsewhere, in the Balkans and so on.
Although it started with enormous difficulties, such as
lack of funding and of resources, the work of the
District Court that handles serious crimes has been
very impressive in this regard.

The Constituent Assembly, as the Council is
aware, has 12 politically active parties. We started off
with 16 parties. In a country of 900,000, we managed
to have 16 political parties. The United States, with
almost 300 million, has two political parties. France
has, I think, five or six political parties. But in East
Timor we had 16. During my travels around the
country, our people asked me why we had so many
political parties in such a small country. We blame it on
Sergio Vieira de Mello and on the United Nations, but
we told our people that they themselves were the best
judges, that on 30 August, they would go to vote; that
some parties would survive and others would not; and
that in the years to come, some would emerge and
many more would disappear. The people handed down
their verdict: on 30 August, only 12 parties survived.

The system devised by the United Nations in East
Timor was, in retrospect, the best one, in that it
favoured the smaller parties as well. Without that
system of proportional representation, there would not
have been 12 parties. We would not have such an
inclusive, multiparty representation in the Parliament.

We were worried that, with so many political
parties, the Constituent Assembly would be bogged
down in endless debate. But so far the work of that
Assembly has been, for the most part, going smoothly.
We are taking the advice of our friends from around the
world in improving the draft that has now been
concluded. We are allowing one extra month, so that
we can get more input from the people throughout the
district. We are listening to the comments and
criticisms of our friends, so that our very first
Constitution in 500 years will be a model one -
something of which we can really be proud.

On 14 April, we will be holding the presidential
elections. In most countries, there is never a lack of
candidates. In our country, we have to try to persuade
people to run for President. So far we have only one
known candidates, but we hope that there will be at
least two or three more.

I should now like to refer to relations between
East Timor and Indonesia. Sergio Vieira de Mello
already spoke in detail about some aspects of the
question. I should like simply to add that, in the history
of decolonization, seldom has there been, in post-war
relations between two countries that separate from each
other, such a quick process of reconciliation and
normalization of relations. In some cases it has taken
generations to heal the rift between some newly
independent colonies and the former colonial powers,
and in some cases it has taken many years for even
formal relations to be established.

In this regard, we can say, with a sentiment of
enormous friendship towards Indonesia, that the
Indonesian side has shown its maturity and its grandeur
in also putting the past where it belongs and in forging
a new relationship with East Timor. If we remember
the past 25 years, then we will understand the
remarkable success that the two sides have achieved.
This, in large measure, is also a tribute to our brothers
and sisters in Indonesia. We are also grateful to
Australia and Indonesia for inviting East Timor to be
part of the South-West Pacific forum, which is yet
another indication of the willingness on the part of
Indonesia and Australia to embrace East Timor.

On the issue of justice and accountability for
others in Indonesia responsible for the violence in East
Timor, we are encouraged by the steps taken so far by
the Government of President Megawati Soekarnoputri.

In the wider region, our neighbours of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN)
continue to offer very important support to East
Timor's reconstruction and development, capacity-
building and security. We have now initiated formal
contacts with our ASEAN neighbours and the ASEAN
secretariat, hoping that East Timor will be able to sign
the ASEAN Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in South-
East Asia on independence day or soon after that.

I would also like to mention that on the day after
our independence, on 21 May, we will be hosting in
Dili, for the first time, a meeting of the heads of State
and Government of the Portuguese-speaking
community. Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde, Guinea-
Bissau, Mozambique, Sao Tome and Principe and
Portugal have been with us for the past quarter of a
century. On 21 May 2002, East Timor will formally
join the Community of the Portuguese-Speaking
Countries.

We are also working hard in the process of
identifying international treaties to which East Timor
should accede once it attains independence. The
Foreign Ministry is working in close consultation with
other Ministries, the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor and United Nations
agencies to prioritize and prepare the necessary steps.

It is our intention, at independence or shortly
thereafter, that East Timor will accede to the greatest
possible number of international human rights treaties.
In this regard, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation is closely watching the drafting of the
Constitution to ensure that nothing in the Constitution
violates any of the treaties to which East Timor is
likely to become a party. As Sergio Vieira de Mello
mentioned, we want East Timor to join the United
Nations as soon as possible, either on the first day of
independence or soon thereafter.

Planning for independence is under way.
Celebrations will take on 20 May. The Secretary-
General has invited all countries around the world to
attend. We hope that all will attend, but if everyone
actually attends, that could pose the worst logistic
nightmare for East Timor, because we are not exactly
Mauritius or Fiji or Namibia, with infrastructures. But,
at the same time, we would like everybody to respond
positively to the Secretary-General's invitation. We
would not go so far as to say to bring sleeping bags and
lunch boxes, but we will do our best to welcome
everyone, in our poverty and modesty, but with the
greatness of the hearts of the people of East Timor.

A great deal has been achieved in the very short
time of two years, since UNTAET was put in place.
Anyone who visited East Timor in 1999 or 2000 would
be amazed at the progress we have made.
Reconstruction has begun. Family houses are being
rebuilt everywhere. New shops are opening all the
time. Agricultural output has reached the level of 1999,
and more children are now enrolled in schools than
before 1999. In 2001 we enjoyed 18 per cent economic
growth in real terms. The previous year we posted 15
per cent growth. However, economic growth will slow
down considerably in the course of this year.

We are confident, nevertheless, that East Timor
will have a viable, sustainable economy. Reference was
already made to the potential revenues from oil and
gas. Tourism will also thrive once we have created the
necessary infrastructures. But in the short term, East
Timor will need the Council's assistance, and we ask,
on behalf of the second Transitional Government and
the entire country, that this Council endorse the
concept of a successor mission, which has been
carefully thought out and planned by my UNTAET
colleagues. In this way, the gains that have resulted
from the Council's tremendous commitment to East
Timor will be consolidated and maintained in the
crucial years to come.

