Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting,
and I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing. I also listened carefully to the statement of
Ms. Sarah Blakemore,

United Nations peacekeeping operations are an
effective means ofdefusing and easing regional conflicts
and defending collective security and have been
making important contributions to the maintenance of
international peace and security. At present the context
in which United Nations peacekeeping operations
are deployed and the tasks they have to perform are
increasingly complex. United Nations peacekeeping
operations should keep improving in response to the
evolving peacekeeping landscape.

In September 2017, the Council adopted 2378 (2017),
which requested the Secretary-General to submit to the
Council on an annual basis a comprehensive briefing
on the progress of United Nations peacekeeping reform.
China commends the Secretariat for taking measures to

implement the resolution and update the Council with
comprehensive information. The Secretary-General
launched the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and
will convene a high-level meeting during the general
debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-third
session. China commends the efforts of the Secretary-
General and is keen to see the initiative contribute to
high efficiency and the effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. With regard to the reform of
United Nations peacekeeping operations, 1 would like
to share the following points.
My first point concerns the need to uphold the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the basic principles of peacekeeping
operations - the consent of the parties, impartiality
and the non-use of force except in self-defence and
defence of the mandate. Those are the very cornerstone
of peacekeeping operations and a sine qua non and
assurance with which peacekeeping operations
can win the trust of Member States and function
properly. Peacekeeping operations should fully
respect the sovereignty of host countries, strengthen
communication with them and help them to develop
their own capacities in the area of peace and security in
the light of their specific needs.

Secondly, there is a need to maintain the primacy
of the political track. The purpose of peacekeeping
operations is to help host countries establish and
maintain a sustainable peaceful environment and
create enabling conditions for putting an end to conflict
politically. A realistic achievable mandate with well-
defined objectives and highlighted priorities should be
developed for each mission focusing on peacekeeping,
which is the core mission of peacekeeping operations.
The mandate can be adjusted in the light of dynamic
needs, with the core agenda reconfigured phase by
phase to be more effective in maintaining the stability
of the host country and helping it move the political
process forward.

Thirdly, we must build a peacekeeping partnership.
It is necessary to motivate all stakeholders, including
host countries, troop-contributing countries (TCCs),
financial contributors and the Secretariat, and to ensure
sufficient resources for peacekeeping operations and
streamline the use of resources. It is necessary to
strengthen cooperation with regional organizations.
The United Nations should fully leverage the advantages
of the African Union in peacekeeping operations in
Africa, carry out capacity-building activities in various
fields according to its wishes and needs and assist the
African Union in forming a standing army and rapid
response force as soon as possible. We must strengthen
communication among the Security Council, the
Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries, and we
must give the TCCs more say in peacekeeping matters.

Fourthly, better peacekeeping performance
requires the Secretariat and the military, police and
civilian components of missions to work together. The
Secretariat and the civilian component of each mission
must provide peacekeeping forces with more efficient,
high quality support and services for the implementation
of their mandates. It is necessary to ensure the safety
of, and medical support for, peacekeeping missions
and personnel and ensure the availability of funds and
supplies required and enhance emergency response
capabilities. We must pay close attention to the actual
needs of troop-contributing countries, especially the
developing countries among them, and help strengthen
the peacekeeping capacity building. It is necessary to
review and improve existing peacekeeping performance
evaluation system on an ongoing basis. Any work in that
area should benefit from the full participation of TCCs.

China is an active player in, and major contributor
to, United Nations peacekeeping operations. China is
an important TCC and financial contributor to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Currently, more
than 2,500 Chinese peacekeepers are serving in eight
mission locations, including Mali, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and Lebanon.

His Excellency Mr. Xi Jinping of China pledged
to further support United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and the implementation of various
commitments agreed to under that pledge is now under
way. We have established a peacekeeping standby
force of 8,000 troops and two permanent peacekeeping
police units, and have completed their registration
in the United Nations Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System. The China-United Nations Peace
and Development Fund has prioritized peacekeeping
capacity-building, through which it aims to assist the
United Nations in enhancing the safety and security of
peacekeepers and supporting developing countries in
building their peacekeeping capacities.

At the Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation in early September, China announced the
establishment of the China-Africa Peace and Security
Fund, through which we will continue to provide gratis
military assistance to the African Union and facilitate
the implementation of 50 security assistance projects in
the area of peace and security, including peacekeeping
operations under the framework of the United Nations.
We shall continue to play an active role in United
Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa and mobilize
the international community to increase its support for
the development of the African standby force and the
African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises.

China stands ready to continue working with the
wider United Nations membership to further improve
the peacekeeping system in the interests of international
peace and security.

