Mr. Corman (Turkey): As the Security Council
holds another open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, a great transformation in the region is
firmly under way. Universal notions such as freedom,
equality, dignity, human rights and the rule of law have
all become rallying cries for millions who rightfully
demand a more just and promising future for
themselves and their fellow citizens. While achieving
meaningful change may take some time and may not
necessarily always be smooth sailing, that process of
11-43171
historic restoration cannot be reversed, undermined or
corrupted.

Meanwhile, as that major upheaval runs its
course, the Palestinian question still remains in limbo.
Palestinians in their millions, whether in Gaza, the
West Bank or refugee camps across the region,
continue to suffer an unfortunate fate not of their own
making. That is an anomaly and must be addressed as a
matter of utmost urgency.

The truth is that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
lies at the heart of the many disputes in the region and
beyond. The international community cannot expect
the momentum towards positive change to be
maintained in the Middle East and North Africa while
occupation and subjugation are a day-to-day reality for
the Palestinian people.

Recent and past events stand as testament to how
the plight of the Palestinian people has repercussions
far beyond its own geographical scope. If we are to win
the hearts and minds of the Arab people and to support
them in meeting their aspirations, we must be able to
show them our collective determination to reach a just
and viable peace in the region to which everyone can
relate. That is why it is crucial that the search for a
lasting and comprehensive settlement not take a back
seat to other developments in the region. On the
contrary, it must once again be the priority.

At the moment, there is neither peace nor a
process in the region. Instead, there is an impasse that
is neither reassuring nor promising for Israelis or
Palestinians. The parties seem to be drifting further
apart. The Security Council and the Quartet have been
unable to pronounce themselves in an effective manner
and to inspire genuine engagement.

The people want solutions from their leaders, not
empty rhetoric. Overall, there is a prevailing sense of
abandonment and uncertainty, which fuels mass
frustration, especially among the most disenfranchised.
That is a troubling picture, reminiscent of a tinderbox.

Turkey rejects violence in any shape or form by
any party as unacceptable and unjustifiable. We also
believe that that there is no genuine alternative to a
negotiated settlement. However, meaningful
engagement that inspires confidence on both sides
cannot happen while settlement activity continues,
including in occupied East Jerusalem.
11-43171
Israel's latest position on the construction of
more than 300 new settlement units is another example
of its illegal activities in the occupied territories. As
such, it is unacceptable and cause for deeper doubt
about Israel's sincerity towards furthering the peace

process.

Once again, we call on Israel, based on its Road
Map commitments, to cease all settlement activity and
to return to direct negotiations with the Palestinian
side. That is not much to ask, and it is currently the
only way to pave the way towards the realization of a
two-State solution based on the well-established
principles by which Israel and Palestine will forever
live side by side in peace and security.

The Palestinians have been working hard for the
past two years to lay the institutional groundwork of
their future State. Through its deeds, the Palestinian
Authority has proven beyond any doubt that it is ready
to assume all the rights and obligations of an
internationally recognized State, even though Palestine
continues to be under occupation and therefore in need
of international support.

Turkey believes that it is high time for Palestine
to be recognized as a fully fledged Member State
within the international community, based on the 1967
borders. The very notion of a two-State solution, going
as far back as 1947, is the firm and clear basis for that.
The international community must not turn a blind eye
to the legitimate appeal of Palestine to be recognized
as nothing less than an equal and, ultimately, to be
admitted to the United Nations as a full Member.
Turkey will work with Palestine to realize those critical
goals. Ultimately, in the absence of a meaningful peace
process, the Palestinians cannot be expected to remain
a prisoner of Israel's will forever.

The situation in the Gaza Strip continues to be a
cause for serious concern. The plight of the
Palestinians in Gaza must urgently be alleviated, and
the reconstruction and rehabilitation requirements of
the people should immediately be addressed.
Resolution 1860 (2009) must be implemented as a
whole. The current humanitarian and human rights
conditions of the civilian population in Gaza are
unsustainable and unacceptable and, ultimately, are not
in the interests of any of those concerned. The periodic
escalation of tension among the parties clearly proves
that the situation is tenuous at best. Minimalist
approaches aimed at public diplomacy will not work.
3
Israel must lift its unlawful and inhuman blockade of
Gaza immediately.

Meanwhile, Turkey welcomes the unity
agreement reached among the Palestinians. That very
important development comes at a time when the
Whole region has begun a democratic transformation.
Thus it is a step in the right direction. We hope that
that process of national reconciliation can be concluded
soon with the formation of an inclusive and
democratically representative Government that will
take the Palestinian nation to free and fair elections.

Turkey calls on the Palestinian groups to embrace
the reconciliation process once and for all and to
partake in the creation of a Palestinian State that will
exist side by side with Israel in peace and security. As
Palestinians seek harmony among their ranks, the
international community should also play a positive
role by supporting the process and not prejudging its
outcome.

It has been more than a year since the deadly
attack by Israel on the international humanitarian
convoy sailing to Gaza. Israeli forces ruthlessly killed
nine civilians and wounded many. The passengers were
subjected to all forms of maltreatment until they left
Israel. The Panel of Inquiry established by the
Secretary-General in accordance with presidential
statement S/PRST/20lO/9 of 1 June 2010 has
concluded its work. The Chair and Co-Chair produced
their report, which is now sealed and waiting for
submission to the Secretary-General.

We have provided an exit to Israel out of this
situation. It must apologize and pay compensation.
There will be no normalization of relations between
Turkey and Israel unless the Israelis deliver what is
expected of them. Turkey will resolutely pursue the
matter until justice is done.

In conclusion, let me reiterate once more
Turkey's strong support for the establishment of a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the region based on
the two-State solution, as well as our determination to
assist our Palestinian brothers and sisters in attaining
their long-delayed goal of a viable, peaceful and
prosperous State of Palestine.

