Mr. Braun (Germany): The Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, reached in Vienna and endorsed today
by the Security Council in resolution 2231 (2015), is an
important, and possibly historic, step towards ending
the decade-long conflict concerning Iran's nuclear
programme. As such, it has the potential to ease
concerns regarding peace and security in the region and
beyond. Allow me briefly to address its significance
from three different angles.

First, Germany firmly believes that the agreement
does in fact reduce the risk of a nuclear arms race.
After long and demanding negotiations, the E3+3 and
the European Union has achieved a credible framework
that will prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons.
Iran has committed itself to comprehensive technical
restrictions and an unprecedented transparency regime
that will allow us to rule out any covert nuclear
activities.

The agreement is not merely built on trust or
goodwill; we have established a unique and long-
term set of confidence-building measures. Everything
we agreed on will be strictly monitored. A powerful
snap-back mechanism for sanctions will serve as an
additional incentive for Iran to abide by its obligations.
It will now be crucial to effectively implement the
agreement. The International Atomic Energy Agency
will have an important role in that regard. In exchange
for the nuclear restrictions, Iran will profit from early
and comprehensive sanctions relief. The resolution
adopted today is a decisive step in the right direction.

Secondly, the agreement also offers ample political
opportunities for Iran. It reflects a fundamental choice
by the Iranian Government. It is an expression of intent
to be a constructive part of the international community.
It is up to Iran to deliver on that commitment. We
express our hope that, in fulfilling the agreement, Iran
will seize this potential to bring about improvements in
other fields as well, from civil liberties to human rights
and the accommodation of regional security concerns.

Finally, we hope that the agreement reached in
Vienna will also have a positive effect on the relations
between Iran, the European Union and its member
States - and that it will improve Iran's regional and
international relations. We also hope that it will open
the door to a more constructive Iranian foreign policy
and, ultimately, contribute to a more secure and stable
region.

The agreement reached in Vienna on 14 July has
proved that complex and long-standing conflicts can
be peacefully resolved if there is enough political will
and courage. It is a victory for diplomacy and for the
principles of the United Nations.

