Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank you, Madam, for scheduling the discussion on
relations between the United Nations and regional
organizations. President Zuma's presence earlier,
together with that of the Secretary-General,
Commissioner Lamamra and other honourable
ministers, underlines the importance of the issue. I
believe that it is also one of the most important
strategic challenges facing the Security Council.

Since the Security Council last debated this topic,
the United Nations and regional organizations have
worked increasingly closely on matters of peace and
security. While mindful of the Security Council's
primary responsibility, the United Kingdom supports
efforts to further enhance relations between the
Council and regional organizations on peace and
security.

That is not always straightforward. We have seen
in the past 12 months major differences of substance
between the League of Arab States and the African
Union, two separate regional organizations, on Libya.
There have also been differences of approach between
subregional and regional organizations, such as
between the Economic Community of West African
States and the African Union on Cote d'Ivoire and
between the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and some members of the African Union
on Eritrea. Such complexities cannot be swept under
the carpet.

The relationship also needs to be taken forward in
a manner consistent with the Charter of the United
Nations. Efforts should make the most of the
complementarities between the United Nations and
individual regional organizations. Such organizations
often have comparative strengths, such as their
knowledge of social, ethnic, historical and political
issues in their regions and their ability to convene
regional States. That is particular true for subregional
organizations.

The situation surrounding issues of peace and
security are diverse. Each needs to be dealt with on a
case-by-case basis, which calls for an emphasis on
timely communication and consultation and the
avoidance of procedures that are inflexible in the face
of varied and urgent challenges.
While underlining the importance that the United
Kingdom attaches to the United Nations relationship
with all regional organizations - including, of course,
the European Union - I would like to concentrate
today on the United Nations relationship with the
African Union, a relationship that the United Kingdom
has sought to encourage.

We believe that good progress has been made.
The African Union and Africa's subregional
organizations have been among the most active in
pursuing peace and security. The United Nations and
the African Union have together worked effectively in
many countries across the continent. But, equally, there
have been cases, such as that of the Sudan, where
managing the complexities of the United
Nations/African Union relationship has proved
challenging.

The United Nations/African Union relationship is
becoming deeper and more productive. We have seen
increasing cooperation on the institutional relationship,
capacity-building and peacekeeping. I would like to
comment briefly on each of those areas in turn.

On the institutional relationship, I welcome the
intensified cooperation between the Secretariat and the
African Union Commission. I also welcome the annual
meeting between the Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council. As Ambassador Rice has
pointed out, those meetings have not always been easy,
but it is right that they should be a forum for
substantive discussion, enabling us to be aware of each
other's perspectives. I encourage the two presidencies
and Secretariats to ensure that such meetings are well
prepared.

Capacity-building needs to be at the heart of the
relationship between the United Nations and the
African Union and its subregional organizations. That
is essential if those organizations are to deliver on the
responsibilities they have assumed for peace and
security on the continent and to build on the progress
that has been made in developing the African Peace
and Security Architecture. In that context, I reaffirm
the United Kingdom's commitment to support the 10-
year capacity-building programme.

Finally, let me turn to peacekeeping led by the
African Union. Yesterday, we heard a briefing from
African Union Commissioner Lamamra on the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), a mission that
plays a critical role in efforts to establish peace and
stability in Somalia. The United Kingdom is grateful
for the efforts and the courage of the AMISOM. troops.
We look forward to the Secretary-General's
recommendations on AMISOM. later this month, and
we are ready to lead a constructive Security Council
response to those recommendations.

Peacekeeping missions such as AMISOM. have
benefited from developments in the relationship
between the United Nations and the African Union. By
linking operational support and capacity-building, the
United Nations Office to the African Union has
provided assistance in real time that will also deliver in
the long term. The European Union and bilateral
donors have made very significant contributions in that
regard, including supporting the development of the
African Standby Force. The first operational
deployment by the Eastern African Standby Force has
been made in support of AMISOM. and is being closely
supported by the United Kingdom.

Looking ahead, I would like to conclude with
three recommendations. First, a one-size-fits-all
approach to the institutional relationship is unrealistic.
The relationship developed with one regional
organization should not set a precedent for relations
with others. The first step would be for the Security
Council to give a fuller consideration to all the issues
involved at a Security Council retreat.

Secondly, we would like to see greater
cooperation on early warning and rapid preventive
diplomacy between the United Nations and the African
Union and other organizations, such as the European
Union and the Arab League. With their unique
geographical insight, regional organizations have a key
role to play in early warning and mitigating the risks of
conflict through preventive diplomacy. Greater donor
coordination of capacity-building support will facilitate
regional organizations' efforts in those areas.

Finally, while noting that regional organizations
have primary responsibility for securing human,
financial, logistical and other resources for their
organizations, the United Kingdom would like to
encourage international partners to enhance the
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of financing
regional organizations when they undertake
peacekeeping under a United Nations mandate. In
offering that support, our focus should be on improving
effectiveness and efficiency and on building a culture
of accountability, transparency and professionalism.
The United Kingdom supports the draft resolution
to be adopted at the end of today's debate (S/2012/25).
We have, however, concerns about some of the
ambiguities in the text as a result of the somewhat
hurried negotiation process. I shall be making an
explanation of vote to clarify our position on those
points.

