Mr. Fischer (Germany): I would like to thank
President Obasanjo for briefing us on the Abuja peace
talks and for his efforts in bringing the parties in the
Darfur crisis back to the negotiating table in Abuja.

The Security Council's most recent resolution on
Sudan, resolution 1564 (2004) of 18 September,
stressed the importance of the African Union, and it
will contribute towards increasing the African Union
authority vis-a-vis the parties to the conflict. I
congratulate the African Union and its member States
for their willingness to take over the leading role in the
efforts to solve the Darfur crisis.

The working draft of the African Union plan for
enhancing the effectiveness of the AU mission in
Darfur, which was submitted yesterday in Addis
Ababa, seems to be a very good basis for playing such
a role. It will also help in implementing the mandate
contained in Council resolutions 1556 (2004) and 1564
(2004).

The African Union (AU) is shouldering a burden
that is heavy for it and for its newly developed conflict
management mechanisms. I am sure that international
support for this effort will be willingly given if and
when the AU asks for it. Germany has been supportive
of the AU role in helping to resolve the Darfur conflict.
The European Union (EU) also stands ready to support
the AU mission, in close coordination with the United
Nations.

Resolution 1564 (2004) is a clear signal that the
Security Council is determined to keep up the pressure
on the Government of the Sudan, on the Sudanese
Liberation Movement/Army and on the Justice and
Equality Movement to return to the negotiation table
and to meet the demands contained in Security Council
resolutions 1556 (2004) and 1564 (2004). Our goal is
to stop the killing and the suffering of the people in
Darfur. The EU will examine appropriate measures -
including sanctions - against the Government of the
Sudan and all other relevant parties, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1564 (2004), if tangible
progress is not achieved in that direction.

I would like to ask President Obasanjo and
Chairman Konare for their opinions on several points.
How can the Security Council and other actors - such
as the EU - best supplement AU efforts to resuscitate
negotiations in Abuja and Naivasha? How do they
envisage disarmament of the Janjaweed taking place in
Darfur? What conditions would have to be put in place
in order to increase the willingness of the Government
of the Sudan to tackle disarmament? What measures
could be taken to ensure that the concerns and special
threats can be addressed with regard to women and
girls among internally displaced persons and the
population in Darfur? In which areas could the United
Nations, the EU and their member States be of special
assistance to the AU mission in Darfur? And one last
question: do they also see a role for the League of Arab
States?

