Ms. Kaljurand (Estonia): Like many nations,
Estonia is gravely concerned about the recent wave of
aggressive terrorism and violent extremism. Following
President Obama's initiative, we gathered in this
Chamber in September (see S/PV.7272) to discuss
various threats posed by terrorists, especially the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), and to stress the
global and comprehensive role of the United Nations in
countering terrorism and radical extremism. The main
outcome of that meeting was the Council's adoption of
resolution 2178 (2014), aimed at blocking funding for
terrorist groups and the recruitment and travel of foreign
terrorist fighters. Today we can take stock of how that
important resolution is being implemented. In Estonia,
we have now almost completed the incorporation of the
resolution's terms and requirements into our national
legislation.

Our shared aim is the establishment of peace
and security in the Middle East and North Africa by
effectively countering the terrorist threat in the region
caused by ISIL and other groups. Yesterday, in a
reflection of the international community's dedication
to addressing the terrorist threat, we held a summit
of the international coalition for countering ISIL. We
welcome that approach, since ISIL is unquestionably
the biggest and most complicated terrorist threat to
peace and security in the Middle East, North Africa and
beyond. We must stop this aggressive, brutal movement,
which is killing innocent people and resulting in huge
waves of refugees.

While we stress the importance of international
cooperation in combating ISIL, we should use our
resources and capabilities effectively and avoid the
danger of acting on parallel tracks. Estonia supports
the existing coalition and its working groups, and
cooperation should continue within that framework.
Terrorism needs a global, unified and consistent
response. Only intensive, close and well-coordinated
cooperation between nations and international
organizations can bring concrete results.

It is also clear that long-term stability and putting an
end to every kind of terrorism and violent extremism in
the Middle East and North Africa can be achieved only
by addressing the ongoing tensions between various
non-extremist political, ethnic and religious groups.
Political solutions to the ongoing conflicts in Syria,
Libya and Yemen will be key to our ability to wage a
more effective fight against ISIL and other extremists.
For that to happen, we must support the ongoing efforts
of the United Nations.

There is one more aspect to add to this. It is true
that today these phenomena all frequently appear in
the broader Middle East, where the religion of Islam
is unfortunately used to conceal terrorist goals. But we
must address the issue more widely. As a global player,
the United Nations should continue with its general
approach of tackling terrorism and violent extremism
everywhere they emerge and of addressing terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, regardless of its
religious, political, historical or ethnic background and
motivation.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that Estonia
welcomes the work of the Secretary-General in the field
of counter-terrorism and countering violent extremism,
especially his efforts to prepare an action plan for
preventing violent extremism, as well as those of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
among others, for organizing a full set of international
meetings on this important subject throughout the year.

