Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Like my
colleagues, I would very much like to welcome His
Excellency President Guelleh to the Security Council
this morning and to thank him for his very useful
briefing and thoughts. The United Kingdom applauds

the positive work of Djibouti in support of peace in the
Horn of Africa. Djibouti has played an important role
in efforts to achieve a more peaceful and stable
Somalia, including by hosting the Djibouti peace
process and, more recently, through its support for the
development of the Somalia constitution and the
training of Somali security forces.

Djibouti also makes a key contribution to
ongoing anti-piracy operations in the Gulf of Aden.
The United Kingdom is grateful for the importance
Djibouti attaches to the Djibouti Code of Conduct and
for the allowing the use of port and shore facilities to
ensure that warships protecting the Gulf of Aden trade
artery are as effective as possible.

Somalia continues to be one of the most complex
challenges on the Security Council's agenda. The
situation remains extremely fragile, as President
Guelleh has just outlined. The humanitarian crisis,
continued instability, the threat to wider regional
stability and piracy all remain of grave concern. This
situation is not a just a tragedy for the people of
Somalia; it is not just a threat to stability in the region:
it is also a major concern for all of us.

We continue to support the Transitional Federal
Government and its efforts to engage in dialogue and
reconciliation. The African Union Mission in Somalia
is playing a critical role in Somalia, and we are grateful
to Uganda and Burundi for their continuing commitment
to that difficult operation. We condemn all those who
seek to undermine the Djibouti peace process and the
Transitional Federal Government. To ensure progress
in Somalia, it is vital that the activities of spoilers be
addressed.

It was on the basis of Eritrea's violation of
Security Council resolutions on Somalia and Djibouti
that the United Kingdom supported resolution 1907
(2009) in December. The resolution followed a specific
request by two regional organizations, the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
for the Security Council to take such action. The
United Kingdom calls on the Government of Eritrea to
comply fully with all Security Council resolutions and
to take the practical steps set out in resolution 1907
(2009). The Council would of course respond to
evidence of Eritrea's compliance with Security Council
resolutions. We also encourage greater engagement by
Eritrea with international partners to help increase
stability in the Horn.

The United Kingdom remains concerned about
the unresolved border dispute between Eritrea and
Djibouti. We urge Eritrea to engage with the United
Nations on this issue and with regional mediation
efforts. It is important that both countries be able to
work together to resolve this situation.

We should also continue to seek the resolution of
other threats to stability in the region. The long-
standing border dispute between Ethiopia and Eritrea is
of great concern to the United Kingdom. We call on
both countries to implement fully the findings of the
Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission, as set down in
the Algiers Agreement. We urge both Governments to
seek to establish a dialogue between their two
countries in order to begin the normalization of
relations. It is Vital that all States in the region engage
constructively to achieve progress on the range of
difficult issues that Horn of Africa currently faces.

