Mr. Kerry (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. Twenty
years ago, President Bill Clinton entered the General
Assembly with a pen in hand, the pen that he had used
to sign the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
(CTBT), the same pen used by President John F.
Kennedy decades earlier to bring the Limited Test-Ban
Treaty into life. At the time, President Clinton declared
the Treaty would be yet another essential step towards a
century in which the roles and risks of nuclear weapons
could be further reduced and ultimately eliminated.

Today, our countries have an opportunity to vote
once again to sign onto and to reaffirm the CTBT's
promise of a safer, more secure and more peaceful
planet. The draft resolution (8/2016/800) that we have
an opportunity to adopt this morning is a strong and
necessary statement of our principles and promises
as a global community. It reaffirms the de facto
norm - I emphasize, a norm - in the world today
against nuclear testing. It acknowledges the legitimate
interests of States that fully and faithfully renounce
nuclear weapons to receive assurances against the
use of the threat of the use of nuclear weapons, and
that those assurances will be upheld. It reinforces the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and its disarmament goals. It builds support for the
international efforts to strengthen verification and
monitoring systems. And it encourages nations to make
the necessary preparations for the day when the Treaty
enters into force.

I want to emphasize that the draft resolution does
not impose a legal prohibition on testing, nor does
it compel any Government to adopt new reporting
requirements. But it does reinforce the core purposes
and objectives of the CTBT itself, that is, to diminish
our reliance on nuclear devices, to reduce competition
among nuclear Powers and to promote responsible
disarmament.

Next month in Reykjavik, the thirtieth anniversary
of the Gorbachev-Reagan meeting will be celebrated
and remembered, and I want everybody to think about
where we were. I grew up in a world of hiding under
my desk in school and being told to take cover and
train for the possibility of a nuclear war - none of
which would have done any good, as we know. I can
remember years in the Senate when I wanted to be on
the arms control observer group, with luminaries such
as Pat Moynihan and Ted Kennedy and John Warner
and Sam Nunn, people who worked a lifetime to move
towards responsible efforts here. Throughout the years,
we watched as the United States and the former Soviet
Union engaged in the arms race - tit for tat, each
doing something that led the other to feel they had to
respond - until we had 50,000 warheads facing each
other, until that moment of Reykjavik, when the two
Presidents came out and said, "This is insanity; we
have to move in a different direction".

Ever since then, that is exactly what the world has
been doing. We have moved in a different direction.
From 50,000 warheads we are now down to about
1,550, and we have proposed to move even further
down. Brilliant people have spent a lifetime looking at
this - former Secretary of Defense Jim Schlesinger,
former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, Bill Perry
and Sam Nunn - people whom one would not expect
to see talking about the possibility of a world without
nuclear weapons. Most recently, the United States and
Iran spent two long years negotiating what everybody
thought was the improbable. Two nations that had not
talked to each other since 1979 began a conversation in
the room right in back of the Chamber, the first time I
came here for the General Assembly. We turned that
into a nation actually giving up a nuclear programme
and making it clear to the world it was willing to move
away from the path of a nuclear weapon in order to
make the world safer.

Two decades after that process began, therefore,
there may be some who question the value of pursuing
this Treaty or investing in its adoption, because the
world has changed dramatically. Almost every member
of the United Nations has now renounced the option of
testing, and responsible Governments everywhere are
committed to reducing the dangers that are posed by
nuclear materials and nuclear weapons. Yet we have
been reminded in recent weeks of the absolute necessity
of supporting the CTBT. North Korea's latest nuclear
test is a challenge to the Security Council's leadership.
It is a challenge to the norm that I just articulated.
It is a challenge and a direct threat to international
stability and peace. It is a dangerous and reckless act of
provocation that we have to summon a determined and
effective answer to.

Today, this morning, is an affirmation of our
willingness to make that clear, to give that answer, to
take a step that says we will not lose our commitment,
we will remain committed to moving in the direction
of ending the threat of nuclear war. Today is also a
reminder of the value of the CTBT. The actions of the
Democratic People's Republic ofKorea and our response
demonstrate the effectiveness of the International
Monitoring system, the International Data Centre and
the broader verification and detection regime. This
entire episode has offered a stark reminder of why the
infrastructure of the Treaty is so vital and why adopting
this draft resolution is so important.

Our affirmative vote here is a sign of our
unwavering commitment to a safer world in which
nuclear technology is used solely for peaceful purposes
and the risk of nuclear conflict is no more.

Right now, the United States Government is
engaged in a process with the Senate, where we have
many new members who have not previously been
part of this debate, in which we are beginning to
literally explain to and educate those members about
what the advances in technology do for us. In today's
modern world of virtual capacity, computerization
and artificial intelligence, we do not need to blow up
weapons to know what we can do. We have the ability
to do this, and I would simply like to say to everyone
in the Chamber that I can think of few greater gifts
that we and our generation could give to the next than
an affirmation that we will continue to move away
from the possibilities of nuclear weaponry. Our action
today can show people everywhere that a world without
nuclear weapons might actually be possible, and that we
are going to do everything responsible in our capacity
to make that day a reality.

