Mr. llkin (Turkey): I would like to thank the
three distinguished Chairmen of the Committees
established pursuant to Security Council resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) for their
informative briefings and for the continued guidance of
their Committees. There is no doubt that today,
terrorism and the proliferation of the weapons of mass
destruction continue to pose two of the most serious
threats to international peace and security. Therefore,
we should remain extremely vigilant and steadfast in
countering those challenges.

To that end, implementation of the three Security
Council resolutions we are discussing today is
important. Indeed, the adoption of each resolution
constituted a concrete and tangible achievement.
However, as we all know, their full implementation
poses an even more challenging task, and that is why
the continuous work done by the three Committees for
the effective implementation of the resolutions is of
critical importance.

As to the 1267 Committee, it is imperative that
we continue to do everything possible to deprive the
Taliban and Al-Qaida of financial, logistical and
political support. Indeed, the threats posed by those
extremist groups are not confined to any particular
region; they constitute a serious danger for the entire
international community.

In that regard, I agree with the Chairman of the
1267 Committee that a comprehensive review of the
consolidated list is important for the credibility and
effectiveness of the sanctions regime. We believe that
with the successful conclusion of the review process
our endeavours will be more focused and will thus
yield more concrete results.

As to resolution 1373 (2001), we are pleased to
observe that the Counter-Terrorism Committee has also
come a long way in its own stocktaking process. It has
finished the adoption of almost all Preliminary
Implementation Assessments (PIAs). We appreciate the
good work done by Mr. Mike Smith, Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), and his dedicated team.
However, we are still far from where we could and
should be in implementing resolution 1373 (2001) in
its entirety. Lack of capacity, political will and a clear
understanding of what needs to be done continues to
undermine our efforts to put up a strong and united
front against terrorism.

Therefore, we should re-energize the work of the
Committee, in particular by focusing more on
identified shortcomings, including those deriving from
unfulfilled obligations by individual countries. In that
regard, we feel that we must not shy away from having
candid exchanges on what is not working and on what
more should be done in this respect.

Likewise, we should start to consider once again
the possibility of preparing a consolidated list, similar
to the one we have in the 1267 Committee, sanctioning
other terrorist groups, individuals and entities. The lack
of such a list seriously undermines international
cooperation against terrorism.

Finally, I also wish to underscore the importance
of resolution 1540 (2004) in our efforts to tackle the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. That is
why we very much welcome the intensification of
efforts to promote the implementation of that
resolution. In this endeavour, outreach is of paramount
importance. Thus, maintaining dialogue with individual

States and responding to their technical and financial
needs for the implementation of the resolution in a
timely and effective manner are critical. Likewise, we
look forward to the comprehensive review process
called for in resolution 1810 (2008). We hope that this
will provide yet another opportunity that could enable
the Committee to enhance its ability to facilitate
national implementation efforts.

In conclusion, substantial work has been done by
and within the framework of the three Committees
under review. But there is still ample room for further
and decisive progress. Having said that, I would also
like to express my sincere appreciation to the
Chairmen of the three Committees for their
commitment and endeavours in that direction.

As a member of the Security Council, Turkey will
continue to lend its full support to the work of these
Committees with a view to helping strengthen our
abilities in countering terrorism and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. The international
community has learned the hard way that only through
extensive and solid international cooperation can these
scourges be eradicated.

