Ms. Rasi (Finland): At the outset, let me express,
on behalf of the Finnish delegation, our congratulations
to you, Mr. President, on assuming the trailblazing role
in putting forward the subject of Security Council
decision-making on mission closure and mission
transition, which is of paramount importance and
currency. We hope that the conclusions initiated by this
discussion, together with lessons learned from past
experiences, can be transformed into profit to be
utilized in future United Nations peacekeeping
activities.

As a Member State actively engaged in
peacekeeping, Finland welcomes this opportunity to
elaborate on a concept that constitutes an essential
element of comprehensive United Nations
peacekeeping. Moreover, we consider this discussion
topical in the context of the current peacekeeping
debate triggered by the recommendations of the
Brahimi Panel. In our View, this exchange of views is
an important step towards an integrated examination of
various aspects of peacekeeping, including conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and peace-building. In
our view, these form a continuum where the Security
Council must remain engaged throughout all phases
and where transition from one phase to another should
be carefully planned and implemented, with the
involvement of the whole United Nations family.

When thinking about the structure of
peacekeeping operations, the exit part of the operation
could be regarded as the final stage of the
comprehensive continuum, which is based on a clear
mandate. The old phrase, "well planned is half done",
also justifies itself in the peacekeeping context.

The number of irksome experiences from the
recent history of peacekeeping shows that an accurate
decision on the extension, alteration or termination of a
peacekeeping operation's mandate presupposes reliable
and objective information from the field. Similar
observations were made also by the Brahimi Panel.
Should the operation be conducted on the grounds of
inadequate information and a vague mandate, the risk
of getting entangled in a "mission creep" type of
uncontrolled and hazardous adventure becomes acute.

As a representative of a troop-contributing
country, I cannot emphasize enough the need to consult
countries that contribute personnel to different
operations. They should be involved at early stages of
every phase of the decision-making process of the
Security Council whenever the mandates of peace
operations are extended, modified or terminated. Their
role is important also in the exit phase since they have
first-hand knowledge from the field. Their true
participation in the decision-making process would
facilitate the implementation, but also the termination,
of a mission's mandate.

A post-conflict environment is vulnerable and
most likely exposed to various internal or external
pressures. Without the commitment to post-conflict
peace-building of regional and local actors, particularly
the former protagonists in the conflict, there will hardly
be a successful exit strategy.

Whether post-conflict peace-building should be
regarded as an element of peace operations or as a
separate exercise is not only a matter of approach.
Peace-building should be seen as an integral part of
peacekeeping operations. It should be a part of the
efforts by the United Nations system to achieve a
lasting peaceful solution to conflicts. It is important to
define and identify elements of peace-building before
they are incorporated into the mandates of complex
peace operations. This would facilitate a smooth
transition from one phase to another in the continuum
of peace operations and ensure continuing support for
key elements of peace-building.

Peace-building measures and continuous
monitoring are important tools for the United Nations
and other international organizations to contribute to
the success of the operation or, if necessary, to react
and introduce appropriate measures in case of regress.

