Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Vice President Biden, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and Minister Zebari for their statements. I should like
to join in the tribute paid to Ambassador Holbrooke. As
a European, 1 would like in particular to recall the role
he played in the conclusion of the Dayton Accords,
which put an end to the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

France is pleased to take part in this meeting,
which marks progress in the process of restoring Iraq's
full sovereignty. Today's meeting is an opportunity for
France and the entire Council to welcome the progress
made by Iraq since the fall of Saddam Hussein's
regime. At all levels - political, institutional and
security - the Republic of Iraq is on track towards
completing its reconstruction and normalization, and
its vigorous economy is the best proof of this.

Recent political developments in Iraq give hope
for full normalization at the institutional level. We
hope that the agreement reached among all the
country's political groups on 11 November to form a
national partnership Government will swiftly come to
fruition. We trust that the spirit of responsibility
demonstrated by Iraqi leaders to overcome their
differences will prevail so as to resolve the final
outstanding issues ahead of the effective formation of
the Government. In so doing, the political stakeholders
in Iraq have chosen to take up the challenges of Iraq's
future, and France wishes to lend them its full support.

On the path towards normalization, France chose
to stand alongside the people and the leaders of Iraq.
This commitment is above all political, reflected by
many high-level visits. Both the President of the
Republic and the Prime Minister visited Baghdad over
the past two years. This commitment is accompanied
by firm engagement on the ground and the resumption
of our bilateral cooperation in the areas of defence,
industry, agriculture, domestic security, governance,
environment and culture.

This support is also reflected at the international
level. France supports the legitimate quest of the Iraqi
authorities to restore the country to the international
status it enjoyed prior to August 1990. Resolution 1859
(2008), which France sponsored in 2008, identified that
objective. Two years later, while Iraq has made
considerable preparatory efforts, the Council has today
closed three components of the measures taken under
Chapter VII. France welcomes this.

With respect first of all to restrictions related to
weapons of mass destruction and civilian nuclear
activities, the Council indicated on 26 February its
readiness to lift those restrictions once the necessary
measures had been taken. Today, we welcome Iraq's
efforts in this area. The lifting of sanctions with respect
to disarmament and non-proliferation - highly
symbolic in view of past mistakes - will allow the
new Iraq to access technologies hitherto banned. On
the basis of this restored trust, we call on the Iraqi
authorities to pursue their efforts by assuming
international obligations that will mark the end of these
painful episodes in its history.

France also welcomes the fact that Iraq is
regaining full sovereignty over its oil revenues. The
closure of the oil-for-food programme is a symbol of
the normalization of Iraq's international status and a
return to its sovereignty. While France was unable to
support this text today, it was clearly not because the
resolution's objective is in the least problematic. The
objective of allowing Iraq to regain its full sovereignty
over the funds retained under the oil-for-food
programme is obviously one that France fully supports.
The modalities for implementation in respect of
this very technically complex issue remain pending.
Intensive but belated discussions were undertaken to
draft a text that all Council members, including France,
could support. Unfortunately, these discussions did not
result in a text within the necessary time frame that
included all the guarantees France considers to be
necessary to end the activities under this programme.
France hopes that, in the future, its requests will be
thoroughly taken into account when the agreements
provided under the resolution are implemented.

Iraq must be able to emerge from Chapter VII. In
this regard, France welcomes the progress made by the
Governments of Iraq and Kuwait in resolving the
remaining issues between them, and urges them to
strengthen their cooperation. To this end, it is crucial
for Iraq to honour without further delay its final
obligations under Council resolutions.

As it has done until now, France will continue to
support the efforts of the Government of Iraq, in
consultation with all relevant stakeholders, to take all
measures enabling Iraq to once again become a nation
that is fully integrated into its regional and
international environment. The United Nations, be it
the Security Council or the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq * whose courageous work on the
ground we wish to salute - will continue to support
this objective.

France wishes to reiterate its willingness to help
these two friendly countries, if so requested, to lay the
groundwork for ambitious cooperation. We hope that
this next stage will hasten the regional integration
process to which Iraq has successfully committed and
which we support.

