Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): First and foremost, I
wish to commend you, Mr. President, for convening
this important meeting on "Security sector reform:
challenges and opportunities", and for preparing the
concept note (S/2014/238, annex) that forms the basis
of today's debate. I also wish to thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive briefing.

Malaysia would like to associate itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of Iran
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

My delegation takes note of the Secretary General's
report (S/2013/480) on strengthening the United
Nations comprehensive support to security sector
reform. The report highlights the ongoing work and
recommendations on how to strengthen the work of the
United Nations in supporting security sector reform
(SSR).

My delegation also wishes to commend the
efforts and important progress made by the United
Nations in security SSR over the years, particularly
in implementing the recommendations contained in
the report of January 2008 entitled "Securing peace
and development: the role of the United Nations in
supporting security sector reform" (S/2008/39). Indeed,
we have seen much progress and improvement in the
area of SSR. That notwithstanding, the rapid changes
in, and complexity of, today's conflicts necessitate
continuous review and enhancement of United Nations
SSR support.

My delegation would like to reaffirm that SSR must
be premised on - and not overlook - the fundamental
principle ofnational ownership. Only through a process
of dialogue, reconciliation and consultation will SSR
succeed. That is important as the views, sentiments
and sensitivities of the people should not be replaced

by an approach that negates the legitimacy of local
stakeholders.

In that regard, Malaysia concurs with the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report that national ownership of SSR processes must
be inclusive so as to increase the confidence in, and
legitimacy of, security institutions. It is essential that
SSR be led by the legitimate authorities of the respective
Member States, in consultation with all the relevant
stakeholders, including all levels of Government,
security sector institutions, civil society and non-State
actors. Apart from lending credibility to the SSR
process, the involvement of national stakeholders in
negotiations on SSR will also play a pivotal role in
ensuring that related SSR provisions are better tailored
to respond to specific national circumstances and
challenges.

While the importance of national ownership reigns
above all, Malaysia is well aware that SSR will require
financial resources. We have seen such SSR initiatives
under the Peacebuilding Commission. In that regard,
the training of personnel, the development of skills,
the formulation of legal frameworks and the building
of national security infrastructure require substantial
funding. Sufficient funding must therefore be made
available to ensure successful SSR efforts.

Externally funded SSR processes often risk
undermining sustainability and neglecting national
ownership. The Security Council could do its part in that
regard by engaging national authorities in formulating
appropriately tailored Security Council mandates that
are better suited to national circumstances.

Experience has shown that sufficient funding alone
may be half of the solution. Capacity and expertise are
also important aspects contributing to SSR. Countries
that are emerging from conflict can learn from others'
successful experiences. Partnerships through South-
South cooperation in such areas as identifying civilian
experts will be beneficial in developing system-wide
SSR. We feel that Member States should seriously
consider developing links to identify civilian capacities
that support SSR and institution-building.

Considering the amount of work and resources
that has been, and will continue to be, channelled to
SSR processes, the Security Council should also place
appropriate emphasis on monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms. While it is easier to measure quantitative
output, more often than not qualitative impact
contributes more significantly to addressing inherent
social issues and the long-term development of SSR
processes. In that regard, Malaysia supports the call
for the United Nations to enhance its monitoring and
evaluation capacities. Again, monitoring and evaluation
priorities and mechanisms must be drawn up according
to the different circumstances and complexities faced
by the countries undergoing reform.

Turning to the prioritization of SSR, Malaysia is
of the View that planning should be undertaken early
on, when peacekeeping missions are formulated.
Experience has shown that countries in transition
require continuing engagement even after the initial
stabilization stage. In that connection, my delegation
calls for better coordination among the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, Force
Commanders and the respective United Nations
agencies when developing comprehensive approaches
on SSR.

To conclude, my delegation welcomes and
supports the Security Council draft resolution on SSR
initiated by Nigeria. The draft resolution is indeed
timely, considering the increasing significance and
immense contribution of SSR in the work of the United
Nations in peacekeeping, peacebuilding and conflict
prevention. Malaysia is certain that the draft resolution
will reaffirm the United Nations' commitment to a
comprehensive approach in support of SSR processes.

