Mr. Corman (Turkey): First of all, I would like
to welcome you, Mr. Deputy Minister, and I wish to
commend Mexico's presidency for organizing this
meeting. I would like to thank to Ms. Asha-Rose
Migiro, Deputy Secretary-General, and Ms. Patricia
O'Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs
and Legal Counsel, for their valuable and insightful
contributions to today's debate.

The founders of this Organization expressed their
resolve to establish conditions under which justice and
respect for the obligations arising from treaties and
other sources of international law can be maintained, in
the Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations.
Today, we are more than ever bound by their
determination and commitment to an international
community based on the rule of law.

During the 2005 World Summit, our leaders also
reaffirmed their commitment to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and
international law, which are indispensable foundations
of a more peaceful, prosperous and just world, and they
reiterated their determination to foster strict respect for
them.

Indeed, upholding the rule of law is an ongoing
endeavour, and we Member States, as well as the
United Nations, are part of this essential process. We
welcome the developments and arrangements made in
the Organization for ensuring the coordination,
coherence and quality of the work of the United
Nations on the rule of law, as we heard this morning
from the Deputy Secretary-General and the United
Nations Legal Counsel.

One of the primary purposes of our Organization
is the maintenance of international peace and security.
But what is even more important is the emphasis given
to the peaceful settlement of international disputes in a
way that will respect international law. Indeed, the
Charter clearly indicates that international situations
that might lead to a breach of peace should be settled
by peaceful means and in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law.

In this regard, the role of the International Court
of Justice (ICJ), as the principle judicial organ of the
United Nations, is of significant importance. The ICJ is
one of the key mechanisms available to Member States
for the peaceful settlement of their international
disputes. We commend the Court for its contribution to
this end, as well as its contribution to the evolution of
international law.

Today, the diverse and complicated nature of
conflicts, the multiplicity of the actors involved, the
indivisibility of security and the wide-reaching impact
of any conflict irrespective of geographical
considerations all require us to pursue a strategic
approach to conflict management, with a particular
emphasis on the durability of the solutions.

Of course, preventing conflicts is a more
desirable approach, and it should continue to be one of
the prime objectives of the Organization. However, in
cases where prevention is not possible, States should
resort to mechanisms available to them for the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Furthermore, when conflicts
cannot be prevented, adherence to international law, in
particular international humanitarian law, is of utmost
importance so that the appalling consequences of
conflicts can be prevented or at least mitigated.

The rule of law and a properly functioning
judicial system appear as the key deterrent factors for
potential perpetrators of crimes. Sustainable prevention
is possible only if there is no impunity. The
international community has a duty to do more in this
direction through capacity-building and technical
assistance.

In recent years, international criminal justice has
evolved and continues to progress through the work of
various institutions, such as the International Criminal
Court and ad hoc and mixed tribunals. We must not
allow a culture of impunity to prevail. Those
responsible for atrocities must be brought to justice.

In his speech at the Review Conference in
Kampala, the Secretary-General said that the old era of
impunity is over and stressed the birth of a new age of
accountability. This new age of accountability should
cover all serious crimes of concern to the international
community, including terrorism. Moreover,
accountability should also be promoted in inter-State
relations. Thus, States that violate international law
must be held accountable for their acts.

The last point I would like to touch upon is
sanctions. As stated by others, a sanctions regime is an
important tool in the maintenance of international
peace and security. In our View, sanctions should be
resorted to only when there is a threat to peace, a
breach of peace or an act of aggression and when other
peaceful options are inadequate. Sanctions should be
resorted to with the utmost caution so as to keep them
from being counterproductive. Moreover, sanctions
should be carefully targeted in order to minimize
adverse consequences on populations and third-party
States.

On the other hand, sanctions regimes have
undergone some important changes in the recent past.
The most recent development is the appointment of an
ombudsperson for the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999), which we also welcome.
Bearing in mind that enhancing the credibility of
sanctions regimes would greatly assist in the
maintenance of international peace and security, we
should continue to focus on how to further strengthen
sanctions regimes' legitimacy and overall
effectiveness.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
collective responsibility of all States to work towards
the strengthening of international law, the rule of law
and maintenance of peace and security by practicing
good governance and accountability as well as
observing and implementing all applicable
international instruments.

