Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Uganda has served as
Chair of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa for the past two
years. The Working Group, in accordance with its
mandate, reviewed and considered issues that affect the
Council's work on conflict prevention and resolution in
Africa, and that strengthen the Council's cooperation
with the African Union (AU) and subregional
organizations. The priority issues were considering
how conflict early warning and response mechanisms
can be made more effective; considering how countries
emerging from conflict can be better supported to build
sustainable peace and avoid relapse into conflict;
strengthening the working relationship between the
Council and the African Union on conflict prevention
and resolution in Africa; and African Union-United
Nations strategic partnership on security sector reform.

The Working Group held four meetings this year.
On 20 July, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs Lynn Pascoe briefed the Working Group on the
proposed establishment of a United Nations office in
Central Africa and the role it would play in promoting
peace and security in the broader context of conflict
prevention in the Central African subregion. The
Working Group exchanged views on how the mandate
of the proposed office could be streamlined, within the
context of strengthening AU-United Nations
cooperation, to discharge its role effectively and
complement the efforts of the Economic Community of
Central African States, the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region and other subregional
organizations.

On August 16, the Working Group held an open
interactive panel discussion on the role of conflict
early warning mechanisms in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts in Africa. The Directors of the
conflict early warning mechanisms of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Economic Community of West African States, Mr. Kitevu
and Colonel Kone, respectively, were invited by the
Working Group as panelists. Participants included
Council members, representatives of the Department of
Political Affairs, the Office of the Special Advisor on
Africa, non-Council members and observers.

The panel discussion provided an opportunity for
an exchange of views with the key practitioners of the
conflict early warning mechanisms. It focused on how
these mechanisms can be optimally utilized, the
challenges being faced, and how the United Nations
and the international community can support the
African Union and subregional organizations to make
these mechanisms function more effectively.

The Working Group continued to focus on
security sector reform as one of the key prerequisites
for peace and stability, especially in fragile and post-
conflict African countries. On 2 December, the
Working Group held a panel discussion on the strategic
partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations on security sector reform. The Chief of the
United Nations Security Sector Reform Unit, Mr. Adedeji
Ebo, and the Permanent Observer of the African Union,
Ambassador Tete Antonio, briefed the Group on the
10
progress made so far towards the finalization of the
African Union security sector reform policy framework.
The Council has recognized the value that the Ad Hoc
Working Group continues to add to the process of
embedding preventive-diplomacy practices in the
United Nations conflict management architecture.

I would like to recommend that the Working
Group's practice should be to hold as many open
interactive meetings as possible, as that allows more
Member States and stakeholders to participate and have
an input. It is essential that the Council continue to
support conflict prevention and resolution efforts in
Africa in order to reinforce the commitment and
resolve shown by the African Union in that regard.

Finally, I am grateful to the members of the
Working Group for the support and cooperation
extended to me in the discharge of the Group's
mandate. I also thank the Secretary of the Working
Group, Mr. Oseloka Obaze, and other members of the
Secretariat who facilitated our work. A comprehensive
report on the activities of the Working Group in the
year 2010 is being finalized for submission to the
President of the Council.

