The President: Under the item on its agenda, the
Security Council will now begin its consideration of
the report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of the Swiss
Confederation for admission to membership in the
United Nations. The report appears as document
8/2002/825.

In paragraph 3 of the report, the Committee
recommends to the Security Council the adoption of a
draft resolution on the application of Swiss
Confederation for admission to membership in the
United Nations. I should like to congratulate the
Committee on its unanimous decision to recommend
that the Swiss Confederation be admitted to
membership in the United Nations.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
prior consultations among members of the Council, I
propose that the Council adopt the draft resolution
contained in paragraph 3 of the report of the
Committee on the Admission of New Members without
a vote.

As I see no objection, it is so decided.

I therefore declare that the draft resolution
contained in paragraph 3 of the report of the
Committee on the Admission of New Members
(S/2002/825) has been adopted without a vote as
resolution 1426 (2002).

I shall convey the decision of the Security
Council recommending the admission of the Swiss
Confederation to membership in the United Nations to
the Secretary-General for transmittal to the fifty-
seventh session of the General Assembly in accordance
with rule 60 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

I shall now make a statement, in my capacity as
President of the Security Council, on behalf of the
members of the Council.
"The Security Council has decided to
recommend to the General Assembly that the
Swiss Confederation be admitted as a Member of
the United Nations. On behalf of the members of
the Council, I wish to extend my congratulations
to the Swiss Confederation on this historic
occasion.

"The Council notes with great satisfaction
the Swiss Confederation's solemn commitment to
uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and to fulfil all the
obligations contained therein.

"We look forward to the day in the near
future when the Swiss Confederation will join us
as a Member of the United Nations and to
working closely with its representatives."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2002/23.

The Council has thus concluded its consideration
of the matter before it.

The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.
