Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General O'Brien and Special
Representatives Bangura and Zerrougui for their deeply
sobering briefings. Reflecting on their statements and
on the Secretary-General's report on the humanitarian
situation in Syria (S/2015/862), it is disturbing to hear
yet again that the security situation has deteriorated
and that humanitarian access to those most in need has
not improved.

Before addressing some ofthe issues raised today, I
also want to say that our thoughts and prayers are with
all those affected by the attacks in Paris on Friday and
in Beirut on Thursday. We condemn such vile terrorist
attacks in the strongest terms. We must do everything
in our power to fight back against what can only be
considered as an assault on our common humanity.

As the Secretary-General and the representatives
here today have said time and time again, the only
solution there can be to the crisis in Syria, including
the dire humanitarian situation, is a political one,
through a Syrian-led political process based on the
Geneva communique of 2012 (S/2012/522, annex). Just
two days ago, we took a fundamentally important step
towards that goal in Vienna. More than 20 stakeholders,
including representatives of regional organizations and
United Nations Special Envoy de Mistura, convened
on Saturday, as members of the International Syria
Support Group, to discuss how to bring an end to the
Syrian conflict as quickly as possible.

The Group agreed to work to implement a
nationwide ceasefire in Syria, which would come into
effect as soon as the representatives of the Syrian
Government and the opposition have begun initial steps
towards a transition based on the Geneva communique.
A halt in the fighting is absolutely essential to our
efforts to address the humanitarian needs of Syrians
and to advance a political process to end the conflict.
For our part, it will be critical for the Council to support
that effort through a resolution on a United Nations-
endorsed monitoring mission for such a ceasefire. As
discussed in Vienna, in both the ministerial group and
a working group, it is critical that all parties and the
international community as a whole work diligently
to ensure swift delivery of humanitarian assistance
throughout Syria, through unimpeded delivery
approvals and improved access over borders and across
conflict lines. As we look forward to the renewal of
resolution 2191 (2014), especially, we must do all we
can to ensure that assistance reaches those most in need
in Syria.

While there is renewed energy for achieving a
political solution, the situation on the ground continues
to be of significant concern. Civilians' tragic suffering
from the persistent fighting and rabid violations of
international law has continued unabated. We are still
shocked by the continuing use of barrel bombs and
other destructive weapons in civilian areas, as well
as by the attacks on schools, hospitals and medical
personnel, arbitrary arrests and detentions, sexual and
gender-based violence, torture and disappearances.
The Syrian Network for Human Rights recorded 1,771
deaths in Syria just in the month of October, including
1,284 individuals who died at the hands of Government
forces, which are clearly still responsible for the
overwhelming majority of deaths in Syria. Furthermore,
despite its claim to the contrary, the regime's ghastly
use of barrel bombs did not end last month. Syrian
documentation groups recorded its use of 1,438 barrel
bombs in October alone. In recent weeks, air strikes,
including some involving barrel bombs, intensified in
the opposition-held eastern part of Ghouta, resulting in
the destruction of medical centres, markets and other
public locations. On 30 October, according to relief
agencies, multiple air strikes on a public market in
Douma killed at least 70 people and injured more than
500 others.

Such brutal tactics must stop. We underscore
how important it is that Saturday's Vienna statement
recalled resolution 2139 (2014), which includes the
demand that all parties cease any indiscriminate use of
weapons in populated areas, and welcome the Vienna
group's commitment to press the parties on the issue. In
northern Syria, increased fighting, including Russian
military operations, has also had a significant impact
on the humanitarian situation. In Aleppo, Idlib and
Hama we have seen about 130,000 newly displaced
Syrians in October alone. As the Secretary-General has
said, attacks on health-care facilities, transports and
medical personnel have a devastating multiplier effect,
not only by killing civilians but also by degrading the
capacity to provide the care that people so desperately
need. Medical facilities and personnel continue to be
attacked, as Under-Secretary-General O'Brien noted.

Schools, too, continue to be attacked. More than
2 million children, one out of three, are not in school
in Syria. That too has a devastating multiplier effect.
If children cannot be protected and educated, Syria's
future generations are at risk. As Ms. Bangura has
reported, in Syria and elsewhere, rape and sexual
violence continue to be used as an instrument of war.
That is a vile crime against humankind that affects
all walks of life in Syria - men, women, boys and
girls - and it must end. As Ms. Zerrougui has reported,
children are also suffering tremendously, as they are
being forcibly recruited to be used in the conflict as
child soldiers and, in some cases, as human shields by
the Government, Government-affiliated and non-State
armed groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) in particular. The United States
thanks the Special Representatives, Ms. Zerrougui and
Ms. Bangura, for ensuring that the Council remains
informed about the appalling acts taking place in Syria.
We welcome future briefings that can lead the Council
to make more informed decisions on Syria.

Human rights violations are also widespread,
as thoroughly documented by the United Nations
Commission of Inquiry, which briefed the Council just
last week. As the Commission reported, many victims
continue to be tortured. The Syrian Network for Human
Rights recorded that 104 individuals had been tortured
to death in October, including 99 who were tortured by
the regime. ISIL continues to rampantly abuse the basic
rights of Syrians. In Raqqah, ISIL arrested a married
couple, for example, for teaching mixed groups of
boys and girls. ISIL also continued to execute Syrians,
whether for perceived spying or for their sexual
orientation, and to kidnap, enslave and rape, including
girls as young as nine years old. Of course, the overall
situation in Syria remains deeply concerning.

According to the recently released United Nations
humanitarian needs overview, those in need of urgent
humanitarian assistance now total 13.5 million

people - an increase of 1.2 million in just over 10
months. At least 8.7 million individuals are unable
to fully meet their food needs at present. Meanwhile,
4.5 million people inside Syria continue to live in hard-
to-reach areas, nearly half ofwhich are ISIL-controlled.
The nearly 400,000 individuals in besieged areas
continue to survive in even more dire circumstances.
The United States is supporting the United Nations
and non-governmental organizations in their efforts
to prepare an active response for the upcoming winter
season, including the distribution of seasonally
appropriate relief supplies to more than 1 million
people in Syria. As noted in Vienna this past weekend,
the resolution of the refugee issue is also important to
the final settlement of the Syrian conflict. Yet more
needs to be done and soon.

The United Nations Syria assistance humanitarian
response plan remains only 45 per cent funded. We urge
all countries to consider increasing their contributions
as soon as possible and to begin considering significant
contributions for the 2016 international humanitarian
pledging conference, to be held in London in February.
While we pursue a ceasefire and a political solution, we
also need to continue to address the critical needs of
Syrians on the ground, and we must do so immediately.

