Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): 1 am
very pleased to see the United States assume the
presidency of the Security Council this month. 1 thank
your country, Madam, for its excellent initiative to
convene this open meeting to address the situation in
Haiti, which is undoubtedly of great interest to our
region.

My delegation is pleased to welcome the
presence of the Prime Minister of Haiti, Mrs. Pierre-
Louis, and takes this opportunity to congratulate the
Secretary-General on his wise appointment of former
United States President Bill Clinton as United Nations
Special Envoy for Haiti. With his experience and
through his good offices, he will thus be able to assist
the Government and the people of Haiti in their
stabilization efforts, with a view to helping build a
better future in that sister nation.

Ecuador also thanks Mr. Hedi Annabi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti and
head of MINUSTAH.

Ecuador's commitment to the stabilization
process in Haiti is known worldwide. Since the
beginning of the humanitarian crisis in February 2004,
we have been active participants in MINUSTAH,
consistent with our foreign policy of providing full
support during humanitarian crises and in the peaceful
settlement of conflicts. It is worth noting that we
contribute to peacekeeping operations not only by
deploying troops: we have an integrated policy
including, for example, the establishment in Ecuador of
the Peace Missions School, which prepares soldiers to
address problems in the areas of internally displaced
persons, refugees and humanitarian disasters, as well as
to resolving conflicts involving civilian. Ecuador is
participating in MINUSTAH with 66 individuals, only
four of them members of the military; the other 62 are
volunteers, team members and civilian engineers who
are contributing to road reconstruction in Haiti and
helping the population in endeavours to promote
socio-economic development. The latter is
acknowledged to be the weakest of the five areas
defined by the Secretary-General in his report of
1 September 2009 (S/2009/439).

Ecuador is pleased to see the improved conditions
in Haiti, in particular regarding political dialogue:
Prime Minister Pierre-Louis has taken office, there
have been senatorial elections, and President Preval
has established presidential commissions on issues of
national interest. This has bolstered the rule of law and
respect for human rights in that sister country. Ecuador
also appreciates the progress in extending State
authority, including in the areas of border control and
enhancing security.

At the same time, my country is concerned at the
stagnation in the levels of socio-economic development
and food security in Haiti. We therefore call for due
coordination among all actors involved in
peacebuilding in Haiti, in line with resolution 1840
(2008).

Ecuador trusts that the new United Nations
Special Envoy, former United States President Bill
Clinton, will help in meeting Haiti's development
challenges and in mobilizing and increasing the
international support that the country so sorely needs.

Ecuador takes note of the report of the Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on Haiti of the Economic and Social
Council (E/2009/105) and believes that it merits
serious consideration by the Security Council.

Finally, Ecuador supports the recommendation
made by the Secretary-General in his most recent
report, that the mandate of MINUSTAH be extended
for a further year. There is no doubt that Haiti
continues to be threatened by food insecurity, growing
poverty and a fragile humanitarian situation. My
Government hopes that the joint efforts of the Group of
Friends of Haiti, donor countries and the Government
of Haiti will be optimally coordinated in order to
achieve the social, political and economic stability that
Haiti needs, wishes and deserves.

