Mr. Hyseni: Cognizant of the Security Council's
time, I wish nevertheless to respond to a number of
points made by Mr. Jeremic': in an evident effort to
mislead the Council, especially when he tried to tell the
Council that the independence of Kosovo was declared
by the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government -
that is, by Albanians alone.

I wish to inform the members of the Council that
the independence of the Republic of Kosovo was
declared by elected representatives of the people of
Kosovo, including by all elected representatives of
non-Albanian communities except the members of the
Serb community. All the representatives of the
Bosnian, Turkish, Egyptian, Roma and other
communities voted in favour of Kosovo's
independence.

With respect to the returnees, I wish to inform the
Council that the Government of the Republic of
Kosovo is vitally committed to and interested in
returning to their homes every single displaced person
and every single refugee - I emphasize, every single
one. We stand ready to provide, at whatever cost,
conditions for returning every single citizen of ours.

However, I have to point out that the kind of
game that is being played with figures is not helpful.
Two hundred thousand Kosovo Serbs, said Minister
Jeremic', are still displaced. I have to repeat yet again
that according to the last census - which was
conducted by the Serbian-imposed authority in
Kosovo * the largest number of Serbs ever living in
Kosovo was 195,000. Presently, in Kosovo 135,000
Serbs live. I do not know where that 200,000 figure is
found.

I wish to again inform the Council that the
Republic of Serbia - the Government in Belgrade -
is not helping the returns. The Government in Belgrade
is encouraging the refugees from Kosovo in Serbia not
to return so that the Government in Belgrade could
have an alibi to tell to respectable forums such as this
one that Kosovars are not doing what they should be
doing.

We have no reason whatsoever to fear the
returnees - quite the opposite. As I said earlier, my
President, Prime Minister, all members of the
Government and ministers are doing their utmost to
make sure that all the conditions are there. Ultimately,
it is impossible to force - and we do not want to
force - any single individual to do what he or she is
not willing to do.

Kosovo is an independent country, and Kosovo
will never again seek authorization from Belgrade to
do anything whatsoever. That should be clear once and
for all. But that should not prevent us from working
together. We are willing to work with Belgrade to
improve the situation of our Kosovo Serbs, if that is
what it takes to have our Kosovo Serbs work with us,
because we are willing to deliver on our commitments
to improve their lives. We are not willing to make use
of unfortunate destinies of individuals in the Serb
community for any sort of political sport, because we
do not need that.

Again, we have an unspeakable game with
figures, close to science fiction - 40,000 claims. The
Kosovo Property Agency is going to consider carefully
every single claim. Property will be restored to every
single citizen, whether Serb or Albanian, or whatever
ethnic background. But I have to just invite the
Council's attention to the damage that this kind of
game with figures may cause, great damage.

Kosovo is a single customs entity and is going to
remain as such. Kosovo is also a single judicial entity.
Regarding the South-East European Cooperation
Process, the Regional Cooperation Council and other
regional mechanisms, Kosovo is very much interested
in being part of those initiatives. Kosovo is insisting
firmly on being part of regional efforts to fight
organized crime and cross-border criminal activity and
to be part of every single other regional initiative that
would benefit the peoples and States all over the
region.

The Kosovo Security Force is not an illegal
paramilitary institution. It was established on the basis
of recommendations of a Nobel Peace Prize winner,
Marti Ahtisaari. I do not think a Nobel Peace Prize
winner would ever suggest the establishment of an
illegal paramilitary criminal force. I tell Mr. Jeremic'
that he should never fear the Kosovo Security Force.
What he should fear is the still-too-many supporters of
Milosevic in the military and police structures in
Serbia. That is what Mr. Jeremie should fear, not the
Kosovo Security Force.
