Mr. Koenders (Netherlands): The Kingdom of the
Netherlands aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union.

Terrorism and violent extremism are timely issues
for the Security Council, so I thank you, Mr. President,
for this possibility to debate today. I will address three
issues: terrorism, the Global Counterterrorism Forum
and the rule of law.

The Netherlands firmly condemns all attacks by any
terrorist organization. Such attacks are disastrous for
peace, justice and development. Propelled into people's
lives by the power of social media and the Internet,
terrorism has no moral or geographic boundaries.
Terrorist organizations are challenging our beliefs and
values, including - and maybe especially - those of
the peopled of the Maghreb and Mashreq regions. We
therefore welcome resolution 2199 (2015), initiated by
the Russian Federation. It obliges Member States to
take steps to prevent terrorist groups from receiving
donations and from benefiting from the trade in
oil, antiquities and hostages. We all know this still
continues. We still must implement the resolution to the
letter with precision.

We need to act collectively against those who
enslave women and children, behead innocent
civilians and destroy our cultural heritage. On Sunday,
the Netherlands became a co-Chair of the Global
Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF) following that of
the United States. The GCTF aims to reduce the
vulnerability of people around the world to terrorism
by preventing, combating and prosecuting terrorist
acts. Furthermore, it aims to counter incitement and
recruitment to terrorism. We are proud and humble
to have assumed the responsibility of co-Chair. We
will work closely with the other 29 members of that
pioneering body, in particular with the Kingdom of
Morocco.

In the past year, the GCTF paved the way for
resolution 2178 (2014). The resolution was a crucial
step against foreign terrorist fighters. Neverthess,
the number of foreign terrorist fighters continues to
increase. They come from a great variety of backgrounds
and countries, including my own. There have been 210
foreign terrorist fighters from the Netherlands to join
the ranks of terrorist organizations abroad.

The GCTF stands for less talk and more action
in close cooperation with other multilateral forums.
Through the GCTF, funds are channelled to support
those who need it for capacity-building. The Netherlands
recently allocated an additional €43 million for that
purpose.

Unlike the terrorists we fight, we act in clear
recognition of the moral and legal boundaries set by
the rule of law and human rights. We take due account
of the dilemmas posed by the demands for security and
privacy. Finding the proper balance is not easy, but the
Netherlands is convinced that the two are not mutually
exclusive.

First and foremost, terrorists aim to disrupt our
daily lives by instilling a sense of constant fear. In
the face of those actions, we need to stay true to our
own values. It means standing firm behind the guiding
principles that unite us here. We know how effective
the United Nations can be if the political will is there.

Sadly, the Council has so far failed us on Syria. The
Council has not acted even though the Syrian regime
has been carrying out a gruesome campaign of terror
against its own people, even though it has fostered the
creation of Daesh, or the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, and attracts terrorist recruits from across the
region. These actions constitute flagrant human rights
violations and abuses against the people of Syria. Let us
not forget the obligation we all have to protect civilians
and to follow the letter and the spirit of the Charter of
the United Nations.

If we look at what unites us, we do not simply fight
terrorism. We must fight for positive things, for things
that hold a more universal value. I am reminded of one
of the fundamental rights in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights: the freedom from fear. Formulated
almost 75 years ago by Mr. Franklin D. Roosevelt, a
President of Dutch descent, as one of the four freedoms
in his State of the Union speech of 6 January 1941,
this freedom is still too often absent today. Let this be
what we collectively strive for. Let us together reduce
the vulnerability of our people around the world to
terrorism.

That is also one of the reasons that the Kingdom
of the Netherlands has the ambition to be elected to the
Council next June for the period 2017-2018. We look
forward to cooperating with the Security Council in the
fight against international terrorism. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands has the ambition to continue being a
partner for peace, justice and development.

