Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me join others in
thanking Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
for his briefing on the latest developments in the
humanitarian situation in Syria. We commend him and
his team for their very important work.

We are deeply troubled by the recent violent
attacks in several parts of Syria, which pose a serious
threat to civilians in the areas concerned. Those
attacks are undermining the current efforts to achieve
a comprehensive nationwide ceasefire in Syria. My
delegation therefore calls on all parties to the conflict to
exercise maximum restraint and refrain from any action
that might increase the risk of humanitarian incidents.
Indonesia would like to highlight three points arising
from the briefing: first, the urgent need to alleviate the
humanitarian suffering; secondly, achieving a political
settlement; and, thirdly, avoiding escalation.

First, Indonesia stresses the urgent need to lessen
the ongoing suffering of millions of people in Syria
who are in need of immediate humanitarian assistance.
My delegation believes that humanitarian needs in
Syria must be addressed as a matter of priority. That
is crucial, as approximately 11.7 million people remain
in need of humanitarian assistance, and some 5 million
of them are children. Moreover, more than 1 million
people are living in hard-to-reach areas, and the
winter season has particularly worsened the situation,
especially for children.

Nonetheless, we were pleased by the humanitarian
aid delivery to Rukban in November 2018. We are also
encouraged to hear from the Under-Secretary-General
that the second convoy is expected to deploy early next
week to deliver assistance to thousands of people in
need in Rukban, including women and children. We
urge all parties to ensure that the humanitarian effort
goes forward unimpeded, in the spirit of resolution
2449 (2018), which in its paragraph 1 stresses the need
for "principled, sustained and improved humanitarian
assistance to Syria in 2019". It is therefore critical for
all parties to ensure rapid, safe and unhindered access
to all affected areas and civilians in need. Civilian lives
are at stake, and the international community needs to
provide humanitarian assistance.

Secondly, concerning a political settlement, it
is evident, as many have repeatedly stressed, that
the absence of a political solution will worsen the
humanitarian situation in Syria. To that end, Indonesia
continues to support a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
political process, facilitated by the United Nations, with
full respect for the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. Indonesia
welcomes the series of meetings conducted by Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen with the relevant parties in order
to find a peaceful solution to the conflict. We stand
ready to support the implementation of his mandate to
help end the conflict. My delegation also appreciates
the ongoing efforts and support of various countries in
advancing the peace process, in coordination with the
United Nations.
Thirdly, with regard to avoiding escalation, which
is very critical, it is of great importance to ensure
that the conflict is not escalated in any way, as we
cannot afford any setback and ensuing humanitarian
consequences. We therefore reiterate our call on all
parties to stop all attacks and violence against civilians,
including civilian infrastructure, and to refrain from
any steps that might jeopardize the ongoing ceasefire
agreement. My delegation stresses that all parties must
work to guarantee the success of all humanitarian
efforts by observing all principles of international
humanitarian law.

There has been too much suffering for far too long.
Let us give peace a chance and turn the cycle ofescalating
violence into one of dialogue and reconciliation. Finally,
as clearly stated by the Indonesian Foreign Minister last
week in this Chamber,

"all parties [must] ensure the success of that Syrian-
led, Syrian-owned United Nations-facilitated
process, which would lead to a concrete pathway to
peace" (S/PV8449, p. 11).

