Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Allow
me first to convey my delegation's sincere condolences
to the people and the Government of the Niger following
the attack last night on a military base in Inates that
killed 70 soldiers. Our thoughts go out to the families
that are in mourning.

I would also like to commend Mr. Mohamed Khaled
Khiari for his very informative briefing.

As all those who have spoken before me have
stated, the security situation on the Korean peninsula
remains a source of concern for the international
community. While the inter-Korean summits and,
in particular, the dialogue between the leaders of
the United States and of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea raised a great deal of hope, the talks
concerning the nuclear programme of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea have stalled. In addition,
since April, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
has continuously tested new types of so-called tactical
weapons and multiple short-range ballistic missile
launches, in violation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and air safety regulations. Cote d'Ivoire
clearly condemns those repeated military exercises,
which constitute serious breaches of international
security and undermine the efforts of the international
community to ensure peace and a peaceful coexistence
among the countries of the region.

In the face of the threat that this situation poses
to international peace and security, Cote d'Ivoire urges
the North Korean authorities to exercise restraint and
to refrain from any action that could jeopardize future
talks. We also urge the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to comply with its obligations, as mandated in the
relevant Security Council resolutions, and to resume its
negotiations with the United States as soon as possible.
My country also calls on all stakeholders involved in
the North Korean nuclear issue to play their roles by
making every possible effort to bring the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea back to the negotiating table
and increase mutual confidence-building measures.
In that regard, Cote d'Ivoire commends the United
States for postponing its joint military air exercises
with South Korea last month with a view to creating
an opportunity to resume the talks. We urge the
United States to maintain its offer of dialogue with
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea so that the
parties may resolve all the points of divergence that
were identified at the meetings in Hanoi and Stockholm.
We also encourage the Republic of Korea to preserve
the achievements of the inter-Korean dialogue as a
guarantee of peace and stability in the region.

In order to achieve the ultimate objective of the
complete denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, it
is imperative that the Security Council maintain the
unity it demonstrated in its adoption of resolution 2397
(2017) and previous resolutions. That will enable it to
speak with one voice and bring all its weight to bear to
achieve a swift and definitive resolution to this crisis,
which carries alarming humanitarian consequences.
In the same vein, it is the duty of the Council to act
in perfect unity on the North Korean issue in backing
and supporting any rapprochement process on the
Korean peninsula that could serve as a tool to build the
confidence needed to achieve lasting peace.

Cote d'Ivoire takes this opportunity to reaffirm
its commitment to the international non-proliferation
architecture, which is an essential tool for the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
therefore hope that our call for dialogue with North
Korea towards the complete, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula will be
heard. The people of the Korean peninsula, who have
contributed so much to humankind through their
cultural richness, ingenuity and hard work, deserve
more than the endless tensions and ongoing threat of
a military confrontation with potentially disastrous
consequences.

