Ms. Sunday: It is truly an honour for me, as a South Sudanese civil society representative, to brief the Security Council on the situation in my country and since the completion of a historical milestone in our long journey towards peace in South Sudan. I would like to dedicate my remarks to all of the South Sudanese women who fought so hard for this peace agreement and who continue to work tirelessly to support their communities on the ground. My name is Betty Sunday. Today I represent the Women's Monthly Forum on Peace and Political Processes in South Sudan. We have been bringing together South Sudanese women from all walks of life since 2014 to make sure that we play a critical role in peace processes. I am also a member of South Sudan Women's Coalition and a staff member of the Community Empowerment for Progress Organization, which took part in the peace talks in 2015 and 2018. I would like to start by thanking the Council for its efforts in pushing for the full implementation of the 2018 Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, including through its visit to South Sudan in October. By meeting with my colleagues in Juba, the Council has help us to create a space for civil society in my country at acritical juncture. Just two weeks after the formation of the much-awaited Transitional Government of National Unity, I want to focus my remarks on the situation on the ground in South Sudan from a civil society perspective, in particular that of women-led organizations. The completion of key aspects of the peace agreement just before the 22 February deadline brings us undeniably closer to the vision of an inclusive and peaceful South Sudan that ordinary citizens have kept alive in their hearts. The alternative could have brought war back to our doorsteps, had the ceasefire that drastically reduced political violence not held. South Sudanese civil society organizations worked tirelessly to keep the international community engaged and to make our recommendations weigh in the political balance. I am confident that I can speak for my sisters and brothers in saying that we are grateful that the Council did not turn a blind eye. Peace required substantial concessions from all parties and, when it was all said and done, I believe it was pressure from the region, from the African Union and from the international community as a whole, that compelled South Sudanese leaders to put the good of our people first. It is not the first time that we have had hope. But I remember bitterly the return to violence and suffering that followed the collapse of previous agreements, which friends of South Sudan were all too quick to call a success, when their disengagement enabled personal interests to prevail once more. Women and girls paid the highest price of that failure to see peace through in acountry where specific threats to them continue to be extreme. The 125 survivors of the November 2018 mass rape in Bentiu should convince the international community to vow "never again', and to mean it this time. The recent breakthrough in the peace process rekindles our hope for a South Sudan where guns have been silenced and the Government can use national resources to tackle key issues, such as girls' education, child marriage, youth job creation and basic services for communities. While the situation on the ground remains calm, we hope that the current political disputes among parties haggling over ministerial attributions will remain just that and that they will not bring us back to the brink. Yet serious challenges lie ahead. Violence continues to displace communities in parts of the country, and humanitarian assistance is as critical as ever for over 7 million people in need. Women and girls are still at extreme risk of rape and other forms of sexual or gender-based violence when they fetch food and water. Communities need rebuilding, with 1.5 million people remaining displaced and experiencing uncertainty about safety and services if they return. Over 2 million refugees remain outside the country, the majority of whom are women and children. I recently visited the Rejab Unified Police Training Center in Juba and was shocked to see how inadequate the conditions were at the site, with pregnant women, lactating mothers and some 700 children without access to proper installations and services. After a visit with the Reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, we had to go back as women of South Sudan as an act of solidarity with our sisters to help them deal with the suffering we had seen there. I argue that measures should be implemented to tackle those inadequate conditions and ensure that pregnant women are not taken to the training centre until they give birth. On the political front, we have been encouraged to see that civil society organizations, including women-led organizations, have increased _ their influence through their unwavering engagement in the peace process. They have played a critical role in some of the recent progress by advocating women's increased representation, the 100-day extension of the pre-transitional deadline and the resolution of a number of state disputes. South Sudanese women have fought hard for the peace agreement to come to life and hold. However, we are still far from achieving the 35 per cent quota for women in the Transitional Government's bodies, particularly at the state level, where the list of governors that is still being negotiated does not include a single woman. This brings me to my recommendations for what the Security Council can do to support for the South Sudanese people on our way to peace and security for all. First, most importantly, I urge all friends of South Sudan, including the Security Council, to maintain full diplomatic engagement so that the parties may work to resolve pending issues to ensure the swift implementation of the peace agreement. In this regard, we hope the Council could impress upon some South Sudanese politicians that individuals on international sanctions lists should not be part of a new Government. Hundreds of thousands of families are still waiting for safe and dignified conditions to go back to their homes. It will be critical for the Security Council and the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) to urge the Government to ensure that armed forces vacate civilian houses without further delay, as required by the peace agreement. Likewise, security sector reform needs to continue so that we can have a professional, unified military equipped with the appropriate training to keep all South Sudanese citizens safe. This must include, for the safety of women and girls in particular, training to counter gender- based violence. After years of abuses, peace will require justice to hold. We hope members of the Security Council will reiterate their support for transitional justice in South Sudan, which must include accountability for gender- based violence, if things are ever going to change in my country. It will take all of us to build a safe and prosperous South Sudan. Grass-roots organizations are counting on the Security Council to help by urging all parties to respect the space for civil society to make a contribution. Women-led organizations in particular need to be recognized for the essential role they played to build peace nationally and at the community level. This young nation of ours will only achieve its full potential through the meaningful participation in public life of women and women-led organizations. We need the Council to stand with us as we renew our call on all parties to realize the hard-won promise of the 35 per cent quota for women's representation in Government. Finally, as the Security Council considers renewing the UNMISS mandate, it is crucial that all existing provisions on women, peace and security be maintained and that the Mission engage with diverse women's groups, in particular those working on ending gender-based violence. We strongly believe that, to be successful, UNMISS should consult a wide range of women's civil society organizations to guide its work in the areas of protection of civilians, confidence-building and mediation. Women and girls have lived in fear for far too long in South Sudan, where gender-based violence continues to reach some of its highest rates in the world. As a mother and a human rights defender, I want to make sure South Sudanese women and girls are not relegated to a status of victims: we have a voice, and we must have a say in our country's future.
