Ms. Power (United States of America): Thank you,
Foreign Minister Mahamat, for chairing this important
meeting. Your presence here adds weight to an already
weighty discussion. I welcome Special Representative
Haysom to the Security Council and thank him for his
briefing and his work on the ground in Afghanistan.
We congratulate him on his appointment as the head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
As he serves, he and his team can count on our full
support. I also thank Mr. Fedotov for his informative
briefing on illicit narcotics production in Afghanistan,
an issue of substantial concern to the Council.

Afghanistan is in a very different place today than

it where it was when the Council last met to discuss the
country, on 18 September 2014 (see S/PV.7267). At that
time, the election process was still being worked out,
and the Council urged candidates to work towards a
durable compromise in the interest ofthe Afghan people.
The candidates forged that compromise and formed a
National Unity Government. Since taking office that
Government has taken crucial steps to end the year on
a positive note. The National Unity Government has set
out a compelling reform agenda committing to improve
governance, limit corruption, reintegrate refugees,
promote sustainable development and defend and
promote the human rights of all Afghans, with a special
focus on women's rights. The Government is backing up
its words with important actions, including reopening
the Kabul Bank investigation, passing internationally
compliant financial regulations, removing unqualified
and corrupt Government personnel and tackling illicit
trade, among other key efforts.

We look forward to President Ghani and Chief
Executive Officer Abdullah naming a cabinet soon,
made up of people chosen on merit. We applaud
their commitment to ensuring that the cabinet is
representative of the Afghan people, including Afghan
women.

The Afghan Government has shored up critical
regional support for its agenda. At the Heart of Asia/
Istanbul Process Ministerial Conference in Beijing
in October, neighbouring countries committed to
doing their part to strengthen Afghanistan's security
and prosperity, which is in the interest of the region's
stability and development. President Ghani has
undertaken important visits to improve relationships
with neighbours, including Pakistan.

Support for Afghanistan's continued progress
also comes from beyond the immediate region. At the
London Conference at the beginning of December,
more than 70 donor States affirmed their commitment
of over $16 billion in assistance to Afghanistan through
2016. That support is critical to building upon the hard-
earned gains made in Afghanistan since 2001. In that
time, school enrolment has increased tenfold, with
nearly 10 million children now signed up. Forty per cent
of students are girls - something that would have been
unthinkable under Taliban rule. Life expectancy has
improved dramatically. Maternal mortality has fallen
from 16 per cent to 3 per cent, while under-five mortality
has dropped from 25 per cent to less than 10 per cent.
Women can now not only walk in public without a male
relative by their side, but also can become doctors who
treat male and female patients. Women hold 28 per cent
of the seats in the parliament of Afghanistan.

The United States is committed to supporting that
ongoing progress. Among other contributions, our
Government is providing more than $107 million this
year to help refugees returning to Afghanistan, because
we have seen the inspiring contributions they can make
to their country. For just one example, look at Fereshta
Abbasi. Her parents fled Afghanistan for Iran before she
was born, and her family did not return until Fereshta
was 12. But she was determined to excel in school
and pursue a career. With her family's support, she
attended Herat University's law school, where she was
the only woman on the school's moot court team. After
graduating she went to work in her country's Ministry
of Women's Affairs, which never would have been
conceivable under Taliban rule. Now she is ensuring
that other girls and women have the same opportunity
she had and face fewer obstacles in their paths.

Of course, much work remains, including on
women's rights. Last month the United Nations
Special Rapporteur on violence against women
visited Afghanistan. While she was encouraged by the
Government's commitment to seeking to end violence
against women, Special Rapporteur Manjoo also found
that "insecurity, pervasive levels of gender-based
violence and an ever present climate of fear has had a
disproportionate impact on the promotion, protection
and fulfilment of human rights of women and girls"
in Afghanistan. Women and girls, she said, continue
to endure domestic abuse by husbands and relatives,
exchange marriages, incest, honour crimes, targeted
killings and discrimination at home and at work, as
well a daunting obstacles to seeking redress for those
and other problems.

Let me turn to the very large challenge of security.
At the end of this month, the United States and our
NATO allies and partners from around the world will
conclude the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) mission. Over 13 years, troops and civilian
personnel from more than 50 countries have worked
alongside Afghan partners to root out terrorism and try
to build a more stable and a more secure Afghanistan.
More than 2,200 Americans and more than 1,200
citizens of other ISAF coalition countries have given
their lives working to defend and empower the Afghan
people.

Afghanistan continues to face serious threats to
security, as evinced by horrific terrorist attacks like the
one carried out on 23 November when a suicide bomber
detonated an improvised explosive device at a volleyball

tournament in Paktika province. More than 50 people
were killed, many of then children. It was part of the
increase in targeting of innocents by anti-Government
armed groups, which has resulted, as we have heard, in
the largest number of civilian casualties this year since
2008. Those horrific, depraved attacks show more than
just the ongoing risks; they show why it is so important
that the Afghan Government succeed and why those
responsible for such for attacks must be neutralized and
brought to justice. NATO and its partners will continue
to train, advise and assist Afghan security forces
through the Resolute Support Mission, allowing brave
Afghan soldiers and police to continue to stand up to
extremists and work to protect their fellow citizens.

