Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We too welcome the
participation of the Secretary-General in our debate
today. My delegation also wishes to associate itself
with the statement that Cuba will make on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, a statement that goes to great
lengths to point out some of the working methods that
need to be considered during this debate.

The Charter of the United Nations has endowed
the Security Council with a mandate for the
maintenance of international peace and security and the
power to take decisions that bind sovereign States. By
doing so, it gives the Council a far-reaching impact on
the lives of many people in the world.

For this reason, we welcome the improvements in
the working methods of the Security Council as
detailed in document S/2006/507. While they are
modest measures, they remain meaningful steps
towards improving the work of the Council and are an
effort to try to enhance the efficiency and transparency
of the Council's work. The challenge is to ensure that
these measures are fully implemented and made
permanent, so that the Security Council can be
predictable.

In recent years, the Security Council has adopted
various measures aimed at improving its working
methods. However, as long as the rules of procedure of
the Council remain provisional, those changes will
always seem inadequate. Even if the working methods
were dramatically improved in accordance with all the
suggestions that have been made so far, the core
problem would remain, namely, that over the past
60 years, the Security Council has witnessed the
gradual erosion of its credibility and authority. Its
representativity has been challenged increasingly, as it
addresses matters that have expanded beyond the
vision that the founders of the United Nations foresaw
in 1945.

In our View, the Security Council must be
reformed to address both enlargement in its categories
of membership and improvement in its working
methods. Anything less is papering over the cracks in
the foundation on which this organ was built more than
60 years ago.

In the past decades, permanent members of the
Security Council have sought to utilize the Council to
further issues in their own interest. There have also
been occasions where resolutions of the Council have
been brought up for decision with little or no
opportunity for meaningful discussion by its entire
membership. We have always had been troubled by the
fact that issues such as Kosovo, Western Sahara,
non-proliferation, and even Georgia, are regarded as of
interest, at least to some members of the Council, to
the exclusion of other issues. On the question of the
Middle East, people around the world are well aware
that the Council has remained paralysed in trying to
address the plight of the Palestinian people 40 years
after the illegal occupation of their land.

This problem is further complicated when the
Council deals with issues that involve groups of friends
and contact groups that draw on States Members of the
United Nations from outside the Council. Typically,
these small groups are dominated by or entirely
comprised of developed countries. They usually
operate in secrecy and seek to impose their views on
the rest of the membership of the Security Council by
drafting resolutions that the Council is then expected to
endorse without any further discussion. For South
Africa, given our desire for transparency and political
inclusiveness, the small group phenomenon presents a
significant problem.

Yet, we indeed endorse innovations that involve
the groups of friends and contact groups as useful tools
for the Council to reach out to consult with the broader
membership. However, these outreach innovations will
only be beneficial if they complement the work of the
Council in an open, accountable and transparent
manner.

On numerous occasions, the Council has been
criticized for its tendency to encroach upon areas of
responsibility assigned to other United Nations bodies,
such as the General Assembly or the Human Rights
Council, thus weakening the United Nations as a whole
and opening the Council's agenda for manipulation and
the promotion of bilateral agendas. The Council can
stem the erosion of its credibility and transcend the
divisions and the national interests of its members by
uniformly discharging its Charter-based mandate to
maintain international peace and security.

The international community needs a Security
Council that is representative and functions in an
effective and predictable manner. The fact that the
Council has always operated through provisional rules
of procedure is central to this debate. It also does not
help that, when the Council was created, the
membership of the United Nations as a whole
constituted 51 countries - a number that has now
almost quadrupled - and that since its creation the
Council has been expanded only once - over 40 years
ago. Again, until the Council is fully representative and
can operate in a manner that is easily understood, its
credibility, legitimacy and even its working methods
will always be challenged.

