Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation thanks the Permanent
Representative of Japan, Ambassador Oshima, for
organizing the visiting mission of the Security Council
to Afghanistan and for submitting his exhaustive report
on its results. The conclusions contained in that
document will serve as a good basis for the Council's
further efforts to resolve the situation in Afghanistan.

I will briefly address the main points relating to
the priorities of our future work in that regard.

We are seriously concerned by the negative trends
emerging in the situation in that country. Afghanistan
faces a significant number of challenges and threats. In
dealing with the threats posed by the implacable
extremists, the ongoing and uncompromising struggle

against them and the strict implementation of the
Council's sanctions regime against members of the
Taliban and Al-Qaida are of particular importance. The
generally complex situation is being exacerbated by the
ever-increasing drug threat and its negative impact on
the fight against terrorism and State administration
reform. The dangerous link between illicit drug
trafficking and the terrorist activities of the Taliban is
growing.

In such circumstances, we must implement a
range of measures to counter Afghan drug trafficking,
including the creation and strengthening of existing
security buffer zones in the context of international and
regional cooperation. We must also implement a full
spectrum of measures in the security sector,
strengthening the ranks and effectiveness of the
national army and the police, disarming illegal armed
groups, addressing corruption and drug trafficking, and
enhancing regional cooperation.

The Russian delegation is convinced that a stable
settlement in Afghanistan is possible only on the basis
of previously agreed arrangements, including the
decisions of the Berlin conference of April 2004. That
implies ensuring the participation of representatives of
all political, ethnic and religious groups of Afghan
society in the administrative institutions of the Afghan
Government and requires the assistance of those
neighbours of Afghanistan that can exercise a positive
effect on the situation and in the restoration of the
country. We feel that more active and collective
international involvement in resolving the situation in
Afghanistan will ensure the successful implementation
of the recovery programme for Afghanistan set forth in
the London Agreement. We believe that the United
Nations will continue to play a key role in resolving
the situation in Afghanistan and that under the aegis of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) there will be strict monitoring and
coordination in the implementation of the Compact.

Russia continues to assist Afghanistan on a
bilateral basis. We feel that our support, as part of the
international effort, will help to turn Afghanistan into
an independent and flourishing State that is free from
the Taliban, terrorism and narcotics. We are ready to
coordinate our efforts towards those goals with the
Afghanistan Government and the international
community.
