Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank Mr. Robert Serry for his briefing this
morning, and the Palestinian and Israeli representatives
for their contributions to today's debate.

First, I would like to express the United Kingdom's
deepest condolences to the families and friends of the
victims of last week's terrorist attack on Israeli tourists
in Bulgaria, and to emphasize our condemnation of
such inexcusable acts.

The crisis in Syria has now entered its eighteenth
month. Despite the best efforts of Joint Special Envoy
Kofi Annan, the Syrian regime has refused to implement
a single aspect of his six-point plan. It has ignored the
decisions of the Council enshrined in resolutions 2042
(2012) and 2043 (2012). Instead, it has intensified
its brutal repression, killed almost 20,000 Syrians
and detained, tortured, raped and abused innocent
men, women and children. The regime continues the
indiscriminate and disproportionate use of heavy
weapons, in violation of international law, resolutions
2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012), the six-point plan and its
own commitments. The recent reports of attacks on
Aleppo by the regime's fighter jets mark even further
dangerous escalation and emphasize that are there are
no boundaries that the Al-Assad regime will not cross
in the misguided hope that it can resist the will of its
people and hang on to power.

Last week's vetoes by Russia and China (see S/PV.6810) were the third example of how they are
prepared to deny the Council the ability to influence
the situation for the better. The consequences are clear:
further violence and bloodshed, and a deteriorating
situation that is now spilling over the borders and
sucking in the region. Shelling across the Lebanese
borders, in clear violation of Lebanon's sovereignty
and territorial integrity, as well as the Syrian military's
violation of the area of limitation in the Golan Heights,
are but two examples of the threat to regional stability.
For our part, we will continue to work with the Envoy,
the Secretary-General and responsible members of
the international community to achieve the political
transition that is the only way forward for Syria.

As grave as the situation is in Syria, we must not
lose focus on the ongoing injustice of the unresolved
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Our shared goal is a
negotiated, two-State solution, based on 1967 lines; a
fair solution for refugees; security arrangements that
respect Palestinian sovereignty and protect Israeli
security; and Jerusalem as the joint capital. We
remain fully committed to that goal, and have urged
both sides to focus on dialogue, avoid steps that could
undermine the prospects for peace, and work towards
the resumption of direct negotiations.

It is disappointing that progress towards a just
and negotiated outcome looks increasingly unlikely in
the near future. In the immediate term, therefore, we
must guard against threats to the two-State solution
and prevent further deterioration on the ground. Israeli
settlement activity remains the single most serious
threat to the two-State solution.

Settlements are illegal under international law and

undermine the very viability of the two-State solution.
We were dismayed by the announcement last month of
tenders for the construction of 171 homes in settlements
in East Jerusalem and the recent decision of the Israeli
Ministry of Defence to reclassify the illegal outpost
of Givat Sal'it as part of an adjacent settlement. Any
step that entrenches the presence of settlements in the
West Bank risks sending the message that Israel is not
serious in its support for a two-State solution.
Along with our European partners, we also call
upon Israel to halt the demolition of Palestinian housing
and infrastructure in Area C of the West Bank, and the
subsequent forced transfer of the population, and to
address humanitarian needs.

In the longer term, we should all maintain support
for the Palestinian Authority. The United Kingdom
will continue to be one of the principle supporters
of Palestinian State-building efforts, assisting them
to tackle poverty, build institutions and boost their
economy. With our European partners, we will work to
encourage Israel to accelerate approval of Palestinian
master plans and to simplify administrative procedures
to obtain building permits for Area C of the West Bank.

Without control over that land, including planning,
building and security, the viability ofa future Palestinian
State, and thus the two-State solution, is significantly
reduced. We continue to value the essential work that the
United Nations and its agencies, including the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, carry out on
the ground in the occupied Palestinian territories. We
hope that such work can continue without hindrance.

We remain concerned about the situation in Gaza
and will continue to press the Israeli Government to
ease restrictions on movement and access. Although
we understand Israel's security concerns, we believe
that for any peace deal to be sustainable, there must be
an economically viable Gaza. At the same time, rocket
attacks from Gaza into Israel must stop. The recent
escalation in such attacks only further entrenches the
status quo.

We continue to witness change and the struggle for
change across the Middle East. Achieving a peaceful
and lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
will not only secure peace and security for the parties
directly involved, but also be beneficial to the region
as a whole. We will continue to urge both sides to
show the political leadership and courage required to
make progress towards that shared goal of a two-State
solution.

