Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): The situation being discussed
today relates principally to Kosovo. The Security Council
has been seized of the situation in Kosovo for about a year
now. Throughout this entire period, the situation has been
deteriorating and the extent of human suffering and
humanitarian problems has been increasing. The threat of
the situation in Kosovo to international peace and security
has been growing. The Security Council has adopted three
resolutions on Kosovo, all of them under Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter. They represent a clear expression
of the will of the international community to assist in
devising a solution and a framework for action in search of
the solution.

Slovenia regrets that the developments in Kosovo have
brought the international community to the point at which
all diplomatic means have been exhausted and military
action in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has become
inevitable. The constant endeavours of the international
community to achieve a diplomatic solution to the crisis
and to prevent a humanitarian catastrophe of even greater
extent have yielded no results. in view of this tragic
moment for the peoples in that part of Europe, we would
like to emphasize that the tragedy is the result and
consequence of the erroneous policy of the Belgrade
Government alone.

The current situation was not inevitable. A diplomatic
solution was not impossible. Let me recall that, not long
ago, the Council welcomed and supported the negotiating
process conducted by the Contact Group in France, which
aimed at reaching a political settlement between the parties
and at establishing a framework and timetable for that
purpose.

Slovenia, for its part, has all along supported a
peaceful solution to the Kosovo problem that would
include broad autonomy for Kosovo with due respect for
the internationally recognized borders of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro).
Slovenia, through its Prime Minister, has been actively
engaged in the efforts of the international community to
achieve this aim. Slovenia supports the agreement
prepared by the Contact Group on the basis of the results
of extensive discussions with the parties during the course
of the second half of 1998. We believe that the political
part of the agreement on the autonomy of Kosovo and the
part on the implementation of the agreement constitute a
whole and provide the only realistic way to stabilize the
situation in Kosovo. The interim period of three years
would also provide enough time to continue the search for
a balanced and long-term solution, as well as for the
restoration of and reconciliation among the Serbian and
Albanian communities in Kosovo.

Unfortunately, the efforts of the international
community were in vain, since the Belgrade Government
was not ready to agree to a political solution of the crisis.
The military activities and those of the special Serbian
police forces in Kosovo against the civilian population
have not ceased, despite the numerous demands of the
Security Council in its resolutions and despite the
commitments made by the Belgrade Government to that
effect. On the contrary, in recent months and weeks, the
military action against the civilian population has further
escalated. The attacks have become more Violent, thus
causing an even greater humanitarian catastrophe.
According to the recent figures published by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), there are already about half a million refugees
and internally displaced persons. This situation represents
a case of massive Violation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolution 1199 (1998)
of 23 September 1998, which called for an immediate end
to all military activity against the civilian population. The
threat to international peace and security in the region is
looming large.

Today's meeting is a sombre occasion for various
reasons. I wish to emphasize this: It is most deplorable
that the Security Council has to meet to discuss the
consequences of systematic and brutal violations of its
own resolutions. This is the main source of our concern
today.

We regret the fact that not all permanent members
were willing to act in accordance with their special

 

responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security under the United Nations Charter. Their apparent
absence of support has prevented the Council from using its
powers to the full extent and from authorizing the action
which is necessary to put an end to the violations of its
resolutions.

It is our expectation and belief that the action which
is being undertaken will be carried out strictly within the
substantive parameters established by the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We would also like to express our
hope that a peace agreement on Kosovo will be reached in
the shortest possible time. We will continue to actively
support the endeavours of the international community to
achieve a mutually acceptable solution under international
supervision.

