Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): First of all, I would like to welcome Their
Excellencies the Foreign Ministers of Angola, Botswana,
Mozambique and Zimbabwe, members of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC), to this meeting
of the Security Council. I thank them for their important

 

statements. A few days ago, the SADC countries held a
summit meeting at Luanda to discuss ways to promote the
Angolan peace process; a communique was issued
afterwards. Today, these four Foreign Ministers have
come to the Security Council in person further to
elaborate their views on the question of Angola and the
position of the southern African States. We commend
SADC for its tireless efforts in search of lasting peace in
Angola.

China has always supported the efforts of African
States to resolve their regional problems on their own and
has deep respect for their independence, self-respect and
self-reliance in their quest for lasting peace and
development in the African continent. The international
community and the Security Council should provide
support and assistance in various forms to the African
States in their efforts towards that end.

Like the SADC countries, we too are deeply
disturbed by the impasse in which the Angolan peace
process once again finds itself. Almost two years after the
signing of the Lusaka Protocol, and after repeated
revisions to the implementation schedule regarding
relevant agreements reached by the two parties, work in
key areas of the peace process remains incomplete.

We are concerned at the delay by UNITA in
participating in the formation of a Government of
National Unity and a unified armed forces, and we are
concerned especially at the rejection by UNITA's Third
Extraordinary Congress of the vice-presidency offered to
Mr. Savimbi in the Government of National Unity. We
also find it regrettable that Mr. Savimbi chose not to
attend the SADC summit meeting held early this month.

We are of the View that by so doing UNITA has not
only reneged on its own commitments but has harmed the
restoration of trust between the two parties. Further delay
in resolving the aforementioned questions may
compromise the results already achieved in the Angolan
peace process. We do not wish to see the peace process
fail on the brink of success. The Chinese delegation
would like to reiterate that the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol and the relevant agreements reached by
the two parties brooks no further delay.

The question of Angola is the last hot-spot issue to
be resolved in southern Africa. After the prolonged
ravages and disruptions of war, the Angolan people yearn
for peace and tranquillity. We sincerely hope that the two
parties, and the UNITA leadership in particular, will, in

 

the general interest of the country and the people,
demonstrate political will and good faith in scrupulously
honouring their obligations under the agreements. Only then
will the peace process in Angola enjoy the continued
support of the international community.

Tomorrow, the Security Council will take action on
another extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III). As the largest
United Nations peacekeeping operation today, UNAVEM
III has made positive efforts and important contributions
towards monitoring the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol and towards restoring peace and national
reconciliation in Angola. It goes without saying that the
establishment, execution and success of a peacekeeping
operation require the full cooperation of the parties
concerned. According to Security Council resolution 976
(1995), the mandate of UNAVEM. III should be fulfilled by
February 1997. Whether this objective can be realized as
expected, and whether the peace process can be
successfully salvaged, will depend on whether the two
parties, especially UNITA, fully cooperate with the
Mission.

The Chinese delegation is ready to favourably consider
a further extension of the UNAVEM. III mandate. We hope
that the two parties, especially UNITA, will seize this
opportunity by taking concrete measures to redouble their
efforts for peace, so that a durable peace will soon reign in
Angola and in the whole of southern Africa.

