The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

I join others in commending Indonesia, through
Ambassador Djani and his team, in leading the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). He can count on France's support over the next
two years within the important framework of preparing
the comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

The resolution is a pillar of the non-proliferation
architecture that underpins our entire collective
security system. Through its adoption in 2004, the
Security Council made a priority of the threat of the
proliferation and use of weapons of mass destruction,
particularly by non-State actors. Fifteen years later, as
2018 unfortunately demonstrated, the non-proliferation
regime continues to be put to the test. Other speakers
have already described in detail the threats facing it,
including the acknowledged risk of the use of chemical
weapons by any actor and the persistence of the illegal
nuclear and ballistic-missile programme in North Korea.

France is particularly concerned about the new
trend involving the proliferation of missiles, their
components and associated technologies to non-State
actors in the Middle East. Clearly, that poses a threat
to regional security and beyond and must stop. The
illicit transfer to non-State actors of missile production
capabilities enabling the delivery of weapons of mass
destruction is a matter of great concern. That is why the
raison d'etre of the 1540 Committee is more relevant
now than ever.

The 1540 Committee is the architect of the action
taken by all States that contribute to the shared work
of meaningfully combating proliferation. Ijoin others
in paying tribute to the Group of Experts that supports
it and whose analytical and awareness-raising work
remains essential. Accordingly, in order to contain
proliferation, we must ramp up our efforts now more
than ever. In that regard, I will focus on two main lines
of action.

First, at the national level, every one of our
countries must strive to coordinate meaningful efforts
to implement resolution 1540 (2004). We must ensure
the security of sensitive material and equipment in our
countries and strengthen export controls, in particular
with regard to the risks involving the use of emerging
technologies. I would also refer to the prevention and
suppression of proliferation financing. France enjoys
a solid and unique national legal framework in that
regard. My country is also particularly involved in
preventing the threat of terrorists acquiring sensitive
nuclear and radioactive materials. We support the work

of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism
and the Group of Seven Global Partnership against the
Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction,
which we currently chair.
Secondly, as we are more effective together, we
must not focus our non-proliferation efforts in isolation.
We must give priority to strengthening cooperation
and assistance. France, which is coordinating the
Working Group on Assistance, attaches particular
importance to strengthening the regional dimension
of ensuring alignment between the needs and the
proposed assistance. The holding of regional seminars
is a successful format upon which we must build.
We welcome the work of the other actors mentioned,
including the European Union, but we must also do
more by focusing on dynamic and interactive exercises,
such as tabletop exercises, so as to enable participants
to learn concrete lessons and take them on board.

Lastly, in order to be effective, we must also consider
the scope of the challenges facing us by strengthening
synergies with other forums facing the same issues
outside the United Nations - such as the International

Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the World Customs
Organization and export control regimes - and the
various internal agencies of which the United Nations
is comprised, in particular the committees dealing
with terrorism.

At a time when the challenges to our security are
constantly on the rise, we must remain fully mobilized
to preserve and strengthen the non-proliferation regime.
Resolution 1540 (2004), the focus of today's meeting,
makes a difference as it establishes both a legally
binding framework and concrete follow-up framework
to ensure the implementation of the obligations which
are incumbent upon all. France will remain fully
committed to fully supporting and contributing to the
work of the 1540 Committee.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose $1111.30 am.
