Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and thank
Mr. De Mistura for his important briefing. We wish
to highlight once again the sense of responsibility and
professionalism that has characterized his complex work
and made possible progress in laying the groundwork
for ending the devastating Syrian conflict. We thank
him for his tireless efforts and his genuine commitment
to peace and justice.
We particularly look forward to the latest
developments in connection with the formation of the
constitutional committee, which we attribute largely to
Mr. De Mistura's perseverance and diplomatic skill as
well as to the commitment shown by the Astana platform
countries. Those developments provide the new Special
Envoy, Mr. Pedersen, with a path on which to advance,
together with the main governmental actors involved,
in order to guarantee the establishment, in the coming
weeks, of a committee that the Syrian population and
the international community can recognize as credible,
balanced and legitimate.

We believe that in order to achieve that complex
objective, it is of the utmost importance for the
committee to be representative and include all sectors
of Syrian society, in particular Syrian women, and to be
equipped with transparent and democratic mechanisms
for its functioning and decision-making. We hope that
those conditions will be met and that the work of the
committee will result in a new constitution leading to
free elections, supervised by the United Nations, within
the framework of the broader political settlement
process as set out in resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), and with
full respect for the unity and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

We also consider it essential that those efforts
be supported by confidence-building measures and
national reconciliation. In particular, we encourage
and expect further and more substantive progress in
the identification of missing persons, the surrender
of remains, and the release of detainees and missing
persons. We must also recall the need to ensure access
to justice and accountability for atrocity crimes
committed during the protracted conflict.

I wish to conclude by stressing the importance ofthe
Security Council remaining attentive to developments
on the ground, with a view to ensuring that the ceasefire
in Idlib, established in September by the Russian
Federation and Turkey, is maintained. The success of
any effort to achieve sustainable peace in Syria, such
as the constitutional committee, will depend to a large
extent on preventing Idlib from becoming the scene of
a new humanitarian tragedy.

