Mr. Li Junhua (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
would like to join previous speakers in thanking the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Pronk, for his insightful briefing. We would
also like to thank him for his efforts on behalf of the
north-south peace process in the Sudan.

We would like to raise two points. First, with
regard to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA),
in the years since its establishment, the Government of
National Unity of the Sudan has, with the help of the
international community, engaged in a serious manner
in implementing that Agreement, and has made some
progress. Although the situation is not fully to our
liking, it is in general on the right track, and we
appreciate that. At the same time, we hope that the
north and the south of the Sudan will further enhance
their confidence-building and cooperation efforts and
fully implement the CPA.

We also welcome the fact that the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) has almost completed
its deployment there, having actively engaged in
operations in accordance with its mandate as
authorized by the Security Council. It has played a
very important role in accelerating the implementation
of the CPA and improving north-south reconciliation in
the Sudan. We also support the extension of its
mandate.
As the Secretary-General has pointed out, the
peace process in the Sudan has entered a challenging
stage and urgently requires international financial
assistance so that disarmament, demobilization,

reintegration, refugee resettlement and national
reconstruction programmes can be implemented. We
join the Secretary-General in urging donors to fulfil
their commitments to provide timely assistance for the
process so that the people of the Sudan can benefit
from the peace dividend of the CPA and so that there
can be true peace.

I would also like to refer to the situation in
Darfur. Earlier, Mr. Jan Pronk raised five points in
connection with the implementation of the Darfur
Peace Agreement (DPA). We appreciate his comments.
In our view, the issue of Darfur has an important
bearing on the CPA. However, it is also important to
note that the Darfur issue is different from the north-
south issue and therefore calls for a different solution
that nonetheless takes into account the resolution of the
north-south issue.

The United Nations Mission in the Sudan has
played a very positive role because it has the support
and cooperation of the Government of the Sudan. The
deployment of a United Nations mission to Darfur
should be based on the same principle. The United
Nations Mission in the Sudan is engaged in very
important negotiations on that issue, and we hope that
the Security Council will support it and cooperate
where necessary. In particular, it should take effective
measures to overcome the difficulties faced by the
African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS). We
appreciate the fact that the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan will continue to provide technical and
logistical support to AMIS, and support that effort.

China also believes that, as long as the various
parties in the Sudan continue to act in a spirit of mutual
understanding, trust and cooperation and implement
the CPA and the DPA, and provided that the
international community provides support, there will
be peace and stability there.

