Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the convening of this meeting and thank
the panellists for their informative briefings. We also
welcome the participation of the Haitian Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Bocchit Edmond.

Peru is closely monitoring the situation in Haiti and
supports the important role played by the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH),
in line with the goals and indicators proposed by the
Secretary-General for the Mission's sustainable exit.

Recognizing the significant progress that Haiti
has made in recent years with the support of the
United Nations, we remain concerned about the
political volatility, institutional fragility and economic
stagnation that have exacerbated social tensions and
adversely affected the humanitarian situation in the
country. In that regard, we welcome President Moise's
initiatives to promote national dialogue, as well as the
governance pact. Moreover, the fight against corruption
and impunity must go hand in hand with those efforts
with a View to strengthening the rule of law and the
people's confidence in their institutions. In that regard,
it would be useful to have additional information
regarding the Government's announcement to create an
independent commission to monitor the investigations
of the PetroCaribe case.

We endorse United Nations support for the
Government of Haiti with regard to the legislative
elections scheduled for October, and we stress the
need for Congress to expeditiously approve the law
on the permanent electoral council. We also commend
the strengthening of the operational capacities of the
Haitian National Police. It is crucial to continue to
make progress in the implementation of the strategic
development plan in order to strengthen respect for
human rights, oversight capacities and accountability
mechanisms. We also believe that it is essential to
revitalize the mechanisms for reducing communal
violence, along with programmes for the regulation of
arms and ammunition. That approach should replace
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration policies,
which are no longer suited to the context in Haiti.

We stress the need to finalize the national action
plan on human rights, specifically to promote women's
rights, as well as to ensure the timely approval of the
necessary pending legislative pieces to strengthen
access to justice, which include the criminal code, as
noted by Ms. Viaud, the code of criminal procedure and
the law on prisons. In that connection, we welcome the
first round of the evaluation of prisons to be carried
out by the Directorate of Prison Administration with
a View to strengthening the resources devoted to this
area, which we hope, together with regulatory reforms,
will contribute to solving the acute problems of health
care and prison overcrowding.

Peru believes that, in line with resolution 2410
(2018), MINUJUSTH's exit and transition process
must take into account the security conditions on the
ground and Haiti's overall capacity to ensure stability
in its territory. It is a matter of taking the necessary
precautions - as noted by the representative of the
Dominican Republic - so as not to jeopardize the
progress achieved. In line with the Government's
priorities, the new mission should pursue MINUJUSTH's
efforts to strengthen the rule of law, train the Haitian
National Police, reduce communal violence, reform the
justice system, and protect and promote human rights.

In that regard, we agree with the Secretary-General
that the new mission should take the form of a strategic
advisory office that works in an integrated manner with
the country team. We believe that the Economic and
Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti and
the Peacebuilding Commission should continue to play
an important role in that new architecture in order to
ensure an adequately resourced, orderly and peaceful
transition that will allow for a sustained United Nations
presence that can respond and contribute effectively
and continually to Government efforts.

In conclusion, I wish to express Peru's support for
the important responsibilities of MINUJUSTH and
the United Nations system on the ground, as well as
our firm commitment to ensuring the stability and
prosperity of Haiti and the region as a whole.

