Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would like to thank

the Secretary-General for the clarity of his briefing

and for sharing his recommendations with us today.

These ideas will help us protect and prevent attacks on

medical personnel and their places of work. The United
Kingdom welcomes this important contribution.

At the outset, I want to pay tribute to Ms. Joanne
Liu and Mr. Peter Mauer from Medecins Sans frontieres
and the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC), respectively. I want to highlight one thing
each of them said to us. Ms. Liu told us that throwing
medical impartiality to the wind is becoming a new
norm of warfare. Mr. Mauer said that we must show that
international humanitarian law remains relevant for
people bearing the brunt of war. That is a wake up call
for the Council. He and his colleagues are carrying out
vital work, so often in the most harrowing of conditions
and so often at great risk to themselves.

Sadly, five months since the adoption of resolution
2286 (2016), the overwhelming dangers facing
Medecins Sans Frontieres, the International Committee
of the Red Cross and others operating in conflict
zones are still painfully apparent. Despite resolution
2286 (2016) and despite the clear protections provided
under international humanitarian law, medical workers
continue to be injured and killed as they work to save
the lives of others in Syria, in Yemen in South Sudan, in
all the countries Mr. Mauer listed and in so many places
around the world.

But let us be honest here - the most starkly this is
on display is in Aleppo. This is not a propaganda point;
it is a fact. We have just heard today about air strikes
against the two largest remaining hospitals in rebel-
held eastern Aleppo. That is a fact. We, the Council,
cannot hide behind the passive voice. We need to be
clear. The only air forces caring out strikes in eastern
Aleppo are the Syrian and Russian air forces. That is
also a fact.

As the Secretary-General said just now, those
using ever more destructive weapons know that they
are committing war crimes. Aleppo is now a city that
is synonymous with suffering. It is a city synonymous
with medics working by the lights of their phones with
only the most basic supplies. It is a city synonymous
with rubble, dust and unrelenting bombardment - a
sickening test bed for even crueller, even more barbaric
weapons. Syria and Russia bear full responsibility for
these atrocities.

And yet this is just the tip of the iceberg. While
400,000 people have died as a direct result of the
conflict, the secondary death toll, as a result of the
destruction of the health-care system, will be much
higher. Access to vaccinations, neonatal care, maternal
health care, women's health care - all these things
have all but disappeared. Once extinct diseases like
polio have returned and measles, typhoid, hepatitis and
tuberculosis are now reaching dangerous levels. In cities
like Madaya, we hear heartbreaking stories like that of
Ghina Ahmad Wadi, who was shot by a regime sniper
last month. For over two weeks the regime denied her
medical evacuation before she eventually received the
attention she needed. Why? Together with the forced
removal of medical supplies from convoys, such actions
amount to amount to a calculated dismantling of Syria's
health-care system.
Our concern also extends to Yemen, 40 million
people are in need of humanitarian assistance.
Improving access to them is a top priority for the United
Kingdom. We call on all sides to improve the flow of
essential medical and humanitarian supplies to alleviate
the suffering. We also take very seriously reports of
violations of international humanitarian law in Yemen,
including attacks on medical facilities. All sides must
conduct thorough and conclusive investigations into
all incidents where it is alleged that international
humanitarian law has been breached.

Wherever in the world international humanitarian
law is breached and whomever by, we must ensure
accountability. We owe it to the people of Aleppo
and to countless more around the world. To do so,
it is clear that we need to gather the evidence and
collect the data to bring this about. We welcome the
Secretary-General's drawing attention to this in his
recommendations. Groups like Da'esh, which conduct
sickening attacks on medical workers and facilities
are no exception. That is why our Foreign Secretary,
Boris Johnson, announced last week that the United
Kingdom, alongside Iraq, will bring a proposal to the
United Nations calling on the Organization to gather
and preserve evidence of Da'esh's crimes in Iraq. We
did so because there can be no impunity. We therefore
support the Secretary-General's recommendation
that where domestic accountability mechanisms are
insufficient or inadequate, international accountability
mechanisms should be sought, including the
International Criminal Court.

I want to conclude by once again stressing the
importance of international humanitarian law. Where
there is armed conflict, civilians and those who
provide medical assistance must be protected. I am
proud to reaffirm the United Kingdom's commitment
to upholding these laws. I urge all Council members to
follow suit.

