Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
Morocco voted in favour of resolution 2044 (2012)
because it encourages the parties to accelerate the pace
of talks and calls on neighbouring States to strengthen
their participation in helping to advance progress
towards a realistic and negotiated political solution.
These are steps that we support and to which we
hereby commit ourselves.

We voted in favour of the resolution because it
reiterates the importance and priority of the self-
determination initiative launched by Morocco and
welcomes the efforts made by my country since 2006.
We are pleased to see the establishment of this
negotiating framework. Morocco voted in favour of the
resolution also because it reiterates the importance of
registering the Tindouf refugees. This is a matter of
relevance to our brothers in Algeria, given the presence
of refugees in their country and their obligations under
international humanitarian law with respect to those
refugees.

The resolution is proof that the Council is
mindful of our good faith and of the need to pursue
efforts in Laayoune and Dakhla that have been
affirmed by the National Council of Human Rights. It
is also evidence of our commitment, reiterated by the
Security Council through the resolution. The
importance of the resolution will not be diminished by
the doubts we heard expressed earlier. Our efforts fall
in the natural context of reform undertaken by His
Majesty King Mohammed VI, and have been given
new momentum by the new Constitution and the
transparent legislative elections that brought in a new
Government.

Morocco voted in favour of the resolution
because the mandate of the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) is very
important and appropriate in the context of the
Organization's efforts. The mandate is now confined to
pursuing a ceasefire, closely monitoring negotiations
and facilitating confidence-building measures. These
highly important functions strengthen regional stability
and promote contact among the inhabitants of the Arab
Maghreb through the efforts of Mr. Christopher Ross.

The Council was quite right to refuse, for the
third year in a row, to consider broadening the mandate
to include matters that are irrelevant to the functions
3
and nature of the Mission. We therefore believe that, in
adhering to the original mandate, the Council is
directing MINURSO to commit to the existing
agreements. We voted in favour of the resolution
because we are mindful that there is no alternative to
negotiations and that there is no turning back. The
approaches of the past cannot be revived today.

Since 2001, we have been convinced that the
referendum approach could result in disharmony and
tension in a society of coexistence that continues to
seek consensus solutions. We have therefore adopted
the approach of negotiation, which we have reactivated
in recent years. In order to entrench that trend, we have
adopted a realistic approach that derives its legitimacy
from the most successful and democratic models. That
is why the Security Council trusts that our efforts are
earnest, honest and conducive to progress in the
negotiating process.

Morocco is committed to these negotiations,
aware that the Western Sahara is Moroccan and that
Morocco must continue to exercise its sovereignty
there. Morocco endured colonization in the early
twentieth century and suffered greatly in seeking to
maintain its own territorial integrity. We are committed
to negotiations in order to preserve the stability of the
Arab Maghreb, strengthen good-neighbourly relations
among the States of the Maghreb, and create
momentum that will allow us to transcend our
differences and reinforce our common Arab dimension.
The desire to live as good neighbours in our own
neighbourhood will help us to resolve this conflict
through joint efforts to establish a climate of stability
in the Western Sahara.

We hope that today's resolution will bolster
efforts to reach an agreement on the major issues and
to achieve the realistic solution sought by all in the
Maghreb, the Tindouf camps and the other Arab
Maghreb States. I know that all members of the
Council seek the same goal.

