Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. I
also listened carefully to Ms. Al Hallak's remarks.

The consensus of the international community
is that a political solution is the only way to reach a
settlement of the Syrian issue. The Syrian political
process has seen major developments in the past month,
including the successful holding of the first meeting of
the large body of the Constitutional Committee and
a 45-member small group. The small group will hold
its second and third round of discussions in Geneva
very soon. China welcomes such developments and
commends Special Envoy Pedersen's good offices and
hard work, as well as the constructive participation of
all Syrian parties.

The establishment of the Constitutional Committee
is a good starting point for the Syrian political process.
We support the work of Mr. Pedersen, on the basis
of existing gains made, to continue promoting the
political process according to the principle of a Syrian-
led, Syrian-owned process and resolution 2254 (2015),
In that regard, there is a need to listen carefully to the
legitimate appeals of the Syrian Government, maintain
the independence of the work of the Constitutional
Committee and fully respect the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
country. Syria should not be divided or torn apart. We
hope that the Syrian parties will use the discussions
in the Constitutional Committee to increase mutual
understanding and gradually build mutual trust. The
members of the Constitutional Committee should
prioritize the interests of the country and its people and
reach consensus as soon as possible. The international
community, including the Security Council, should
provide support in that regard and do more to help
the Syrian parties set their differences aside and
create consensus.

Rampant terrorism represents a major potential
threat to a political solution to the Syrian issue, as it
will have a significant negative impact on the political
process and the future of the country. This scourge
deserves the attention of all parties and should be
resolved. The situation in north-eastern Syria remains
fragile. The parties involved should avoid any action
that might undermine the achievements made thus far
in the area of counter-terrorism. The current priority is
to jointly deal with the risk posed by the movement of
terrorists and guard against the return of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham. The Secretariat should
keep a close eye on the counter-terrorism situation in
Syria, as well as terrorists on the move, and carefully
consider the issue of bringing those terrorists to justice
by proposing recommendations to that end. Idlib has
become a breeding ground for terrorism, posing a threat
to millions of civilians. This is a common challenge for
the peace and security of Syria, the Middle East and the
world at large. The international community, in line with
the relevant Council resolutions and international law,
should continue to align standards to fight terrorism in
all its forms and undertake joint efforts to deal with the
issue of foreign terrorist fighters.

While promoting the political process in Syria,
we should also make efforts to improve the country's
economic and humanitarian situation. The international
community, including the United Nations, should adopt a
comprehensive, objective andbalancedperspective when
considering and addressing the Syrian humanitarian
crisis. Syria is currently faced with economic sanctions,
oil shortages, damaged infrastructure and a lack of
reconstruction funds, as well as other difficulties
that exacerbate the humanitarian crisis and have an
acute impact on providing food, clothing, housing and
transport for its people. The large number of refugees
has put economic and social pressure on neighbouring
countries and constitutes a destabilizing factor in the
region. The provision of humanitarian materials to
Syria should not come with any political preconditions.
All humanitarian relief actors on the ground in Syria
should increase their communication and coordination
with the Syrian Government.
China would like to reiterate its support for
the political process in Syria and is ready to play a
constructive role in the early resumption of peace,
stability and development in Syria.

