Mr. Nangaa Yobeluo (spoke in French): The
Democratic Republic of the Congo just held its
presidential, legislative and provincial elections on
Sunday, 30 December 2018, in accordance with national
legislation, specifically the country's Constitution and
the organic law on the organization of the operations of
the Commission electorale nationale independante, as
well as the general law. Of course, that architecture is
complemented by other laws and regulations pertaining
to the organization of elections.

Before I proceed with my statement, I would like
to inform the Security Council that, three years after I
was appointed President of the Commission electorale
nationale independante, we have now reached what
could be considered the culmination of our work. I
would note that the process was fraught with numerous
difficulties. As such, some would have thought it
not humanly possible for me to now be able to share
positive results.

The reason for that is that the process is rife with
constraints and, above all, mistrust. There is total
mistrust among the actors themselves, among the
politicians and with regard to the electoral process
itself, as well as between the Government and other
actors, such as the international community, and
even sometimes towards me, the President of the
Commission electorale nationale independante.
Since I became President, not a day goes by without
someone demanding that President Nangaa resign. This
environment made it very difficult for us to carry out
our work. Nevertheless, some of the obstacles could
have been avoided because they were rooted in mistrust,
innuendo, suspicions and other factors.

With regard to the registration of voters on the
electoral rolls, everything was called into question. Of
all the decisions taken by Electoral Commission, there
is not one that is not challenged by this or that group
or stakeholder, including the international community,
which, at times, surprises us with positions entirely
divorced from reality, when in fact they are partners
with whom we work day and night.

As for voter registration, we conducted seven
rounds and, thank God, have ended up with 40 million
registered voters. Since then, even the 40 million voters
have been challenged because some believe that we are
overstating or understating the number of voters, or
that we have somehow made a mistake.

The electoral register was audited by the
International Organization of la Francophonie.
The Electoral Commission believed that the audit
conducted at its request would help to build confidence.
Unfortunately, the audit cast more doubt than expected.
Thereafter, we were able to adopt all the laws required
to conduct the process. Unfortunately, all the laws that
were adopted have been challenged.

We have assembled the electorate and even the
candidates, and we carry out our functions in accordance
with the mission entrusted to us by the Constitution.
Some of the Electoral Commission's decisions have
been challenged, and some consider themselves to be
the experts instead of the Commission for one reason or
another. We registered 21 candidates for the presidential
election. We also registered approximately 15,358
candidates for national elections and 19,640 candidates
for provincial elections.

In order to facilitate successful elections, the
Commission electorale nationale independante
introduced technology in the form of what are known
as voting machines. Even those machines have been
the object of a year of bickering - saying no to the
voting machine, we do not want it, it is for cheating, it is
for this or that purpose. Regrettably, some candidates,
even a week before the elections, were still telling their
supporters not to use the voting machines. The elections
nevertheless took place, and that is what is important. It
was held on 30 December, and even the critics who did
not want voting machines now welcome the holding of
the elections.

I hold the Security Council somewhat accountable
because, from the perspective of the Electoral
Commission, these unhelpful discussions have been
supported, and even created, by the international
community. For obvious reasons, the voting machines
had no problems and events proved us right, but the
fact that this matter was escalated to the international
level is a little embarrassing and creates a very
complicated situation.
The election took place, and before giving the
Commission's analysis, it is very clear that on Sunday,
30 December, when many were predicting chaos,
saying that we would not be able to vote with the voting
machines and that elections would not be possible,
the elections were held. Everyone was able to vote
and today, unlike in 2006 and 2011, the election took
place on 30 December in an atmosphere of peace.
Whereas in the past there were casualties, the election
on 30 December went well and everything proceeded
rather smoothly.

After the elections it was necessary to move on to the
post-electoral phase, which consists of two important
elements. The first is, of course, the collection and
processing of data for the announcement of provisional
results, in accordance with the law. That is what the
Electoral Commission has been working on, and two
days ago it was able to announce the provisional results
of the elections. Of course, we must not be under any
illusions - something that was also said even before
the elections. We were indeed anticipating reactions,
starting with the Catholic Church. It should be noted
that the Catholic Church challenged the results in 2006
and 2011, and it is now challenging the result of the 2018
election. That is no surprise. It is what we expected for
well-known reasons.

Of course, when elections are held, there are many
stakeholders and everything must be done in accordance
with the law. Far be it from us to announce from this
forum that the election was organized flawlessly. It is
a human undertaking that was organized against the
backdrop of well-known challenges, but the key point
is that what is important has been safeguarded. We
are in our third election cycle and the elections have
taken place.

In a letter dated 4 January, we protested against the
unlawful announcement of election results by persons
and bodies legally incompetent to do so. We addressed
that correspondence to the President of the Conference
episcopale nationale du Congo (CENCO) by clearly
identifying the articles of the Constitution, the various
laws and other texts that were systematically violated
by the early announcements of the trends in the results.
What is worse is that we went so far as to say that they
knew the name of the person who would have won,
which was surprising. We drew CENCO's attention to
the fact that this trend and this issue being managed
in this way obliged the stakeholders to refrain from
commenting on publications and trends in election
results and that they would be responsible for what
would happen in that regard.

Why are we saying that? There are many elements
that we would like to make available to the Security
Council. We have here a list of all the organizations and
the witnesses of the political parties who participated in
the monitoring of the elections. We tend to think that it
was just the Catholic Church that observed. No, dozens
of organizations did so as well. I have heard that 40,000
CENCO observers were deployed. That is very serious.
The observation was deployed on the basis of the
accreditation of the Commission electorale nationale
independante.

Accreditation statistics for CENCO have never
reached the figures that are put forward. We have 17,000
observers accredited by the Commission. We are told
that, apart from the accredited observers, there were
others who were not accredited by the Commission.
Of course, in addition, there are more than 6,000 other
observers who are considered permanent or long-
term observers, and therefore we have approximately
20,000 to 23,000 observers. I do not know where the
40,000 observers come from. On that issue, there is a
fundamental question.

Observation missions are organized and managed
by the law. The observers are not tasked with compiling
data. I do not know where the CENCO results are from.
The observers are not qualified to obtain, at the polling
station level, the various reports and cards, which
are rather issued to witnesses of the political parties.
Should I take that to mean that the CENCO observation
mission conducted itself as a witness of the political
parties? I would be interested to know which party it
favoured. Those are serious issues, and I challenge
anybody who may claim that they have collected all of
the records. For the Commission itselfto do so, it would
have taken nearly a week. These are serious issues.

Having said that, we announced the results in
accordance with the law. I believe that the Commission
is of the view that it has done itsjob. Ifthere is a dispute,
the law provides for verification mechanisms and other
mechanisms, and I think that there are competent courts
to do that. Nevertheless, we would like to make it clear
to the Security Council that we seem to be losing sight
of the objectives that were the reason for this process. I

believe that there are three main objectives.
The first objective is that the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo did not want their
Constitution to be changed. The Constitution of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was not changed.
That was a victory for the opposition, the majority and
civil society. It was a victory for the opposition because
it more or less demonstrated that we are in a country
where there is an opposition that does not allow the
authorities to do whatever they want. It was a victory
for the majority and those in power because, by not
changing the Constitution, they could also consider
making a forced transition, but they did not do so. It
was a victory for civil society, which has always sought
to defend the Constitution, because that objective
was achieved.

The second objective, which I underscored for the
Congolese people, is that the Congolese people did not
want there to be a third term for the Head of State, the
outgoing President of the Republic. Indeed, he did not
run as a candidate, which reflects the fact that we had
21 candidates other than him. That is a victory that has
been achieved.

The third objective is that we have achieved a
handover of power at the highest level of the State.
This handover of power is all the more important for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as for the first
time in the 60 years of its post-independence existence,
we will experience in the weeks to come a handover
of power between an outgoing Head of State and an
incoming Head of State. For the very first time, we will
see how, as is done in other countries, the two Heads of
State greet one another. Indeed, over the course of 60
years we have had four Presidents: President Kasavubu,
President Mobutu, President Laurent-Desire Kabila
and President Joseph Kabila. The first four Presidents
succeeded one another without ever engaging with one
another - either through coups or assassinations. We
will have the first peaceful handover of power in the
weeks to come, of course after having processed all the
documents and dossiers pertaining to the provisional
results. The Commission stands ready; its team has
already been put together to manage the challenges.

In conclusion, what shouldI say? You, Mr. President,
invited me to take part in this meeting. In about 30
minutes after my statement, we will proclaim the
provisional results of the national legislative elections.
This is an election conducted under circumstances
of which we are all aware. However, to general
surprise, the elections were well organized. In that
regard, we wish to pay tribute to the Commission's
representatives. A large number of them - 32 agents
of the Commission - perished during this process. We
pay tribute to them by noting that we have achieved
what we sought to achieve, what the Congolese people
have been awaiting all this time. That is briefly what I
wanted to note.

I will conclude by stating that the Commission
worked under difficult conditions with constant
challenges, whether the controversies were fabricated
not. However, regardless of the difficulties encountered,
it has done what it was able to do. We also say that we
were not perfect. The Commission, through me, asks for
indulgence for every time we made a mistake. However,
the essential thing is that the results are within reach
today and that it is time, with the beginning of this
new mandate, for the new authorities to be supported
by the international community as always. Why should
one try to weaken them when they have not even taken
their first steps yet? Yes, there may be challenges from
various quarters. We believe that the competent courts
will take care of the rest. We expect to submit the final
reports of the process, which will lead us, more or less,
to the first peaceful and civilized handover of power in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

It would be remiss of me to conclude without
thanking the United Nations. Some believed that
the Commission received only logistical support for
the process. That is not true. We wish to thank the
United Nations for its ongoing technical assistance to
the Commission. More than 150 international experts
work alongside us in the same building. Only badges
distinguish a Commission employee from a United
Nations employee. The relationship was decisive in
the planning stages, the concept and design of certain
processes and for our reporting. We would also like
to thank other actors and stakeholders, including the
political parties, who participated in the process.
The Congolese voiced their views. Today we have a
President-elect. We hope that the process will continue
until he is officially sworn in as President.

I also wish to draw the attention of members to
the fact that there is controversy. There are only two
options for addressing it: either confirm the result of
the Commission or cancel the election. Cancelling the
election would mean that current institutions would
remain in place because we will not have a President
until new elections are organized.

