Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of this meeting and the
detailed briefing just given by Mr. Antonio Guterres,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. The
information he conveyed today is of essential
importance in our opinion, and we believe that such
briefings should become common practice as they
enable the Council and the members of the
Organization to keep abreast of the situation of
refugees in general and in the field. Our attention to
specific circumstances should not distract us from the
need to periodically analyse the situation in general,
which would allow us to evaluate our own actions in
the medium and the long terms and to take corrective
measures when necessary.

When the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) was set up more
than 50 years ago, it was believed that a temporary
mandate would be enough to address the situation of
people displaced by the war in Europe. Today, we
know that we were mistaken. Forced displacement has
not only been a constant and insidiously perpetuated
phenomenon, but has also become increasingly
complex and global, requiring the permanent attention
of this Organization.

The situation in Gaza, which still has us on
tenterhooks, testifies to the magnitude of the
challenges facing the international community. Those
who seek refuge or who are displaced by a conflict
become double victims every time the international
community in general and the Council in particular fail
to solve the conflicts that force them to abandon their
homes. Those hundreds of thousands of people, about
whom Mr. Guterres has spoken to us today, are first the
victims of the actions of some and then victims of the
inaction of others.

Just as Gaza cries out for concrete action,
effective responses and sustainable and rapid solutions,
the displaced and the refugees in the Sudan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Chad, the Central
African Republic, Somalia, Georgia, Afghanistan, Iraq
and, unfortunately, many other regions in the world
demand from us comprehensive, serious, responsible
and courageous treatment. We have said this before,
but will never tire of repeating it. While there remain
on the Council outright defenders of those whose
actions cause the forced displacement of whole
populations, we shall continue to be part of the
problem and not of the solution.

We are all partly responsible for this. Those who
raise their voices to criticize actions today remained
silent on other actions of the past. For that reason,
Mr. Guterres's briefing should serve as a wake-up call
for us to review our actions in depth.

Despite its small geographic size, Costa Rica was
a refuge for many thousands of people who fled from
wars in Central America throughout the 1980s, and we
continue to receive significant inflows of people today

who have been forced to flee their countries of origin.
These painful circumstances have enabled us to clearly
understand the links between forced displacement and
peacekeeping, especially in situations where mass
displacements threaten the stability of the places of
origin, transit and destination and which represent a
huge challenge for the effective protection of people
throughout the displacement cycle.

For that reason, my delegation understands that
the evolution and complexity of this issue require it to
be placed in the wider context of the protection of
civilians, where respect for international law,
international cooperation and timely and decisive
action by the United Nations are essential. When we
speak of the protection of civilians, we are essentially
speaking about respect for legality and international
law. For that reason, the protection of civilians should
always be the highest focus of political strategy in any
effort to settle conflicts and a key element in post-
conflict actions and in peacebuilding processes. It is
necessary at all times to ensure the cooperation of all
parties to a conflict in order to create areas of security,
neutral zones or humanitarian corridors that will permit
either evacuation or the distribution of aid to the
affected populations.

While we emphasize the importance of permitting
access to those who require refuge and the
responsibility of complying with international
obligations, especially with the principle of
non-expulsion or non-refoulement, we acknowledge
the need for greater international cooperation in those
countries that have received huge flows of refugees.

It is clear that both the old and the new
challenges that we face today are essentially of a
practical nature. In this context, there is an obvious
need to make greater efforts in early warning and rapid
and decisive responses to crises. This work should
involve the United Nations and its agencies, in close
cooperation with the Security Council.

We are seriously concerned by current trends
whereby displacement is no longer a phenomenon
linked only to conflict but has become a military
strategy and a terrorist tactic. It is alarming to note the
persistence of military and bandit attacks on refugee
camps and the increase in sexual violence, arms
trafficking and the recruitment of children that
frequently take place within the camps themselves.
Those occur in conjunction with the typical problems
and needs in the spheres of health and education that
perpetuate and exacerbate the vulnerabilities already
exposed by forced displacement.

Today, we stress the importance of strong
mandates to protect civilians as a key aspect in the
design and composition of peacekeeping missions, as
well as the need for clear guidelines that enable
effective protection throughout the whole displacement
cycle, from evacuation to the provisional establishment
of camps for refugees and internally displaced persons.

We need greater resources to expand surveillance,
information collection and patrols in areas of conflict
where there is considerable risk of attacks against
civilians. It is absolutely indispensable that
peacekeeping missions in situations, such as those in
Darfur or the Democratic Republic of the Congo, be
suitably structured and provided with the equipment
and technology necessary to duly comply with their
mandate to protect civilians.

In conclusion, strengthening coordination
between the political, humanitarian and military
dimensions is critical not just to guarantee the security
of aid personnel and the humanitarian space necessary
to care for refugees and displaced persons, but also to
adequately transition from the early stages, where
priorities lie in the realm of safety, protection and
covering basic needs, towards recovery and the
re-establishment of order and the rule of law in order to
guarantee the respect and promotion of human rights.

Finally, I would like to thank UNHCR and its
staff all over the world for their work. We recognize
that in many cases they must care for years for those
who have nowhere else to go to assure their continued
existence. I stress the need for our support to be
extended to efforts to prevent and effectively resolve
the conflicts that are the cause of the displacement and
suffering witnessed by the High Commission and other
United Nations agencies on a daily basis.

