Mr. Daou (Mali) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to extend to you, Sir, my heartfelt
congratulations upon Rwanda's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month. At the
same time, I wish you every possible success in the
discharge of your lofty burden. I am gratified that this
meeting has been convened to consider the Secretary-
General's report on the situation in Mali (S/2013/189),
pursuant to the implementation of resolution 2085
(2012). I congratulate the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, on his
outstanding briefing.

Mali welcomes the report, which by and large
covers its concerns, and sincerely thanks Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his tireless and praiseworthy
efforts towards a lasting solution to the very serious
crisis racking my country. It will be recalled that
in a letter dated 12 February 2013 addressed to the
Secretary-General, that the interim President of the
Republic of Mali, His Excellency Mr. Dioncounda
Traore, underscored the need to configure the
international community's presence in Mali through
support for the re-establishment of territorial integrity
and the restoration of peace and stability in my country.
Today, as evidenced by recent developments in the
security situation in northern Mali, the goal of the total
liberation of the country has not yet been achieved or
peace restored.

As emphasized by the report of the Secretary-
General, extremist armed groups are resorting to new
asymmetric modes of action, such as guerrilla warfare,
ambushes, suicide attacks, booby-trapped vehicles,
improvised explosive devices, and anti-personnel
mines. These armed groups often melt into the local
population to commit their crimes. Infiltration attempts
by jihadists elements and the offensives of extremist
groups have been repeatedly repelled as a result of
the vigilance and the determination of the Malian
armed forces, backed by French troops and those of
the African-led International Support Mission in Mali
(AFISMA).

The cities of Kidal, Tessalit, Gao, Timbuktu and
several other parts of the country that have been targeted
by terrorists in recent weeks and months must be
secured. On 21 February, some 30 terrorists infiltrated
the administrative district of Gao and entrenched
themselves in the city hall. Following violent clashes
with elements of the Malian armed and security forces,
backed by French military forces of Operation Serval,
the allied counter-offensive neutralized the terrorist
band, some of whose members wore explosive belts.

On 20 March, the village of Dougoumi in the
municipality of Tenenkou, in the region of Mopti, was
attacked by armed men, resulting in heavy casualties,
with about 20 dead and missing from the local
population.

On 23 March, Timbuktu was hit in turn by the wave
of terrorist attacks, with the explosion of a car bomb
and a failed attempt to break into the city airport. On
the night 0f30-3l March, violent clashes again occurred
between the Malian army and jihadists infiltrators in
the city centre, with an estimated toll of eight terrorists
killed and a Malian non-commissioned officer killed
and eight wounded. On 1 April, again in Timbuktu,
three jihadists who had managed to successfully
infiltrate the city were neutralized.

I could cite many cases of armed violence and
subversive actions undertaken by the narco-jihadist
groups and their secessionist allies against the unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Mali.

It is clear that these recurrent outbreaks of violence
undertaken by Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,
Ansar Dine, Mouvement pour l'unicite et le jihad en
Afrique de l'Ouest and the Mouvement national pour la
liberation de l'Azawad (MNLA) constitute an obstacle
not only to the re-establishment of State authority,
but also to the return of internally displaced persons
and refugees living in neighbouring countries to their
homes. The violence is also an obstacle to creating a
climate of calm that would allow for the organization of
free, transparent and credible elections throughout the
national territory, and a threat to the peace and stability
of the entire region.
Today more than ever before, the sovereignty and
authority ofthe State ofMali must be in force throughout
the national territory from Kayes to Kidal, from
Taoudenni to Zegoua, and from Tessalit to Koure'male'.
To that end, it is necessary to disarm the MNLA and to
take urgent action to bolster the operational capabilities
of the armed and security forces of Mali so that they can
discharge their duty to protect the population and their
property and to defend the national territory threatened
by armed terrorists and rebel groups.

I take this opportunity to pay warm tribute to
the glorious French soldiers of Operation Serval, to
the soldiers of Chad, Nigeria, Burkina Faso, Senegal,
Guinea, Ghana, Togo, Benin, the Niger and AFISMA;
and to all of those who responded to the calls of Mali,
its President and its armed forces and who continue to
make a significant sacrifice to preserve the honour and
dignity of the Malian people and renew their hope. It is
also proper to reiterate here our heartfelt gratitude to
the European Union training mission in Mali, which has
decided to enlist and train nearly 3,000 Malian soldiers
to fight the terrorist groups and defend their country.
Finally, we welcome the establishment in Bamako
of the United Nations Office in Mali (UNOM), and
reiterate our full readiness to work in close cooperation
with UNOM. and its head, Mr. David Gressly.

Allow me now to say a few words on my country's
position on the topic of the transformation of AFISMA
into a peacekeeping stabilization mission. Two options
are proposed in the report of the Secretary-General. The
Government of Mali prefers the second, which consists
of the deployment of a multidimensional, integrated
United Nations stabilization mission under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, alongside
a parallel force whose objective will be to carry out
large-scale anti-terrorism combat operations. The
Government of Mali remains convinced that this option
will enable it to achieve its objectives of restoring the
sovereignty of the Malian State throughout its national
territory, stabilizing the country and engaging in
national reconciliation efforts.

Part and parcel of that aim is the unanimous
adoption by the National Assembly on 29 January of
the transitional road map, which provides, inter alia,
for re-establishing territorial integrity, organizing free
and transparent elections, and creating the National
Commission for Dialogue and Reconciliation, which
will include all elements and stakeholders of the
Malian crisis. An important milestone was achieved on
27 March with the appointment of the Chair and two
Vice-Chairs of the Commission by the Head of State
of Mali. That clearly shows that no stone will be left
unturned by the highest Malian authorities to ensure
the effective establishment of the Commission and its
successful operation as rapidly as possible.

One of the transitional Government's priorities is
the organization of presidential and legislative elections
by 31 July at the latest. Despite the many difficulties
and complexity of that endeavour, there is reason
to hope that the Malians, with the assistance of their
partners and the international community, will meet
the challenges and turn a new page in their history.

I cannot conclude without extending my gratitude
to all countries that pledged their assistance during
the pledging conference held in Addis Ababa on
29 January to support AFISMA and the Malian army.
I also welcome UNESCO's establishment of a special
fund to preserve Mali's global heritage in order to assist
the authorities in preserving and protecting property
affected by the conflict, in particular the affected sites
in Timbuktu and the Tomb of Askia in Gao.

Finally, I would like, on behalf of the Government
of Mali, to reaffirm my profound gratitude to all of
the members of the Council, to the African Union, to
the Economic Community of West African States, and
to all our bilateral and multilateral partners for their
unanimous support and the special attention they have
always devoted to the issue of Mali.

