Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today's meeting, and
the briefers for the valuable information they provided.

We follow with deep regret and concern yet another
escalation of violence in Idlib and other areas in north-
western Syria, as a result of intense air strikes that do
not discriminate between combatants and civilians.
Peru strongly condemns terrorism and believes that the
terrorist groups in Idlib and other areas of Syria must
be brought to justice. We also acknowledge the need
to safeguard Syria's sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity. However, we underscore that in no case does
that justify the commission of additional attacks on
civilians and medical facilities, medical personnel and
essential health infrastructure.

We underscore that such acts are flagrant violations
of international law and, because of their intentionality
and impact on civilians, can and should be classified as
war crimes. They are also a violation of the provisions of
various Security Council resolutions, such as resolution
2286 (2016). We therefore hope that such reprehensible
acts will be the subject of exhaustive investigations that
will identify and duly punish those responsible.

We are also alarmed that the upsurge in violence
appears to be exacerbating the extreme vulnerability
of millions of women and children in the area, which
leads us to highlight the responsibility of the Council
to protect them. We also emphasize the importance of
meeting the needs ofhundreds ofthousands ofinternally
displaced persons registered in recent months, mainly
from northern Hama and southern Idlib, who are in
precarious temporary shelters in areas close to the
Turkish border.

Given the delicate circumstances that bring us all
here today, we urge the Syrian Government and all
actors in the conflict to prevent further deterioration of
the situation and Idlib from again becoming a stage for
horror and destabilization, in particular when the lives
of millions of civilians are at stake. We underscore
that essentially that means preserving the ceasefire
brokered by Turkey and Russia last September and a
renewed commitment by all parties, and in particular
the Syrian Government, to the political settlement
process promoted by the United Nations, on the basis
of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex).

We believe that it is crucial that the Astana
guarantors and other countries with influence over the
Syrian Government and the opposition contribute to
that goal by fostering a climate of moderation, calm,
dialogue and commitment to peace and the future of the
country and its people.

