Mr. Carrera (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I am
pleased to be participating once again in a meeting of
the Security Council when Guatemala is 12 days from
concluding its tenure as an elected member for the
biennium 2011-2012.

Let me begin by thanking Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, Executive Director Yury Fedotov of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa
Said Djinnit for their respective briefings. We also
thank Ambassador Ge'rard Araud of France, President
of the Security Council for the month of December, for
his lucid concept note (S/2013/728, annex).

The concept note draws attention to the important
similarities shared by West Africa and Central America
as regions that are gravely affected as countries
of transit between the main markets of production
and consumption of illicit drugs. In the case of the
Mesoamerican territory, that involves 90 per cent of
the drugs that move from the South to the North of the
American continent. That situation of transit countries
has led to the proliferation of narco-trafficking
organizations, accompanied by much criminal violence
and especially violent homicides in our territory.
Fortunately, however, in the past three years Guatemala
has a chieved a significant reduction in homicides,
thanks to the strengthening of our security and justice
institutions.

Undoubtedly, the engine that drives the drug
trade is the same one at the global level, whether in
producing, consuming or transit countries, that is,
the immense profits generated by the trafficking in
narcotics. It must be said that the corrosive power of
major financial flows originates mainly in consuming
countries. Equally important is the flow of weapons
from consuming countries that pours into transit and
producing countries. That is Why it is no exaggeration
to say that arms trafficking and the illegal financial
flows from the North to the South are undermining the
foundations of democratic institutions, not only in West
Africa and the Sahel but, with to varying degrees, also
in our region.

To date, the response framework at the global
level has been based on a prohibitionist approach in
regard to the market for drugs. The principal strategy
of that framework entails repression and interdiction
through the criminal justice system. From Guatemala's
perspective, with the support of other countries in the
Latin American region and the rest of the world that
share the same view, we are seeking a new model to
address the global drug problem, one that is centred on
regulation, public health, reducing harm and seeking
the well-being of citizens, all based on respect for
human rights.

We need to move from partial and inefficient
responses towards an integrated response that provides
us with better results. To that end, we need to have
a broad discussion at the global level that aims to
find alternatives to the existing framework, which
unfortunately has failed to provide more and better
results. It was with that goal in mind that, in our western
hemisphere, the Declaration of Antigua, Guatemala, of
the General Assembly ofthe Organization of American
States, signed in June 2013, marked a milestone that
has served to officially establish an intergovernmental
debate on the drug problem in the Americas. That effort
continues to take root in regional forums such as the
Inter-American Drug Abuse Commission (CICAD) and
the Pan American Health Organization.

It is clear that cooperation is necessary to confront
the world drug problem - just as today's concept note
suggests and as stated in the presidential statement
issued by the Council on 21 February 2012 under
the presidency of Togo (S/PRST/20l3/2). We note
that there is broad interregional cooperaiton in West
Africa and the Sahel region, promoted especially by
the Economic Community of West African States. In
the Americas as well, we have numerous mechanisms
of intraregional cooperation under the aegis CICAD
and the Organization of American States. However, in
spite of the enormous commonalities between the two
regions in that matter, there is little or no cooperation
among different regions of the world. In our view, that
situation should be addressed because, for example,
West Africa and the Americas have much to learn from
each others' accumulated experiences through an open
dialogue. I should point out that such South-South
cooperation should be complemented by a healthy dose
of cooperation from the principal consuming countries.

In order to advance the interregional dialogue,
Guatemala has already expressed its readiness to support
the establishment of forums for dialogue between the
Americas and the countries of West Africa, with a view
to jointly identifying and developing new policies and
strategies to address the global drug problem.

We all agree that combating illicit drug trafficking
is a major challenge for all of humakind and one that
we must decisively address. The special session of
the General Assembly on the global drug problem,
mandated by the Assembly to be held in 2016, will
provide us an exceptional opportunity to hold such a
broad and open debate at the global level.

As I said at the beginning of my statement,
Guatemala will conclude its term as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council in a few days. I would
therefore like to take this opportunity to bid farewell
to members and to say that it has been a privilege to be
able to contribute to the noble and irreplaceable work
of the Council to maintain international peace and
security.

The Council has been criticized for its obvious
shortcomings, its inequitable composition and its
insufficiently transparent working methods. Many of
those criticisms are merited, and there is little doubt
that this organ needs to adapt to the new global realities.
We ourselves have formulated specific ideas on the
matter and expressed them in other instances. For now,
however, the Security Council is the only thing we have
in the multilateral setting to maintain international
order that. With all its imperfections, the Council has
succeeded in avoiding major global conflagrations and,
at the same time, has managed to mitigate and often
overcome conflicts of limited geographical scope.

It has been a source of profound satisfaction for my
country to be part of this organ for the very first time.
We trust that, in the not too distant future, we shall
return. We believe in all due modesty that we have made
a contribution to the collective work of the Council. We
leave enriched for the experience we have gained.

