Mr. Oyarzun Marehesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the presence in the Security Council
once again of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court. I would like to reiterate the firm commitment of
my country to the Court and to international criminal
justice, as well as its acknowledgement of the work of
the Prosecutor and the team at her Office.

More than a decade has gone by since the Council
referred the situation in Darfur to the Court in the light of
the serious allegations about the commission in Darfur
of the most serious international crimes. Eleven years
later no official has been tried, the conflict continues
and civilians continue to suffer the consequences of the
conflict; eleven years later there is still no justice in
Darfur. The Sudan must cooperate with the Court and
must comply with the mandate established in resolution
1593 (2005) in accordance with the obligations that
are imposed by the Charter of the United Nations as a
member of the Organization.

We are living in a world marked by conflict in which
violations of international humanitarian law, as well as
human rights abuses, happen without any consequence
for those responsible, where accountability is the
exception and where impunity for such acts shamefully
becomes commonplace. This should not be the case,
especially since never before have we had so many
means at our disposal in order to prevent it, including
the most extensive conventional network and the most
developed international justice system in our history.

The reality shows, however, that the means are not
enough when there is no political will in order to use
them. The International Criminal Court is a perfect
example of this. It is the best instrument against
impunity that the international community has ever
had but, in the case of Darfur, the lack of cooperation
on the part of many States, some of them State parties
to the Rome Statute, and the lack of support by the
Council has not allowed them to carry out its task. As
we have said on previous occasions, if only for the sake
of consistency, the Council needs to react. We must be
concerned by the message that we convey through our
persistent inaction in the light of non-compliance for
years with a resolution adopted under Chapter VII. On
11 occasions, the Court has brought to the knowledge
of this organ different cases of non-compliance in
relation to the situation in Darfur, and on 11 occasions
the Council has been unable notjust to adopt a decision,
but even to discuss the situation.

Let me refer to the latest of those notices. It was
received in December and it refers to the case of
Mr. Abdallah Banda. He is alleged to be responsible
for an attack against a contingent of the mission of the
African Union that, on 29 September 2007, resulted
in the deaths of 12 of its members. In October 2007,
the President of the Council condemned the attack,
calling for

"no effort [to] be spared so that the perpetrators
[may] be identified and brought to justice.
(S/PRST/2007/35)

There is not much left to be done except for Mr. Banda
to be found and tried as the alleged perpetrator of the
attack. The Council, in line with the comments made
by the representative of New Zealand, should at least
be consistent with regard to its own demands. In the
meanwhile, the Blue Helmets serving in the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) continue to lose their lives in Darfur.

The conflict in Darfur must end. Spain reiterates
its appeal to all parties to join the peace process in a
constructive spirit and with the determination of finding
a negotiated and inclusive political solution. While we
await peace, we would like to remind all parties of
their obligation to respect the norms of international
humanitarian law and to immediately put an end to
attacks against the civilian population.

We remind the Government of the Sudan of its
particular obligation to protect its population and,
once again, we call for the removal of all obstacles and
restrictions that prevent UNAMID from carrying out
its mandate, in particular with respect to protecting
the civilian population and guaranteeing humanitarian
assistance.

I would like to conclude by stating that impunity
is still a serious challenge and a threat for the peace
process and a threat to civilians, the majority of whom
are being denied the right to reparations. Those are
words that come from the latest report of the Secretary-
General, as well as the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission on UNAMID.

We call on the Council and all Member States,
whether they are part of the Rome Statute or not, to
cooperate to prevent a climate of impunity in Darfur
from continuing. We must understand that fighting
against impunity is also fighting against unlimited
violence and against wars without rules. It is defending
the dignity of people, which is mentioned in the
Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations. It is
preventing conflicts. And, in the end, it is fighting for
peace, because peace is not sustainable in the absence
ofjustice. There are not many reasons to be optimistic,
but we cannot abandon the struggle. That is why we
encourage Ms. Bensouda and her team to not yield in
their efforts. We must trust that some day the situation
will change and that some day her work will bear fruit
and bring justice to the victims of Darfur.

