Ms. Cavanagh (New Zealand): I thank the
President of the Council for convening today's debate;
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/43); and
Special Representative Haq for today's briefing and for
her tireless work towards a cause very dear to the
hearts of New Zealanders. I also extend a warm
welcome to the Timorese delegation, led by President
Ramos-Horta, a good friend to New Zealand and a
dedicated servant to his people over many decades. In
the interests of time, I shall read out a summary of the
statement we have circulated.

The Secretary-General's latest report paints a
positive picture of developments. While past
experience suggests a need for caution, all signs
suggest Timor-Leste is posed to step decisively
forward from a decade of conflict and fragility into one
of peace, development and growing self-reliance.
Three key issues demand our particular attention in the
year ahead.

First, facilitating stable, fair and credible
elections must be the top priority - and they seem to
be on track. New Zealand was pleased to host Timorese
electoral officials to observe our own elections in
November last year. We are now considering the best
framework for providing observers to the upcoming
elections in Timor-Leste.

Secondly, we must make good use of the time
remaining to the Mission to consolidate gains made
and to prepare the ground for the transfer of residual
tasks and responsibilities to national and international
partners.

Progress has been made in strengthening security,
justice and corrections capacities and core governance
and accountability mechanisms. But international
support is likely to be necessary long after the
departure of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT). In that regard, New Zealand
looks forward to working closely with Timor-Leste on
community policing.

Similarly, consolidating transparent, democratic
governance, tackling poverty, generating employment
and achieving sustainable and inclusive growth are
inter-generational challenges. Moreover, the
Government and people of Timor-Leste are still
grappling with how best to resolve outstanding issues
and allegations arising from the crises of 1999 and
2006.

We hope that further progress will be possible in
all of those areas during the time remaining to the
Mission. But careful planning to transfer key aspects of
any unfinished business to national and international
partners is important. As a long-term bilateral partner,
New Zealand is committed to playing its part. We hope
to soon finalize with the Government of Timor-Leste a
strategic framework for our bilateral programme.

Thirdly, we must ensure careful coordination
during the transition process among all relevant
stakeholders. New Zealand has been impressed by the
energy and effort invested in UNMIT's transition
planning to date, and by the spirit of partnership with
which the Mission and the Timorese Government have
approached the task. In the next phase of its
implementation, engagement with other international
partners will be crucial. This morning's Member States
consultation was a welcome development.

If events over the coming months proceed as we
hope and expect, then we appear to be on track for
UNMIT's smooth drawdown and withdrawal by the
end of 2012. At the same time, the Mission must retain
sufficient flexibility to respond to unexpected
challenges or developments.

New Zealand supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation to extend UNMIT's mandate for a
further nine months, and for the drawdown of its
civilian and uniformed personnel. It is essential that the
drawdown be carefully managed and proceed in line
with security conditions on the ground.

Attention is turning to what will replace UNMIT
following its departure. Decisions on a post-UNMIT
12-23800

United Nations presence should be determined in line
with identified needs and national priorities for
assistance. It is ultimately for the Government that
emerges from Timor-Leste's upcoming elections to
articulate those.

Identifying a suitable framework for facilitating
continued international engagement and effective
coordination will be crucial, whether through
continued Security Council oversight, the framework
of a United Nations political mission or the leadership
of a United Nations Development Programme Resident
Coordinator. To be most effective, the model chosen
must be a genuine United Nations presence, effectively
delivering as one, with a mix of expertise and
capacities tailored to Timor-Leste's priorities and
needs.

The year 2012 is shaping up as a historic year for
this proud country. Successful elections and the smooth
withdrawal of UNMIT would a suitable way for Timor-
Leste to mark its tenth year of independence and to cap
what has been a decade of remarkable progress.

New Zealand pays tribute to the tireless effort
and commitment of United Nations personnel over the
past decade; to the steadfast support of Timor-Leste's
many friends and partners in the international
community; and above all, to the vision, courage and
determination of the people and Government of Timor-
Leste, all of which have made that possible.

New Zealand is proud to have played its own part
in those efforts and remains a committed partner and
loyal friend to Timor-Leste as it steps forward with
confidence and hope towards a brighter future.

