Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): Mr. President, my
delegation wishes to join others in thanking you for
convening this open meeting of the Council to brief
Member States on the review of and progress in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), which is of
concern to us.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by Cambodia on behalf of the members of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations. Moreover,
my delegation wishes to draw the Council's attention to
the declaration of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC) adopted recently at the special
session of the Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers,
on terrorism, held in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia from
lto 3 April, 2002. That declaration will be formally
communicated to you, Sir, as President of the Security
Council, by Mali, the current Chairman of the OIC.
However, as host of the meeting, Malaysia deems it
appropriate to highlight some of the salient points of
that declaration.

In the declaration, the Foreign Ministers stated
their resolve to combat terrorism and to respond to
developments affecting Muslims and Islamic countries
in the aftermath of the 11 September attacks. They
rejected any attempt to link Islam and Muslims to
terrorism, as terrorism has no association with any
religion, civilization or nationality. They reiterated that
preventive action taken to combat terrorism should not
result in ethnic or religious profiling or in the targeting
of a particular community. They condemned acts of
international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, including State terrorism, irrespective
of its motives, its perpetrators or its victims, as
terrorism poses a serious threat to international peace
and security and is a grave violation of human rights.

The ministers further reiterated the OIC's
principled position, under international law and the
Charter of the United Nations, on the legitimacy of
resistance to foreign aggression and of the struggle of
peoples under colonial or alien domination and foreign
occupation for national liberation and self-
determination. In that context, they underlined the
urgent need for an internationally agreed definition of
terrorism that differentiates such legitimate struggles
from acts of terrorism.

The Ministers also emphasized the importance of
addressing the root causes of international terrorism,
convinced that the war against terrorism will not
succeed if the environment that breeds terrorism,
including foreign occupation, injustice and exclusion,
is allowed to thrive. They also reaffirmed the OIC's
commitment to international action in combating
international terrorism undertaken in conformity with
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
including the principles of non-intervention in internal
affairs and respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity, as well as with international law and the
relevant international conventions and instruments. In
that regard, they further rejected any unilateral action
taken against any Islamic country on the pretext of
combating international terrorism, as that would
undermine global cooperation against terrorism. They
reiterated the call to convene an international
conference under the auspices of the United Nations to
formulate a joint, organized response of the
international community to terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations.

The special session of the Islamic Conference of
Foreign Ministers, on terrorism, held in Kuala Lumpur
also saw the reaffirmation of the commitment of OIC
members to take action at the national level and
through international cooperation in combating
terrorism through a plan of action. This plan of action
prescribed the establishment of a 13-member, open-
ended, ministerial-level OIC committee on
international terrorism with the mandate to formulate
recommendations on the following matters: measures
to strengthen OIC cooperation and coordination in
combating international terrorism; ways of expediting
the implementation of the OIC Code of Conduct and
the Convention on Combating International Terrorism;
measures to project the true image of Islam, including
through seminars and workshops, to promote a better
understanding of Islam and its principles; measures to
strengthen dialogue and understanding among different
civilizations, cultures and faiths, for instance, building
on initiatives such as the United Nations dialogue
among civilizations and the OIC-European-Union Joint
Forum on civilization and harmony; and other
measures in response to developments affecting
Muslims and Islam arising from action to combat
terrorism. The committee is mandated to study the
work of other international organizations in matters
related to international terrorism and to contribute to
the work of the OIC group in New York in that regard.

The Foreign Ministers also stated that the OIC
will continue to work with other countries and support
the efforts of the international community in combating
international terrorism undertaken under the auspices
of the United Nations in a transparent and impartial
manner and in conformity with the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and
relevant international conventions and instruments.
That includes implementing relevant Security Council
resolutions, particularly resolution 1373 (2001), as well
expediting Member States' accession to or ratification
of international conventions and protocols relating to
terrorism.

The ministers reaffirmed that the OIC will
undertake efforts towards convening an international
conference under the auspices of the United Nations to
formulate a joint organized international-community
response to terrorism. It will also make every effort at
the international level to promote a collective security
regime responding to the security and development
needs of all countries and to promote a conducive
political, socio-economic environment that will stifle
support for terrorist activities and eliminate the causes
of terrorist acts. The ministers agreed that, at the
national level, OIC member States will continue to
pursue policies and strategies aimed at enhancing the
well-being and prosperity of our peoples, as well as at
addressing and resolving domestic factors that
contribute to terrorism.

