Mr. Bermude (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
once again express our appreciation for the presence
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
Ms. Fatouh Bensouda. We welcome the presentation of
the fourteenth report of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) on the situation in Libya pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011). Uruguay reiterates its full support for the
work of the International Criminal Court, as well as for
the role played by Ms. Bensouda in prosecuting those
responsible for the most serious crimes, as defined in
article 5 of the Rome Statute.

Uruguay considers the fight against crimes
against humanity, war crimes, genocide and crimes of
aggression perpetrated against the rights ofmen, women
and children to be of the utmost importance. The ICC
serves as a landmark in the international community's
fight against impunity and the commission of the most
serious crimes against human beings, which violate
their integrity as well as their rights.

The development of international awareness of the
need to put an end to atrocities against human beings,
whether individual or mass atrocities, and to maintain
peace and security were the reason for the creation of
the International Criminal Court. The importance of its
establishment and the mission entrusted to it require
us to support every action aimed at improving the
management of the ICC. In that regard, we remind States
Parties to the Rome Statute of the need to cooperate
with the Court so that it can perform its duties.

Moreover, we believe that it is essential to raise
awareness of the importance of the ICC, and States
must therefore accede to and ratify the Rome Statute,
as well as its amendments. The ICC is a Court that
was only recently created and which requires all of the
support that States are able to provide in discharging its
mission. That should be done through cooperation and
by providing information, complying with its requests,
understanding its processes and ensuring that they are
adequately carried out and completed.

In that context, it is important to strengthen the role
of the International Criminal Court as an international
adjudicating body for the prosecution of the crimes
listed in article 5 of the Rome Statute. Accountability
for the perpetration of such serious crimes, regardless of
by whom or where they are committed, must continue to
be a priority objective for States and the Council alike.

We encourage States Members of the United
Nations that are not yet parties to the Rome Statute to
accede to it, with a view to making progress in the fight
against impunity and to defending all inhabitants of the
planet against these heinous crimes, which represent a
serious threat to peace and security.

It is important, in this context, to strengthen the
role of the International Criminal Court as a mechanism
for rendering justice when national courts are incapable
of doing so.

With regard to Libya, regrettably, since the
previous report of the Prosecutor, there have been no
promising signs, except for the fresh momentum given
by the United Nations to the political process and
national reconciliation in the country. The Government
of National Accord continues to see its authority
challenged at the national level, and the blockade
imposed by the House of Representatives in Tobruk
has prevented the provisions of the Libyan Political
Agreement from being fully implemented.

The many challenges facing Libya six years after
its civil war require quick and effective responses from
its new authorities. They are dealing with the threat
of Islamic terrorism, a migratory crisis that affects
hundreds of thousands of people, a humanitarian
emergency and a very difficult economic situation,
among other serious problems. In this context, it
is necessary to work towards the reunification and
reconciliation of the country in order to prevent further
bloodshed among its population and to put an end to
the institutional crisis and military conflict that have
plagued the country since 2011.

We must also make progress towards the objective
ofa genuine democratic transition and lasting peace and
stability as a sustainable foundation in order to more
effectively investigate the atrocities committed in the
country, while avoiding further widespread violence
and impunity. We trust that the new Libyan authorities,
to the extent that they can consolidate their power and
gradually extend their authority throughout the entire
territory, will fulfil their commitment to render justice
for the victims of these crimes and cooperate with
the Office of the Prosecutor in future to identify the
perpetrators and facilitate their surrender to the Court
for prosecution.

We urge the Government of National Accord to
surrender Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the Court and
ensure atrial with all guarantees forAbdullah Al-Senussi
and other individuals who allegedly committed war
crimes and crimes against humanity before, during
and after the civil war that broke out in 2011, including
Al-Tuhami Khaled and Mustafa Al-Werfalli, for whom
arrest warrants were issued this year.

It bears noting that, in the most recent reports, there
has been a focus on abuses committed against refugees
and migrants in Libya, including acts of sexual violence
and crimes against minors during their detention in
inhuman conditions. We are concerned by the fact that,
after having identified during her previous appearance
investigations in Libya as one of the priorities for 2017,
the Office of the Prosecutor continues to face budget
difficulties in carrying out this objective. We therefore
support her request for the resources necessary for her
to properly fulfil her mandate in a timely manner, and
we also call on those States parties that are able do so
to provide the required funding.

In conclusion, Uruguay reiterates its recognition
of the work of the Prosecutor as reflected in her
statements on the crimes committed in Libya. They
will definitely help to strengthen the rule of law and
bring about a more just and inclusive Libyan society in
which the rights and guarantees of all of its inhabitants
are fully respected.

