The President: I thank Mr. Guehenno for his
statement.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recognizes the vital
role that United Nations peacekeeping operations
have played for decades in bringing peace and
stability to countries emerging from war. The
Council further recognizes that, with few
exceptions, the women and men who serve in
United Nations peacekeeping operations do so
with the utmost professionalism and dedication,
and in some cases they make the ultimate
sacrifice.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned
with the allegations of sexual misconduct by
United Nations peacekeeping personnel. The
distinguished and honourable record of
accomplishment in United Nations peacekeeping
is being tarnished by the acts of a few
individuals.

"The Security Council condemns, in the
strongest terms, all acts of sexual abuse and
exploitation committed by United Nations
peacekeeping personnel. The Council reiterates
that sexual exploitation and abuse are
unacceptable and have a detrimental effect on the
fulfilment of mission mandates.

"The Security Council, while confirming
that the conduct and discipline of troops is
primarily the responsibility of troop-contributing
countries, recognizes the shared responsibility of
the Secretary-General and all Member States to
take every measure within their purview to
prevent sexual exploitation and abuse by all
categories of personnel in United Nations
peacekeeping missions to enforce United Nations
standards of conduct in that regard. The Security
Council reiterates the importance of ensuring that
sexual exploitation and abuse are properly
investigated and appropriately punished.

"The Security Council underlines that the
provision of an environment in which sexual
exploitation and abuse are not tolerated is
primarily the responsibility of managers and
commanders.

"The Security Council welcomes the
comprehensive report on sexual exploitation and
abuse by United Nations peacekeeping personnel
(A/59/7lO) prepared by the Secretary-General's
Adviser on this issue, His Royal Highness Prince
Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein, Permanent
Representative of the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan to the United Nations. The Council also
welcomes the report of the resumed session of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping
(A/59/19/Add.l).

"The Security Council urges the Secretary-
General and troop-contributing countries to
ensure that the recommendations of the Special
Committee that fall within their respective
responsibilities are implemented without delay.

"The Security Council will consider
including relevant provisions for prevention,
monitoring, investigation and reporting of
misconduct cases in its resolutions establishing
new mandates or renewing existing mandates. In
this regard, the Security Council calls on the
Secretary-General to include, in his regular
reporting of peacekeeping missions, a summary
of the preventative measures taken to implement
a zero-tolerance policy and of the outcome of
actions taken against personnel found culpable of
sexual exploitation and abuse."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2005/21.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.
