Mr. Akram (Pakistan): The people and the
Government of Pakistan today mourn the sad demise of
President Yasser Arafat, the noble leader of a noble
struggle - an epic struggle, against impossible odds,
for self-determination and national liberation. Pakistan
has declared three days of national mourning to mark
the passing of this man, who, more than any other,
symbolized the just aspirations and the unjust suffering
of the Palestinian people.

Pakistan is confident that, inspired by the legacy
of Yasser Arafat, the Palestinian people will realize
their aspirations sooner rather than later, ending
foreign military occupation and creating a free,
sovereign and viable Palestinian State in Palestine.

Mr. President, I would also like to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation for the
effective manner in which you are guiding the Security
Council during this important month and the equally
skilful way in which your predecessor, Ambassador
Emyr Jones Parry, discharged his responsibilities
during the British presidency.

I would like to welcome the presence of
Mr. Mladan Ivanovic, the Foreign Minister of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and I take this opportunity to once
again express our fraternal sentiments towards his
country and his people.

I wish also to welcome Lord Paddy Ashdown, the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, once
again to the Council and to thank him for his very
informative briefing.

Pakistan appreciates the considerable progress
that has been made by Bosnia and Herzegovina
towards the objective of becoming, as Lord Ashdown
has stated, a peaceful, viable State on course to
European integration. This is in large measure due to
the resilient and resourceful people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as well as to the sustained commitment of
the international community. We also appreciate the
efforts of the Stabilization Force (SFOR), under NATO
command, in providing security assistance in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, following the role played by the
United Nations Protection Force, in which Pakistan
was proud to have played a part. We hope that the
European-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR), which will
take over from SFOR, will complete the stabilization
process in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Pakistan appreciates the achievements made by
the Office of the High Representative in promoting the
rule of law, strengthening the institutions of justice,
carrying out reforms in the security and intelligence
sectors, and instituting fiscal and economic reforms.

We also take note of Lord Ashdown's intention to
continue his efforts to assist in improving the operation
and effectiveness of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
governing institutions in promoting human rights and
national reconciliation.

We are especially heartened to note that the
historic bridge in Mostar, destroyed during the war, has
now been rebuilt. Moves are also being made to rebuild
political and social bridges in that divided city, which
once epitomized the tragedy that had befallen Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Similarly, we are pleased to note that progress has
been made by the Srebrenica Commission to address
the issues of truth and justice for the 8,000 innocent
Bosnian Muslims who were massacred in that town by
extremist forces.

In spite of those achievements, several hurdles
stand in the way of national integration: parallel
structures and the intransigence of a number of what
Lord Ashdown has described as "obscurantist
elements" in the Republika Srpska, including those
who continue to harbour and support known war
criminals such as Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic.

The issues of justice and national reconciliation
remain fundamental to Bosnia's future as a peaceful,
stable and unified nation-State. Economic development
is essential for sustainable peace. We appreciate the
fiscal reforms being carried out by the Office of the
High Representative aimed at creating a single
economic space in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but these
reforms need to be supported by sustained foreign
assistance and investment.

In Bosnia, as in the European Union itself,
political integration is predicated on economic growth
and cooperation. We hope that the pull of Europe,
which Bosnia is continuing to experience, will become
stronger, and it will if it is accompanied by generous
economic and reconstruction support from Europe.

Pakistan, which has ties of fraternity with Bosnia
and Herzegovina, will continue to extend its
cooperation, within its means, as agreed during the
Visit of President Sulejman Tihic' of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to Pakistan in August this year.

We are deeply committed to the goals of peace,
harmony and prosperity in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and to its emergence as a modern State and a success
story for the United Nations and for the international
community.

