Mr. Ducaru (Romania): It is my great pleasure to
congratulate you, Ambassador Said Ben Mustapha, on
taking over the presidency of the Security Council, and
to warmly welcome this initiative to continue the
practice of broader debates open to States that are not
members of the Council. In the same spirit, I would
like to extend warm congratulations to Ambassador
Kishore Mahbubani of Singapore on the dynamic and
efficient manner in which he managed the work of the
Security Council during the month of January.

I would also like to commend the wise choice of
an issue which goes to the core of the United Nations,
namely, that of peace-building, and to say that we
appreciate the value ofthe policy papers with which we
were provided by the presidency.

While we associated ourselves with the European
Union statement on this matter, we would like to add
some considerations inspired by our own experience.

We all have a common agenda: to make sure that
the world is safer, that new conflicts are prevented and
that existing conflicts are contained and brought to a
negotiated settlement. Romania shares the vision,
expressed in the United Nations documents before us
and highlighted by Secretary-General Kofi Annan this
morning, that the concept of peace-building does not
apply only to post-conflict situations but covers a
continuum which links conflict prevention,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and post-conflict
rehabilitation. That is why an integrated approach is
required in this respect - an approach that enables the
international community to cope with the deepest
causes of conflicts, which often lie in the deficit of
democracy and in underdevelopment.

Romania started its current Chairmanship-in-
Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) from the following
premise: the security relationship between the United
Nations and Europe has become more knotted than
ever before. What is new in Europe is the emergence of
a variety of actual and potential conflict situations that
require full cooperation and a shared sense of purpose
and of direction among the main organizations and
institutions actively playing a role in the European
area. The involvement of the United Nations in a
continent that boasts the most sophisticated security
alliance in history might seem paradoxical. Yet this
decade has taught us that security can be jeopardized in
many ways short of military attack, and preserving it
requires more than military capabilities. The United
Nations offers tools and experience in conflict
prevention and post-conflict peace-building that are of
great relevance for European needs today. At the same
time, many of Europe's security institutions, starting
with the OSCE, may provide best practices for the
United Nations itself and for other regions. The idea of
a coordinating meeting bringing together the
executives representing the United Nations, the OSCE,
the European Union, the Council of Europe and the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, for example, on
the theme of lessons learned in Balkans could be
instrumental in order to enhance complementarity and
synergy for greater coherence in policies and to
develop effective networking, communication and
information flows among them.

What we need is a comprehensive approach that
takes all policies into account. Allow me in this respect
to mention some priorities that could, in our view, be
seen in their entirety as important guidelines for
concrete exercises on peace-building.

The first priority is to keep the human dimension
ever on top, including the protection of national and
other minorities, the elimination of any kind of
discrimination, coping with new threats- such as
organized crime, trafficking in human beings and
children in armed conflict- and the integration of
refugees and displaced persons. Consequently, respect
for human rights must be seen as a permanent and
crucial dimension of any peace-building effort.

The second priority is to properly address the
economic and environmental issues which are often the
underlying reason for political instability. Any peace-
building endeavour should start by identifying potential
economic or environmental trouble spots and, on this
basis, should continue by mobilizing States and other
national or transnational actors to take the appropriate
steps. In this respect, proper data, expert advice and
unbiased views coming from any organization with
competence in this area are welcome and should
complement each other.

The third priority is to increase cooperation with
non-governmental organizations. Their capabilities,
mostly in terms of human resources, and the dedication
of their staff often fill the gap between abstract
political tasks set by the political and economic
international organizations and the needs of real people
in the field, who are so often paying the largest share of
the toll of conflicts triggered by their leaders'
ambitions.

The fourth priority is to approach any local
conflict from a broader regional and international
perspective. Each conflict is unique and raises unique
problems; there are, however, regional conditions that
none can ignore. Only a regional perspective can
ensure the much-needed integrated and consistent
approach to peace-building activities.

The fifth priority is to promote proactive and
preventive diplomacy. One cannot repeat enough that
prevention is cheaper than cure. As seen in the
Balkans, Caucasus or elsewhere, most current conflicts
have long historical roots. While trying to build peace
for today, we should avoid sowing the seeds of future
conflicts or wars.

