Mr. M'Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina, for his presentation. His briefing
underscores the ongoing political impasse in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the little progress that has been
made in terms of the reforms necessary for promoting
development in the country and shaping a multi-ethnic
Bosnian society.

Togo regrets that no tangible progress has been
made on the five objectives and the two conditions for
the closure ofthe Office ofthe High Representative and
the revision of the country's Constitution. Moreover,
when it comes to numerous other areas, the political
parties sharing power in Bosnia and Herzegovina
are struggling to reach an agreement on reforms to
help the country move ahead. The report of the High
Representative (S/2013/646, annex) notably points out
that, as a result of the ongoing paralysis in Parliament,
no new legislation was adopted during the period under
review.

However, in 2012 the Bosnian authorities committed
to implementing the country's Constitution along with
the recommendations made by the European Court of
Human Rights in order to end political discrimination
against minorities. It is essential that those reforms be
launched before general elections in October 2014.

That is a worrying situation for the international
community, which has made significant efforts to bring
peace and stability to this country, as well as to the
Bosnian people. The demonstrations that took place
in June related to the failure to issue of identifiction
numbers for newborns, a situation resulting from a
dispute between the Federation and the Republika
Srpska on the implementation of a decision by the
Constitutional Court, point to the disquiet of the people
at the procrastination of their leaders in terms of
building tha central State.

We remain concerned by statements and defiant
actions on the part of political leaders of the Republika
Srpska in terms of central State institutions, which
undermine national cohesion. Togo criticizes such an
attitude, which seeks to block the decision-making
process of the central State and weakens the country
when it comes to the possibility of partition.

In spite of all sorts of obstacles, the report indicates
that in October, for the first time in 22 years, Bosnia
and Herzegovina carried out a population census. We
hope the main aim of the census was not to establish
a balance of power between the various communities
or to reopen old wounds that have barely healed but,
rather, to implement a reliable system of statistics to
help plan and guide public policy.

While Bosnia and Herzegovina's neighbours are
progressing towards European integration, Bosnian
political leaders have no choice but to meet the
expectations of their people by tackling the challenges
of national development and shaping a truly functional,
multiethnic State, as stipulated in the Dayton Accords.
In that regard, Bosnia and Herzegovina should draw on
the positive aspects of its different peoples, rather than
trying to deny the existence of one group or another.
It is essential that all Bosnian political stakeholders
overcome their differences in order to fully join in that
vision. Only then will they be able to undertake a full
set of reforms that will allow Bosnia and Herzegovina
to make progress towards joining the European Union,
allowing its institutions to function more effectively in
order to ensure peace and development in that country.

We call on countries neighbouring Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which have historic ties with different
communities, to work constructively towards the
unity of the Bosnian State. However, it remains the
responsibility of the main political leaders in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to shoulder their responsibilities and
to take the initiative of forging harmonious coexistence
among the various ethnic groups.

At this stage, the political situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina still requires the support and assistance of
the international community. That is why my country
stiII considers the international presence necessary, in
accordance with the Dayton Agreement.

I would like to reiterate Togo's support for the
efforts of the High Representative during his mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as for the civilian
and military personnel, in particular those working
for the European Union Force-Operation Althea, who
are striving to ensure that parties abide by the Dayton
Agreement and working for the stability of the country.

