We congratulate Germany on assuming the presidency of the Security Council and thank it for organizing today's timely debate on the important issue of pandemic and security. Following the Ebola outbreak, the Security Council pronounced in resolution 2177 (2014) that pandemics constitute a grave threat to international peace and security. They not only undermine the political, social and economic stability of the most affected countries, but also vitiate the overall security environment, becoming drivers of instability in the concerned regions and beyond. Unlike Ebola, however, which was contained within a region, coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has proved to be much more infectious, spreading exponentially all over the world and posing a threat to the lives and livelihoods of all nations of the world. While the virus does not discriminate between rich and poor, it has nevertheless disproportionally affected the most vulnerable, including the elderly, handicapped persons and such displaced people as refugees and migrants, as well as those living in conflict zones and under foreign occupation. In more ways than one, this pandemic has shown that in today's interconnected world, no one is safe until everyone is safe. At the same time, it has also reinforced the idea that without coordinated international efforts to contain the virus and mitigate its multifaceted impacts, we cannot win the fight against this pandemic. As COVID-19 rages through the world, two different streams of response have emerged. On the one hand, we have seen a rise in international solidarity and cooperation. The United Nations and other international organizations, including international financial institutions and several States Members of the United Nations, have stepped up relief efforts to help the most affected countries. Medical expertise, essential life-saving and protective supplies, scientific research and public-health data are being shared despite disruptions in the global supply chain and political tensions. The calls for financial assistance within countries and internationally have met with a positive response. Initiatives like debt relief for developing countries have seen widespread support, although much more is needed to address the monumental health, economic and social challenges of developing countries. On the other hand, the COVID-19 pandemic has also exacerbated tensions between major Powers and brought about a sharp spike in their rivalry. A blame game on the origins of virus, increased polarization and reliance on populist narratives have exposed fissures in the global response, at the cost of solidarity, humanism and multilateralism. One example of these divisions is the lacklustre response to the Secretary- General's timely and well-intended call for a global ceasefire. In many conflict zones around the world, there has been no real reduction in violence. Instead, some States have taken advantage of the situation and tried to consolidate their illegal occupations of foreign and disputed territories. In occupied Jammu and Kashmir, India has callously exploited the COVID-19 crisis to further advance its unlawful occupation. For over 10 months, the Kashmiris have faced crippling restrictions on civil liberties and unrelenting human rights abuses at the hands of Indian forces. The coronavirus has now condemned them to a double lockdown, bringing them to the precipice of a vast human tragedy. The prolonged lockdown in occupied Jammu and Kashmir had already depleted essential medical supplies in hospitals, turning them into graveyards. Now with the coronavirus spreading rapidly, they are entirely incapable of meeting the public-health crisis. Today, Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir is the world's most militarized zone, with 900,000 Indian troops suppressing 8 million Kashmiris, and there is only one doctor for every 4,000 Kashmiris. While the world's attention is focused on the virus, India has taken advantage of the situation by implementing additional steps to consolidate its occupation. Besides the extended lockdown and a communications blackout, India has introduced a new domicile rule to engineer a demographic change in Kashmir with a view to transforming it from a Muslim-majority State to a Hindu-majority territory. These measures are in direct contravention of relevant Security Council resolutions and international law, in particular the Fourth Geneva Convention. Hundreds of senior Kashmiri political leaders and thousands of young men, including human rights defenders and journalists have been arbitrarily detained and incarcerated to stifle the call for azadi - freedom - and suppress their legitimate struggle for their right to self-determination. Peaceful protesters, including children as young as four years of age, have been blinded by pellet guns. Women and girls have been dishonoured and threatened with rape and violence, hundreds have been killed in extrajudicial executions, and whole neighbourhoods have been destroyed as a form of collective punishment. The Security Council has a primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. It cannot afford inaction and appeasement in the face of open aggression and atrocities against an occupied people. The Council must denounce India's illegal actions in occupied Jammu and Kashmir and take urgent actions to rein in its fascist ambitions, which are putting enormous strain on the peace and security of our region and beyond. In this regard, the Council must urge India to, first, immediately lift the continuing military siege in occupied Jammu and Kashmir and rescind the illegal and unilateral actions undertaken since 5 August 2019; secondly, remove restrictions on communication, movement and peaceful assembly in Kashmir and restore Internet access so that people can get accurate and reliable information relating to the pandemic; thirdly, allow access to international human rights and humanitarian organizations so that relief efforts may be undertaken in Kashmir; fourthly immediately release arbitrarily detained and incarcerated Kashmiri political leaders and allow them to express wishes of the Kashmiri people; fifthly, freeze and reverse new domicile rules designed to change the demographic composition of Kashmir; sixthly, remove draconian laws that enable Indian occupying forces to commit human rights violations with impunity; and finally, protect the Muslim minority in India from apartheid-like segregation and oppression. These actions are urgently needed not just to calm the tensions in our region, but also to protect the credibility of the Security Council and the continued efficacy of the United Nations in matters related to peace and security.
