Ms. Inoguchi (Japan): At the outset, as the
Permanent Representative and head of the delegation
of Japan to the Conference on Disarmament at Geneva,
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to you, Mr.
President, on behalf of my Government, for inviting us
to participate in the Security Council's deliberations on
the issue of small arms, an increasingly important item
on the disarmament agenda. It is my great honour to
address this body, which has primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security. I
would also like to express my utmost appreciation to
Secretary-General Kofi Annan and to Under-Secretary-
General Jayantha Dhanapala and his office for issuing a
substantive and comprehensive report on this issue.

Numbers speak for themselves. Small arms and
light weapons kill more than 500,000 people every
year. The excessive accumulation of such weapons is a
particularly dangerous destabilizing factor in post-
conflict situations, as it disrupts humanitarian aid
operations and hinders rehabilitation and
reconstruction efforts. The excessive accumulation of
such weapons can also rekindle conflicts and thus
undermine efforts for peace and stability.

The events of 11 September 2001 showed another
dimension of the issue of small arms. Those are the
weapons that various terrorist groups around the world
use most frequently. The elimination of the supply of
weapons, including small arms, to terrorists, as called
for in Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), is an
essential element in the global fight against terrorism.

The problems of small arms and light weapons
are multidimensional and interlinked. I cannot fail to
note that there is also a gender element involved. One
of the extraordinary aspects of contemporary wars and
conflicts is the large proportion of non-combatants
among the victims. As a matter of fact, the greatest
number of conflict-related deaths of women and
children are caused by small arms. Restraining and
curbing the problems of small arms and light weapons
is a matter of urgent priority for the entire international
community.

The United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, held in July 2001, adopted a Programme of
Action that represents the collective will of the
international community to address these problems.
That outcome of the Conference was further
consolidated with the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 56/24 V, on small arms and light weapons,
the draft of which was submitted jointly by Colombia,
South Africa and Japan in October 2001. That
resolution called upon all States to implement the
Programme of Action and decided to convene a
conference, no later than 2006, to review progress
made in its implementation. The consensus adoption of
that important resolution demonstrates global solidarity
in addressing the issue of small arms and light
weapons.
The resolution also decided to hold biennial
meetings of States, the first of which will take place
next year. The purpose of that meeting is to provide an
opportunity for States and other international actors,
including non-governmental organizations, to share
experiences and lessons learned in the implementation
of the Programme of Action. Such exchanges will
allow them to address their problems more effectively
and efficiently.

Japan, as a country steadfastly committed to
tackling the issue of small arms, attaches great
importance to the global implementation of the
Programme of Action. In January we organized a
meeting to follow up on the United Nations
Conference. We are also planning to hold a seminar
with the participation of Pacific countries to facilitate
their implementation of the Programme of Action. I
would like to take this opportunity to remind all
delegations that, since Japan would like to play a
meaningful, if modest, role at the 2003 meeting, it has
already announced its candidacy for the chairmanship
of that meeting.

The Programme of Action comprises two
categories of measures: prevention of the excessive
accumulation of small arms and the reduction of such
accumulations. With regard to prevention, a Group of
Governmental Experts has been established to examine
the feasibility of developing an international
instrument to enable States to identify, trace and
disrupt illegal supply lines. The report of the Secretary-
General calls upon Member States to support such
meaningful exercises. As a member of that Group,
Japan will continue to actively contribute to it.

The Programme of Action also calls for the
effective implementation of arms embargoes decided
by the Security Council. Monitoring arrangements are
also in place to ensure the effective enforcement of
embargoes. Japan supports the recommendation of the
report of the Secretary-General that the use of a
combination of those measures should be further
enhanced.

With regard to the reduction of excessive
accumulations of small arms and light weapons, the
Programme of Action stresses the importance of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
of ex-combatants. In that regard, the Programme calls
upon affected countries to develop DDR projects, while
also calling for international assistance and cooperation
in support of such projects. Further, the inclusion of
DDR in the mandates of peacekeeping operations,
where appropriate, deserves the serious attention of the
Security Council.

Japan will continue to implement appropriate
weapons for development projects in cooperation with
other Governments, international, regional and non-
governmental organizations. Japan has also recently
begun a joint research programme with the United
Nations Institute for Disarmament Research on arms
collection projects in Albania, Cambodia, Congo, Mali
and Papua New Guinea. That research will be
completed no later than 2004, and we are confident that
it will provide the international community with
valuable lessons learned from the experiences of those
affected countries.

The role of the United Nations is increasingly
important in following up last year's United Nations
Conference. The Coordinating Action on Small Arms
mechanism is already harmonizing the response of the
United Nations. Japan commends the initiative taken
by the Secretary-General in establishing the small arms
advisory service, which will greatly enhance United
Nations efforts in that area.

I would like to touch upon the significant
achievement of the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms and the United Nations
standardized instrument for reporting military
expenditures. They are valuable international means for
promoting transparency in armaments and international
confidence-building. This year, the United Nations
Register of Conventional Arms is celebrating its tenth
anniversary. Currently, 120 Governments are
submitting their official data on the transfer of arms. In
order to promote the universality of the Register, Japan
has been co-organizing, with Canada, Germany, the
Netherlands and the United Nations, a series of
regional workshops in several countries, including
Ghana and Namibia. A similar seminar is planned to
take place in Indonesia next February.

The trust fund established in the Department for
Disarmament Affairs has supported several United
Nations activities, such as the study of the problems
related to small arms and light weapons, public
awareness programmes and the dispatch of fact-finding
missions to affected countries. Japan has thus far
contributed $2.16 million to the Fund.

Finally, I would like to stress the importance of
addressing the root causes of violence, armed conflicts,
instability and other threats to international peace and
security. In order to prevent the resurgence of conflicts
and to foster durable peace and stability in post-
conflict situations, it is important to accelerate the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants. But it is equally important to promote
economic and social development, democratization and
reconciliation among the parties to a conflict. That
approach will help to ensure a fundamental, long-term
and comprehensive solution to security problems in
volatile areas. I believe that it is an approach the
international community must take in order to
consolidate peace and stability around the world in the
twenty-first century.

