Mrs. Shwalger (New Zealand): New Zealand
too thanks Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Yamamoto for his dedication to delivering
on the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, particularly in such a difficult
operating environment.

The year 2016 has seen its share of ups and downs
for Afghanistan. As we have heard this morning,
the Taliban's offensive has intensified over the past
year, with armed clashes at record levels. The cost
of weathering this storm has been considerable. The
Afghan economy has faced severe challenges in 2016,
including a significant drop in investment. A sharp
increase in the number of internally displaced persons,
resulting from ongoing insecurity, and a large increase
in returnees from Pakistan will place additional stress
on the already challenging humanitarian situation.
September marked the two-year anniversary of
the National Unity Government. Efforts over the past
few months to provide a more united leadership have
been welcome, but divisions within the Government
remain evident, as witnessed by the Parliament's recent
dismissal of seven ministers.

The conclusion of a peace agreement with Hezb-
i-Islami also represented a positive, if modest, step
towards long-term peace and reconciliation. However,
prospects for peace talks with the Taliban appear to
have dimmed in the near term.

On a more positive note, we welcome the
international community's recommitment of support to
Afghanistan for another four years at the NATO Warsaw
Summit and the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan.
New Zealand stood with others to demonstrate its
enduring commitment to the people of Afghanistan. We
did so without hesitation. The cost of failure would be
too great.

History has shown us that no amount of
international support can by itself bring peace and
security to Afghanistan. As my Minister stressed to
the Council in September (see S/PV.7771), the future
of Afghanistan lies in the hands of its Government
and its people. A unified and effective National Unity
Government - one that puts the interests of its people
first - will be essential for success.

We recognize the scale and complexity of the
challenges the Government faces. Key among them
is tackling an emboldened Taliban insurgency. The
insecurity brought about by the continued offensive
undermines progress across the board. Experience
tells us that peace and reconciliation with the Taliban
demands a multifaceted approach. The Afghanistan
National Defence and Security Forces have a vital role
to play in meeting these challenges.

Beyond the battlefield, the Taliban's ability to wage
war needs to be constrained. There is an urgent need to
tackle the flow of narcotics, funding and personnel to
the Taliban and other insurgents. The same can be said
of funding from illegal mining.

We also need to see concerted, good-faith efforts
by others in the region to halt the supply of funding,
weapons and personnel to the Taliban and to support the
establishment of a viable peace process. In particular,
the enormous trust deficit between Afghanistan and
Pakistan needs to be bridged. These tensions filter
down to the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), where consensus
decision-making regularly allows politically motivated
stalling to prevent the most basic and necessary of
actions from being taken.

The freezing of assets to prevent them from
being used to fund the Taliban's insurgency has been
blocked. Even proposals to meet with regional States
have been denied. Such behaviour has time and again
frustrated practical action that could support peace and
reconciliation efforts on the ground. It also undermines
the credibility and effectiveness of the 1988 Committee
and, by extension, the Council itself. We urge all
parties to make a concerted effort to rebuild trust. The
alternative will be extremely costly for all involved.

The challenges faced by the National Unity
Government in achieving long-term peace and security
are many and daunting, but it will not have to walk
that road alone, as many have reassured Afghanistan
this morning. For its part, New Zealand will remain a
partner to Afghanistan in 2017 and beyond.

