Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The 25 May elections were a step in the right
direction. As the President of Russia, Mr. Vladimir
Putin, stated before they were conducted, "we respect the
elections of the Ukrainian people". However, we would
stop short of the euphoria that our Western colleagues
have demonstrated. Elections are not a panacea. In
evaluating them and their potential consequences, there
is a need to take into account the events that preceded
them and the context in which they took place. We
cannot forget the havoc wreaked by those who opposed
the legitimately elected President or the coup d'etat
carried out with outside support and help from national
radical forces. We cannot forget the tragedies that took
place in Odessa on 2 May and in Mariupol on 9 May.
We cannot remain deaf to the mortar fire in the south-
east, where punitive operations are being carried out.

We have to recognize that the elections were
not totally free and democratic. A heavy influence
was brought to bear, including the threat of physical
violence, in favour of certain candidates, while others
were forced to withdraw from the electoral race. The
elections saw the violent suppresion of the mass media.
The consolidation of the population was achieved
essentially through the marginalization and terrorizing
of entire regions and the spreading of anti-Russian
propaganda.

However, today we cannot simply discuss the
electoral process in one particular country. The
Security Council has the entirely different mandate of
bearing primary responsibility for international peace
and security. When a portion of Ukraine is essentially
at war, we in this Chamber should be talking about how
to end the violence and to move the situation onto a
more peaceful front by faciliating negotiations among
all Ukrainian parties.

For Russia, that task is of particular importance,
given that the military operations are taking place
extremely close to our borders. Security Council
members should call upon Kyiv to finally acknowledge
the need to take the interests of all citizens of the
country into account and to put a swift end to the
punitive operations in the east and south. That is what
is its citizens expect and what is required of Kyiv in
line with its obligations under the Geneva declaration
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) road map. It would allow for genuine,
nationwide dialogue to agree on comprehensive
constitutional reforms. Genuine dialogue is needed
rather than punitive operations behind the smoke screen
of round tables organized without the participation of
representatives of the east and south of the country.

It is interesting that immediately after the elections,
the memorandum on peace and concord was somehow
forgotten. Instead of seeking agreement among citizens,
they are assaulted by insults. Russia is blamed for every
possible problem. There are calls for to end the punitive
operations swiftly by intensifying them. People are
being pushed into the army and the so-called national
guard. Those who do not want to kill their own people
are dealt with. There has been increasing use of air
assets, tanks, armoured vehicles and mortar guns, and
the chaotic bombing and artillery fire against civilian
targets, including schools, kindergartens and hospitals.
In spite of the calls of the leaders of besieged cities,
peaceful citizens are not allowed to leave military
areas. There are no secure humanitarian corridors,
and the Ukrainian authorities are taking no measure
fo r the evacuation of children or the unification of
separated families. The provisions of the 1989 (2011)
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
are violated, as are the basic safeguards stipulated in
Additional Protocol II of the Geneva Conventions.

We regret to note that some Council members
continue to justify, in all possible ways, the military
actions of the Kyiv powers. Today, indeed, a colleague
qualified actions in that context as admirable in
manifesting restraint. We would like to say: You shall
answer to God, ladies and gentlemen.

There is much evidence in the mass media and
video material on the use by Ukrainian forces of
helicopters displaying United Nations markings.
The latest such instance was observed as recently as
26 May in the skies over the Luhansk region. We call
upon the United Nations Secretariat not to be passive in
situations where United Nations rules are violated but
to deal with the issue and take active measures to put an
end to those practices that discredit the United Nations.
A simple negation of the facts by the Kyiv authorities
is not enough.

The road map of the OSCE contains plans to
investigate all cases of mass killings. However, there
has been no progress in that respect. The investigation of
the incidents of 18 through 20 February in the Maidan,
including repercussions of the case of the sniper, have
not fared any better. There has been no response to our
urgent calls for an international investigation into the
tragic events in Odessa on 2 May, when, as is known,
an unidentified lethal chemical substance was used, nor
of the incident of 9 May in Mariupol. The Ukrainian
side is avoiding serious interaction with international
structures on this issue.

Representatives of the mass media face ongoing
threats and persecution by the Ukrainian authorities,
who prevent them from carrying out their professional
activities and investigating the chaos in the country.
Today everybody knows of the outrageous detention of
journalists from the Russian television channel "Life
News" and the cruel treatment they suffered. We have
lost count of the cases of journalists who have been
refused entry into Ukrainian territory or expelled
on far-fetched pretexts. We express condolences to
the families of the Italian journalist and his Russian
companion, who died at the hands of the Ukrainian
forces.

We are seriously concerned about the situation of
the two groups of OSCE observers. One group included
a Russian citizen. We will do everything we can to
find and liberate those who have not yet been freed.
Nevertheless, we call attention to the fact that primary
responsibility for the security of the observers attaches
to the Ukrainian side. However, Kyiv has not yet
concluded the internal State procedures for ratification
of the memorandum of understanding with the OSCE
guaranteeing the inviolability of staff of international
missions. Ambiguity in the status of OSCE observers,
who have been working in Ukraine for more than two
months, is a genuine threat to their security.

In conclusion, we truly hope that the presidential
elections of 25 May will nevertheless mark the
beginning of a new, more constructive period in the
internal political life of the Ukrainian State. However,
for that, it must be backed by specific actions for broad
national agreement. Ukrainian politicians have many
times violently taken advantage oftheir people. It is our
hope that this will not occur during the current crucial
period of the country.

