The Secretary-General: I am pleased to have the
opportunity to present to the Security Council my report on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. This report
takes as a starting-point the worst acts of humankind and
calls for our best efforts to defend civilians where they are
most imperiled.

More than just the Victims of crossfire, civilians have
themselves become the targets in today's conflicts. During
the past decade, many millions have been killed. Over 30
million have been displaced, and countless men, women
and children have been denied access to life-saving food
and medicine. These statistics are made all the more
shocking by the calculated methods used by so many
belligerents. We have observed in each of the five
continents that belligerents are increasingly taking care to
avoid direct confrontation with each other. Instead, their
favourite strategy is to gain ground in the exercise of terror
against defenceless civilians. Their actions, regardless of
any reason that may motivate their struggle, demonstrate a
shocking disregard for human life and human values.

The Emergency Relief Coordinator addressed this
issue in January in a meeting of the Security Council. Eight
months later, it is fair to ask whether the situation has
changed. Has there been any improvement?

Since January, conflicts have erupted or have been
reignited or intensified in Angola, Colombia, Sierra Leone,
Kosovo and East Timor. Each of these situations reminds
us in different ways of the scale of commitment needed to
transform a fragile ceasefire into a secure and stable peace.
Years of careful work in Angola have been undone by the
desire of warring parties to control economic resources. The
Lusaka Protocol has collapsed and the civilian population
is paying dearly for this failure. Many have lost their lives
and hundreds of thousands are again displaced.

In Sierra Leone, too, the quest for power and control
of economic resources has driven belligerents to acts of
depravity. The mutilation of so many people demonstrates
that international law means nothing without effective
measures to back it up.

In East Timor, the international community is faced
with another situation where human rights have become
a casualty of aggression. Militia groups are attempting by
a campaign of terror to overturn the results of a
democratic poll in which they were overwhelmingly
defeated.

None of these countries at present has the
institutions or the democratic political culture necessary
for peace to take hold. They all require sustained and
comprehensive efforts to support those who favour peace
over war, stability over banditry. To ensure that these
crises are brought to an end, the United Nations must be
ready to respond with more than meetings, speeches and
reports. It must take action in the name of the principles
of the Charter and the values of humanity. The essence of
the United Nations work is to establish human security
where it is no longer present, where it is under threat or
where it never existed. This is our humanitarian
imperative.

We are at the end of a century that has seen the
creation and refinement of much of the corpus of
international law. Yet civilians have rarely been so
vulnerable. That the conventions of international
humanitarian and human rights law are being disregarded
so wilfully by combatants and are being enforced only
sporadically by the international community is deeply
disturbing.

Contained in this report are a total of 40 concrete
recommendations which I believe can help to improve the
security of civilians in armed conflict. These
recommendations provide the Council with tools and
strategies which it can use to respond to particular
situations. To make the best use of these tools, the
Council may wish to set up a standing mechanism
through which it can seek expert advice on specific
issues. Such a mechanism would allow the Council to
develop a range of responses to deal with issues of legal
protection, prevention of conflicts and physical protection.

The Council should make use of this expertise not
simply for briefings on humanitarian situations, but as a
source of concrete solutions to the problems being
confronted. For example, recommendation 39 refers to
humanitarian and security zones. In situations where such
options are being considered, expert advice may be sought
from the Secretariat or elsewhere. All the
recommendations but the last could help to prevent future

 

hostilities and assist in the protection of civilians already in
armed conflict.

Tragically, they will not always be enough. If they are
not, the final recommendation on enforcement action will
need to be taken. There must, of course, be objective
criteria to determine the threshold for any form of
intervention, but its use must always be on the table. There
is no doubt that enforcement action is a difficult step to
take. It often goes against political or other interests, but
there are universal principles and values which supersede
such interests and the protection of civilians is one of them.

I have given high priority to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict and am willing to work in close support
of the Security Council. I am prepared to use my good
offices to put in place a system of monitoring progress in
the implementation of the 40 recommendations that we
have made and to report back to the Council on a regular
basis. The Council should then be able to measure its
progress and evaluate the effectiveness of its efforts.

Those who founded the United Nations believed that,
despite a bloodied history, humanity was ultimately
redeemable. Yet we see that civilians are still forced from
their homes; driven to borders which are open one minute
and closed the next; forced into hiding; separated from their
families; made to act as human shields; stripped of their
identities; and callously killed. The plight of civilians is no
longer something which can be neglected or made
secondary because it complicates political negotiations or
interests. It is fundamental to the central mandate of the
Organization.

Failure to address these issues would erode the respect
of the Council's resolutions and so diminish the authority
of the United Nations as a whole. More importantly, it
would take away the one thing that sustains the many
millions who have lost all in conflict: the hope that
something called "the international community" is willing
to uphold the basic dignity of humankind.

Mr. President, with your permission, I would ask Mrs.
Robinson to make a brief statement.

