Mr. Calovski (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia): Let me first say how pleased my delegation
is to see you, Sir, the representative of Canada, presiding
over this important meeting. I thank you for organizing
this meeting on such an important and topical subject.

The views of my delegation coincide with those
expressed by the representative of Portugal speaking on

 

behalf of the European Union. As members will see from
what I am going to say, the focus of my statement will be
Article 50 of the United Nations Charter.

The implementation of Article 50 of the Charter has
enormous political, economic, social and humanitarian
importance for many Member States and is very relevant to
the credibility of the United Nations and, in particular, of
the Security Council. We regret the non-implementation of
Article 50, and we are very much concerned that essentially
nothing is being done by the international community or by
the Security Council with respect to its implementation.

We are, however, pleased by the decision to establish,
on a temporary basis, an informal working group of the
Council to develop general recommendations on how to
improve the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions. We
hope that these recommendations will not neglect Article 50
of the Charter.

The non-implementation of Article 50 of the United
Nations Charter has negatively affected the Republic of
Macedonia in a very substantial way over the past 10 years.
The negative effects of sanctions are a main obstacle to the
already difficult development of our economy and the main
cause of social and humanitarian problems. The situation is
worse because all our neighboring countries are also
affected negatively by the United Nations sanctions. The
wars in Slovenia, in Croatia, in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and most recently in Kosovo, as members know, have
negatively affected the development of our region and the
situation of my country, the Republic of Macedonia. The
sanctions have thus made the situation much more difficult.

All this of course is not unknown to the international
community, to the United Nations or to the Security
Council. The present frustrating situation in which nothing
is being done on the implementation of Article 50 cannot
be explained by ignorance. The Security Council must insist
on adequate compensation to the victims for the non-
implementation of Article 50. That should be seen as a
main duty of the Security Council. In our view, it is
important that the Council decided to organize this debate.
We hope that the follow-up of the debate will lead to
concrete undertakings.

The subject before the Security Council today should
not be viewed as a matter of importance to only a few
countries. In our view, it is a problem of global importance,
and not only for the Organization and for this body, but in
a much wider sphere. It is not only important to request
Member States to concur with the implementations of the
sanctions adopted under a given Security Council
resolution; from the point of view of Member States
negatively affected by the sanctions, it is much more
important that they be compensated, particularly if the
Security Council expects Member States fully to comply
with the relevant resolutions on sanctions.

Article 50 of the Charter contains a very clear
request. I am not going to read it out, in order to save
time. In our view, the following should be done on the
implementation of Article 50 of the Charter. First, the
Secretary-General, before the Security Council opts for a
decision on sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter,
should prepare an analytical study of the negative effects
of that decision on the political, economic and social
situation of the countries concerned which could be
negatively affected by that decision. That analytical study
should be prepared in consultation with the countries
concerned which, as I said, could be negatively affected.
In that regard, it can go without saying that the
Secretariat should be staffed with qualified personnel to
prepare such an analytical study, on the basis of which
the Security Council could make its decision without
hesitation. I would like to add that I appreciated Mr.
Prendergast's statement in that regard.

Secondly, in a draft resolution to be adopted by the
Security Council containing sanctions there should as a
rule be a specific request addressed to the World Bank,
the International Monetary Fund, the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development and other similar banks
to undertake projects with the aim of alleviating the
negative effects of the sanctions on the countries
concerned which could be negatively affected by them.

Thirdly, at the same time, all Member States should
be requested in the draft resolution to contribute to the
compensation effort to alleviate the negative effects of the
sanctions on the countries concerned which, as I said,
could be negatively affected by the sanctions resolution.

Fourthly, the draft resolution should request the
Secretary-General to make a special appeal for
compensation for the negative effects upon countries
which could be negatively affected and to organize for
that purpose one or more financial donor conferences,
which is a very important element.

And fifthly, it can go without saying that in all these
matters the Security Council should consult the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, and that
the Secretary-General should consult other relevant bodies

 

of the United Nations system. If there is political will, it
will not be difficult to agree on an adequate mechanism.

In our view, further hesitation to tackle this issue is of
great concern to a large number of Member States. At the
same time, that hesitation really discredits the relevance of
the Security Council. However, as you know, Mr. President,
it is never too late for a positive move by the Security
Council. We therefore hope that the body that the Council
is going to create will be an important mechanism for
helping the Council to take on this issue effectively, in
accordance with the provisions of our Charter.
