The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of Kuwait.

I would like to begin by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zahir
Tanin, for his comprehensive briefing to the Security
Council on the report (S/2018/76) pertaining to the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). The State of Kuwait
reiterates its full support for the Special Representative
in the discharge of his duties, and appreciates the
vital role of the United Nations during the past
period in assisting Kosovo in building its institutions,
in accordance with security Council resolutions,
especially resolution 1244 (1999). I also welcome His
Excellency Mr. Ivica Daeic', Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
as well as Ambassador Vlora Citaku, and thank both of
them for their statements.

The security and political developments in Kosovo
without a doubt directly affect regional security and
stability. The State of Kuwait applauds the measures
taken by Kosovo to achieve more coherent and faster
progress in implementing the European reform agenda
and its full commitment to the implementation of all
the consequent obligations within the framework of
the agreed agenda. Kuwait welcomes the free and fair
municipal elections held on 22 October 2017, which
were the second local elections to be held in Kosovo
since the signing of the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations between
Belgrade and Pristina, on 19 April 2013.

We appreciate the role played by political leaders and
their self-restraint in the aftermath of the assassination
of Mr. Oliver Ivanovie, as well as the commitment of
both Pristina and Belgrade to cooperation in order to
prevent political tensions from escalating.

On the other hand, we express our concern at the
continued challenges facing the dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade, as indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General before us. Kuwait stresses that the
high-level dialogue between the two sides, which is being
facilitated by the European Union, remains the most
appropriate framework to resolve all pending issues in
order to achieve consensual, equitable and sustainable
solutions. We also express concern regarding attempts
by members of Parliament in Kosovo to repeal the law
on supporting the work of the Specialist Chambers
and the Prosecutor's Office, which would undermine
the credibility of the Parliament. We also call upon all

parties in Kosovo to remain fully committed to justice
and the rule of law.

In conclusion, we stress the importance of the
continued efforts of the international community to urge
Pristina and Belgrade to overcome their differences
and to achieve consensual, equitable and sustainable
solutions that are acceptable to both parties and lay
the foundation for peace and stability in the region.
UNMIK should continue to cooperate constructively
with Pristina and Belgrade and all communities in
Kosovo in order to enhance security, stability and
respect for human rights.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at 12.15 pm.
