Mr. Tekaya (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno for introducing
the eighth report of the Secretary-General. I would also
like to thank Mr. Olara Otunnu for his presentation on
his recent visit to the Congo. My delegation hopes that
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kamel Morjane, will soon be well.

My delegation would also like to welcome the
presence here of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. His participation in this meeting bears
further witness to the interest his Government attaches
to the role of the Security Council in seeking peace and
security in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Great Lakes region. Once again, I would like to
thank him for all the cooperation he personally and his
Government provided the Security Council mission.

The momentum for peace persists in the region,
but it is fragile. It is worth doing all we can to make it
irreversible. Here the main responsibility lies with the
parties. They must work in conformity with the
resolutions of the Security Council, abide by the
commitments they have entered into and avoid any
backsliding - which would be damaging to the entire
region.

We are gratified by the many diplomatic activities
under way in the region, as well as by the summit
meetings that have been held or are planned. We
encourage all bilateral and multilateral initiatives for
dialogue among the States of the subregion. Such
dialogue will allow for the implementation of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement to be accelerated.

Whereas the cooperation of the Congolese
authorities with MONUC is satisfactory, MONUC
continues - as the Secretary-General's report states -
to be frustrated by a lack of cooperation on the part of
the Rassemblement congolais pour la democratic and
the Front de liberation du Congo. During its visit the
mission of the Security Council conveyed a clear
message, reminding these parties of the commitments
that they had undertaken. The Council should reiterate
this message.

The humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains worrisome, and there
are pressing needs. Significant efforts are being made
by humanitarian organizations in cooperation with
MONUC. These efforts deserve our full support.

Mr. Olara Otunnu has just described the
challenges inherent in this situation in which children
are being recruited to fight in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo conflict. We are grateful for the efforts he
made during his visit and for his recommendations for
assisting war-affected children. We also appreciate all
the initiatives being taken by humanitarian actors in
order to protect children.

The economic revival of the Congo is one of the
important elements that must accompany the return to
peace. The Council mission gave particular attention to
this. We note with satisfaction the will of donor
countries and of the Bretton Woods institutions to
support the efforts and sacrifices of the Congolese
Government at this crucial stage. The re-opening of the
road and river networks with the assistance of MONUC
and the carrying out of the small local projects that
have been identified will make the dividends of peace
tangible to the people.

The recommendations formulated by the
Secretary-General in his report are realistic, and we
support them. The transition stage during phase III, as
recommended by the Secretary-General, seems
appropriate to us. In this regard it is worth reminding
the delinquent parties that they need to provide all the
required detailed information regarding the withdrawal
of foreign troops and disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and resettlement. This information is
essential if the United Nations is to play its role.

The need to enlarge MONUC's civilian
component, including deploying a civilian police unit,
has become obvious with the evolution of the peace
process. In addition, the demilitarization of Kisangani,
demanded by the Security Council in resolution 1304
(2000), and the increasing presence of MONUC in this
city, as described by the Secretary-General, reflect the
importance of the role that Kisangani could play in the
economic and political life of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. As Mr. Guehenno has told us, Kisangani
has a symbolic value.

We agree that while extending the mandate of
MONUC, the Security Council must remain vigilant,
regularly reassessing the evolution of the situation and
the parties' compliance with their commitments.
Preparations for the next phase must be accompanied
by renewed political will on the part of the parties. The
Security Council has worked since last year in
partnership with the Political Committee of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement. This partnership should be
enhanced during the next phase which will,
undoubtedly, be decisive.

I would like in conclusion to pay tribute to the
Secretary-General, to his Special Representative Mr.
Kamel Morjane, to the Force Commander of MONUC
and to all the staff of the Mission for the considerable

efforts that they continue to make to in support of members Norway, Mali, Colombia, and Bangladesh, in
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. my national capacity, and also Sweden, Namibia,
Egypt, Japan, Burundi and Rwanda. We will suspend

