Baroness Ashton: I am grateful for the
opportunity to speak to the Security Council about the
2

growing cooperation between the United Nations and
the European Union (EU) in the area of peace and
security.

The European Union attaches great importance to
its partnership with the United Nations. A core
objective of EU foreign policy is the development of
an effective multilateral system with a strong United
Nations at the centre. The United Nations Charter and
this Security Council are the primary framework for
the rules-based international system that we seek.

The reasons behind the creation of the United
Nations were similar to those that originally drove
European integration: "to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war". Today, the United Nations
and the EU need to promote the ideals that inspired
earlier generations - peace, justice, human rights, the
whole notion that power relations among States must
be subjected to the rule of law - in a new world.

We share many objectives and we work closely
together, at Headquarters and in the field. We are
convinced that complex problems require
comprehensive global solutions. We agree that we must
advance the causes of security, human rights and
sustainable development together; if we do not, none
will succeed.

It is no surprise that EU member States jointly
constitute the largest contributors to the United Nations
regular and peacekeeping budgets. But this partnership
is about much more than money. The EU is a strong
supporter of the United Nations in political and
operational terms. The EU and the United Nations are
working together on the ground in eight major crisis
theatres in Europe, Africa, the Middle East and Asia.
The EU currently reports to the Security Council on
three of its ongoing operations.

Given the United Nations mandate in the area of
peace and security and given the expansion of EU
external action in recent years, it is logical that we
have built a growing partnership in peace and security
that has complemented our long-standing cooperation
in development and humanitarian assistance. For
example, in the 19905 we worked closely together to
try to prevent and curtail the tragic and unnecessary
wars in the Balkans. Since then, much progress has
been made, but our joint work there is not yet
complete. With respect to Bosnia and Herzegovina,
steps remain to be taken to secure a well-functioning
State. Further work is also needed in other countries of
10-34411
the region if they are to succeed on their path of
eventual succession to the European Union, which
remains our goal. In the Balkans as much as anywhere,
we know that a lasting peace depends not so much on
foreign intervention but on the efforts and commitment
of local political leaders themselves.

I am speaking before the Security Council at a
special moment in the development of the European
Union. The Lisbon Treaty is now in force. This is a
historic step which matters to Europeans and
non-Europeans alike. The Lisbon Treaty offers the
opportunity to strengthen the European Union's
international impact and strategic vision through
streamlined decision-making and greater policy
coherence and consistency.

Work is advancing on the creation of the
European External Action Service, which will operate
under my authority. It will integrate diplomats from the
EU's institutions and member States. It will also direct
the delegations of the EU around the world, including
here at the United Nations. The External Action
Service will lead to more integrated policy-making and
delivery by bringing together all the instruments of our
global engagement - political, economic and crisis
management - in support of our strategic goals. This
should also make the EU a better partner of the United
Nations, and I ask all United Nations Member States to
support efforts to ensure that EU representatives can
act efficiently within the United Nations to maximize
our contribution to achieving common United Nations
goals.

In my short period in office as High
Representative, I have established an important
working relationship with the Secretary-General. We
have discussed many issues that also top the agenda of
the Security Council. These include piracy and the
situations in Somalia and the Sudan, the Middle East
peace process, and the serious concerns about Iran's
nuclear activities and its refusal to abide by several
resolutions of the Security Council.

We have also discussed such issues as climate
change and the Millennium Development Goals that
affect the wider international security landscape. The
impact of climate change threatens the future of
millions of people. It could worsen existing situations
of fragility and insecurity and create new conflict
constellations. For the Millennium Development Goals,
10-34411
it is important that we step up our efforts, particularly
in those areas where improvements have been modest.

There is a growing consensus internationally on
the need to apply a comprehensive approach to crisis
management and peacebuilding. The same goes for the
need to take into account the evident links between
security, development and human rights. Along with
comprehensive approaches, we also need to ensure that
our efforts are tailor-made, reflecting the precise nature
of every challenge. That is true for individual conflicts,
but it also applies to overarching topics such as the role
of women in peace and security. This year, we mark the
tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), which was
a milestone in making the entire international
community more aware of and focused on the specific
needs and concerns of women in the area of peace and
security.

Allow me to illustrate how the EU is contributing
to the United Nations work in peace and security with
some concrete examples, beginning with conflict
prevention. In many crisis zones, special
representatives of the Secretary-General and the EU
are working hand in hand. Indeed, mediation and
mediation support are now growing elements of EU-
United Nations cooperation. Sometimes we act directly
ourselves; at other times, we back the efforts of others.
For example, in Darfur, the EU has provided support
through the Trust Fund set up by the Secretary-General
to facilitate the mediation efforts led jointly by the
United Nations and the African Union.

In the area of crisis management, civilian and
military, our cooperation has developed significantly
over a short period of time. In 2003, we launched
Operation Artemis at the request of the United Nations
and the Government of the Democratic Republic of
Congo to protect the people in Bunia in the eastern part
of that country. This was the first time the EU assisted
the United Nations in the area of peace and security.
The Operation opened a new chapter in our
cooperation and was followed later on by a backup
force to support the United Nations at the time of the
elections.

In some places we have supplemented the United
Nations, for example in Kosovo after the
reconfiguration of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo. In other places, we
have preceded the United Nations, for example in
Chad, where our force to protect refugees from Darfur
3
was succeeded by the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad. And in yet others
we are reinforcing an ongoing United Nations
operation - for example in Afghanistan, with the
European Union Police Mission in that country. We are
working closely with both the United Nations and
regional partners, for example, our naval operation
Atalanta has been combined with the training mission
for the security forces in Somalia. The latter has been
set up within a United Nations framework to support
the Transitional Federal Government.

As part of our comprehensive approach to the
piracy problem, the EU Stability Instrument has been
supporting the efforts of Kenya and Seychelles to
prosecute piracy suspects through a programme that
was developed jointly with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime.

One of our biggest priorities is to assist our
African partners in the development of their
capabilities in conflict prevention, crisis management
and peacebuilding. We have created a specific financial
instrument, the African Peace Facility, to underpin this
work.

With respect to the whole conflict cycle, special
efforts are needed on peacebuilding. Too many
conflicts re-emerge or linger and thus prolong the need
for international engagement. In all of this, the leading
role of the Security Council is evident.

But I also want to mention our joint efforts in the
Peacebuilding Commission. It is essential to bring
together all resources to help countries succeed on the
path of post-conflict recovery. The EU has expertise in
these areas and is the biggest donor to all four
countries on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Five years after the Commission's
creation, this is a good moment to take stock and see
what could be improved.

In the area of long-term stabilization and
development we are working closely with the entire
United Nations family. In Haiti, after the devastating
earthquake, our joint actions comprised a good
example of how to maximize EU-United Nations
synergies. The EU responded rapidly to United Nations
calls for assistance ranging from humanitarian aid to
military assets. We now to need to pull together with
clear plans for long-term reconstruction.
The fight against impunity for the most serious
crimes remains a key factor in peacebuilding and
conflict prevention. That is why the EU is a staunch
supporter of the International Criminal Court.
Promoting the Court's universality and bolstering the
enforcement of its decisions are among the key topics
for the upcoming review conference in Kampala.

Before I finish, I want to underline three things:
first, that the EU is strongly committed to an active
partnership with the United Nations in promoting
peace, protecting the vulnerable and helping people to
live in safety and dignity. Secondly, this partnership
has grown rapidly in recent years and has demonstrated
its added value on the ground. We have achieved a
good deal together, but even more work remains to be
done. And thirdly, the EU's potential will increase with
the Lisbon Treaty. We should become more capable,
better able to bring politics and economics together and
better at combining different forms of intervention
within a political strategy. As a result, I hope we shall
become a stronger partner for the United Nations in the
future.

