Mr. Satoh (Japan): I would like to thank you, Mr.
President, for giving me the opportunity to participate
in today's discussion. I would also like to welcome the
two eminent representatives from East Timor, Mr.
Gusmao and Mr. Ramos-Horta. Their participation is
especially valuable as we enter the critical final stage
of our efforts for the independence of East Timor.

My delegation commends the Secretary-General
for his work in producing his well-considered report.
As described in it, preparations for the election of the
Constituent Assembly on 30 August, including the
registration of voters and parties, are well under way.
So is the consideration of a United Nations presence in
East Timor after independence. But many difficult
tasks lie ahead, and the future is fraught with
uncertainties which, unless they are seriously
addressed, could jeopardize the progress made so far.

Today I would like to underscore several points
which my delegation believes are essential for bringing
about a viable East Timor. Most importantly, the
political transition must be effected through a process
that is open, fair and democratic. We strongly support
the efforts of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) to this end,
most notably in drawing up, with the people of East
Timor, a specific timetable for the election of the
Constituent Assembly and compiling electoral
regulations, and voter education programmes.

Japan, for its part, is sponsoring a seminar on
electoral law, organized by UNTAET, and is
considering other contributions in support of the
electoral process, including the dispatch of electoral
observers.

I would like to stress here that every effort must
also be made in order to ensure that the electoral
process will be conducted in an orderly manner. As
noted in the Secretary-General's report, there is a
widely shared concern among the Timorese population
that the political process may not remain peaceful. We
therefore fully support UNTAET's policy of zero
tolerance for violence, and urge UNTAET to ensure
that effective contingency support will be given to the
police by the military component.

I would also like to add that it would be prudent,
as suggested by the Secretary-General, to maintain the
military component essentially in its present form, at
least until the establishment of the East Timorese
Government. Needless to say, future changes in the
size, configuration or mandate of the military
component must be based on the objective security
assessment at the time.

The issue of East Timorese refugees in West
Timor remains a matter of serious concern. While it is
important to give those refugees the opportunity to take
part in the electoral process, the plight of the refugees
in the absence of international humanitarian workers
and the reported incidents of friction between the
refugees and the local population are indeed
worrisome.

We have to admit that the refugee problem is
complex and difficult. It is for this reason that we
would like to urge the Indonesian Government to
continue its best efforts to resolve the problem by
addressing the issue of militia activities, as well as the
broader issue of reconciliation. It is equally important,
of course, for the international community to provide
necessary support to such an effort.

In this context we welcome the decision of the
United Nations Security Coordinator to organize an
inter-agency security assessment mission to West
Timor this month. Here I would like to stress anew the
importance of the safety and security of international
personnel.

We also share the concern of the international
community over the judiciary process in Indonesia with
respect to the Atambua incident, in which humanitarian
workers were murdered. It is evident that all parties
concerned, particularly the host country, should firmly
deal with those engaged in such hostile actions. This
would in turn serve as a deterrent to future such
incidents.

Violations of human rights and humanitarian law
should be dealt with firmly, and Japan was encouraged
by the steps taken by the Indonesian authorities, such
as the Parliament's decision to establish an ad hoc
tribunal to address gross violations. But we share the
Secretary-General's concern over the limited
jurisdiction of the tribunal, and we hope that the
Indonesian Government will address the issue in such a
way that would help ease our concern.

Lastly, I would like to touch briefly upon the
United Nations presence after independence. It is
evident that addressing the economic and social
dimensions of the situation will be essential if East
Timor is to develop as a Viable sovereign State. As we
have emphasized in the past, ensuring continuity in the
provision of international assistance is essential in
order not to jeopardize the progress that has so far been
made towards nation-building.

In this context, we welcome the fact that
UNTAET and the United Nations at Headquarters have
established a working group and an integrated mission
task force to draw up a blueprint for the future United
Nations presence. We look forward to discussing the
blueprint at the forthcoming donor conference to be
held in Canberra in June.

The people of East Timor have come a long way
on the path to independence. But they will continue to
need the support and cooperation of the international
community before and after independence. I would
therefore like to take this opportunity to assure the
Council and the representatives of East Timor that
Japan will remain committed to help build a peaceful,
democratic and prosperous East Timor.

