Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
open briefing on East Timor. I should also like to thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Hedi Annabi, for the comprehensive
information he has provided us.

Precisely a year ago the people of East Timor
prepared to take a crucial decision about its future,
choosing between full autonomy within Indonesia and
independence. On 30 August 1999, the inhabitants of
the territory decided by an overwhelming majority to
initiate the process of transition to independence under
United Nations tutelage.

The road of transition was not free of difficulties
or risks. Evidence of this were the acts of violence and
destruction which were unleashed subsequent to the
popular consultation. The scope of the humanitarian
disaster that ensued has given rise to serious concern
by the international community and has led to
concerted United Nations system-wide action.

A year later, after all these serious incidents, it is
gratifying to see that the humanitarian emergency has
been put behind us. It is also worth noting the progress
made in creating the institutions that will serve as the
basis for the territory's independence. Against this
backdrop it should be underscored that the main
decisions were taken after the holding of consultations
with the representative of the people of East Timor and
that the Timorese themselves are, in an increasing
fashion, shouldering major responsibility for managing
their own interests.

I should like to reiterate Argentina's appreciation
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, and to all the UNTAET
staff for the outstanding job they have done. They
carried out their task under extremely trying
circumstances - at times, indeed, when the safety and
security of United Nations staff were seriously
endangered. A number of UNTAET personnel lost their
lives in the line of duty in recent weeks. I should like
to convey to the Governments of Bangladesh and
Nepal and to the family members of the victims the
sincere condolences of the Argentine Government and
people.

Notwithstanding the overall improvement in the
situation in East Timor, we must once again voice our
concern at the lack of resolution of two serious
problems: incursions by the militias along the land
borders and the situation of the refugees in the West
Timor refugee camps. In both instances, we find that,
notwithstanding the time that has passed and the
requests made by the international community, the
situation has not improved - rather it has grown worse
in the last month. Thus, we reaffirm again our appeal
that militia elements still operating in East Timor be
disbanded and separated from refugees and that their
activities be monitored.

We trust that the Indonesian authorities will live
up to all the commitments they have made and will
make the decisions necessary as quickly as possible to
put an end once and for all, to these serious problems.

