Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): It is common knowledge
that today the world situation warrants a greater
engagement on the part of the United Nations in the
area of peace and security. Sustainable de-escalation
and progress in achieving peaceful settlements and
peacebuilding are not possible, in most cases, without
a robust international security presence. It is also an
axiom that the Council has to craft each and every
peacekeeping operation's mandate carefully and update
them accordingly based on reliable and full information
from the ground.

In this regard, today's briefing has practical value,
and I should like to express my sincere gratitude to the
Under-Secretary-General and the Force Commanders
for their valuable input.

Among the many potential improvements that
could be made, I believe that the United Nations could
benefit greatly from sophisticated technologies to
assist its peace operations. To miss such opportunities
means missing chances for peace, as has happened far
too often in the past. In this regard, I would like to
echo the point that was made in several consultations
of the Council on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF): the use by a force of relevant,
sophisticated technologies remains one of the priorities
yet to be achieved. I am aware of the intention of the
Secretariat to explore options to deploy sense-and-warn
technologies to the mission and would appreciate it if
the Council could be updated on progress in that area.

I would like to reiterate our View that UNDOF
remains one of the important cornerstones of the long-
term stability of the region. In this regard, I commend
the efforts aimed at the return and further consolidation
of UNDOF's presence in the area of separation.

I should like also to touch upon the activities of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), as other speakers have done. I believe
that the United Nations peacekeeping presence in
the Central African Republic is more than vital in
supporting the efforts of the country's new leadership to
achieve peace and stability throughout its territory. The
continuing presence and increasingly violent activities
of armed groups is leading to numerous casualties
among civilians, the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in the Central African Republic, and an
increased number of internally displaced persons.

As Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013)
concerning the Central African Republic, I should like
to express serious concern regarding the information
provided by the Panel of Experts on the regular inflow
of weapons and fighters into the Central African
Republic from neighbouring States.

As previous speakers have done, I condemn
all attacks and provocations against MINUSCA,
including the brutal killings of peacekeepers, as well
as the most recent attack against the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali. These actions are unacceptable and may
constitute war crimes.

Liberia will soon mark 14 years of peace since
the lengthy and bloody civil war in that country. The
security situation in the country remains stable, and the
Government has demonstrated its ability to effectively
ensure security on the ground. At this point, the
crucial task is a timely transition from peacekeeping to
effective United Nations peacebuilding measures.

I look forward to the country's peaceful and
democratic transition of power in October this year.
This should represent a genuine milestone for the nation
and a success story for the United Nations. Ukraine is
proud to be among those troop-contributing countries
that have played a part in this success by actively
contributing to United Nations peacekeeping efforts
in Liberia.

Ukrainian troops also continue to serve in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, whose mandate
the Council recently updated (see S/PV.7910). The
Mission must pursue its force-transformation process
in order to become an flexible, agile and mobile force
that can adapt to the current challenges facing the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. My delegation
also supports prioritizing the Mission's talks on the
protection of civilians.

In conclusion, I should like to take this opportunity,
on the eve of the International Day of United Nations
Peacekeepers, tojoin my colleagues in paying tribute to
all United Nations Blue Helmet. Their devoted service is
universally recognized as the most meaningful symbol
of our Organization. Through the Force Commanders,
I thank all of them.

