Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on the
situation in Somalia as well as the recommendations on
actions that the international community could take to

resolve the conflict, as detailed in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2008/709).

The report by the Secretary-General, confirmed
by information provided by humanitarian
organizations, indicates that the security and
humanitarian situation in Somalia is deteriorating very
fast and that it has resulted in extensive loss of life
among the civilian population, in malnutrition and in
an increase in the number of internally displaced
persons.

None of this is new. This situation in Somalia has
been allowed to deteriorate to this point due to the
continuing conflicts between the various groups in
Somalia and, to a large extent, by the inaction of the
international community. And the sad part is that there
is an acute danger that it could very well get worse.
Not even humanitarian workers, the United Nations nor
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) are
being spared; they are also being targeted by attacks on
an almost daily basis. We of course condemn these
attacks in the strongest possible terms.

We also want to acknowledge the efforts of some
groups in Somalia to bring peace to their country and
we welcome the signing on 26 October of the
agreement on cessation of armed confrontation as well
as the further discussions between the Transitional
Federation Government (TFG) and the Alliance for the
Re-liberation of Somalia (ARS) to implement the very
important Djibouti agreement. The parties must be
supported through capacity-building and confidence-
building and through the provision of minimum
security.
However, lasting peace will continue to elude us
as long as certain groups remain outside of the peace
process. We call upon all those groups which have not

08-6107]
yet joined the Djibouti agreement to do so to enable
Somalia to continue to move forward.

It is also of concern to my delegation that there
are reported disagreements even within the Transitional
Federal Government. It is time for the leadership of
Somalia to muster the political will and work for the
interests of Somalia, which would bring about peace in
that country.

The most important point, however, is that the
Council mandated the Secretary-General, among other
things, to elaborate contingency plans and provide a
detailed description of feasible support that could be
given to Somalia. We thank Assistant Secretary-
General Menkerios and the representative of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations for their
briefings.

However, as the Secretary-General himself points
out, much of what could be done is dependent on
positive responses from the Member States. That raises
the question: If there is no positive response from the
Member States, what is to happen to the Somali
people? Are they to be left just to suffer until,
somewhere down the line, there will be those who may
wish to help? The Secretary-General says in paragraph
52 of his report that, indeed, he has made all kinds of
efforts, including personally visiting and talking to
some of the countries that could assist, but so far there
has been very little support. The question then
becomes: What is the role of the Security Council in a
case to which Member States are not responding?
Unfortunately, we are the ones who carry the mandate
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
What, then, is the Council's responsibility in such a
situation? I hope that is the question we will debate
among ourselves, because the people of Somalia
cannot be left to the goodwill of Member States that
may choose to assist down the line.

The many reports of acts of piracy have been
very worrisome to us and we condemn the piracy
phenomenon, which seems to be growing very, very
fast. The representative of the International Maritime
Organization (IMO) pointed out how many ships and
thousands of people have been victims of that piracy.
However, the piracy will never be answered, as we
have always argued, until we address the situation in
Somalia. Yes, piracy gets the publicity. It gets the
attention of all of us, but I think it is time that the
people inside Somalia also catch our attention. We
hope that the suggestions of the representative of the
IMO will be helpful to the Security Council assisting
those countries that are monitoring the waters of
Somalia, but we hope that the Council has equal energy
also to remember the people of Somalia.

