Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): 1
would like to thank you, Mr. President, and the members
of the Council for convening this meeting.

The Council's unanimous co-sponsorhip and
adoption of resolution 2377 (2017), containing the
Secretary-General's recommendations, is a new
demonstration of support to Colombia and will be
important in achieving peace in our country. We would
also like to thank the United Kingdom, the penholder of
the resolution, for its continued support, and, of course,
the Secretary-General and the team of Mr. Jean Arnault,
Special Representative of the Secretary- General, for
their support and unswerving commitment to peace and
reconciliation in Colombia.

We realize that the challenge is enormous, but in
the past months the Council has witnessed the actions
that have been taken, step by step, despite the obstacles
and difficulties, by the parties to accomplish the
ceasefire, the demobilization of the combatants of the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia and
their definitive laying down of arms and, currently, the
neutralization of weapons, a vital process that reaffirms
their political will. As Council members are aware, this
is a crucial though very difficult time, which demands
all of our political will and the Council's support. We
have been greatly helped by the participation of the
international community and the observers from the
countries of the region and elsewhere. We can all agree
that their support has been effective.

I cannot conclude without expressing my thanks
for the demonstration of support we have seen to the
bilateral and temporary ceasefire recently announced
between the Government and the National Liberation
Army, which will come into force on 1 October for
an initial period of 102 days. The people of Colombia
firmly believe that these new developments will open
up infinite possibilities for a nation where reconciliation
and the rebuilding of a collective peace will eventually
strengthen our democracy that will help the entire region
and, needless to say, improve the living conditions not
just of Colombians in urban centres but also of those in
rural areas. I thank the Council once again.

The meeting rose at 10.40 am.
