Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to welcome and thank the Secretary-
General for his personal commitment to resolving the
crises in the Middle East.

I would also like to thank the Russian presidency
for organizing this debate, in which I would like to
explain the great principles that guide France's action
in the face of the multiplying regional crises. First
is the goal of establishing inclusive and democratic
governance, which is key to the stabilization of the
Middle East. Next is combatting terrorism, which,
today, is one of the greatest threats to international
peace and security. Finally, there is a need to promote
the multilateralism of the United Nations and the
international legal framework.

Democratic, inclusive and pluralist governance
in the Middle East is a precondition for any long-
term stability in the region. There is no alternative to
a political solution for conflicts in the Middle East.
Regional conflicts are often the product of and are
always fed by the lack of the rule of law and political
openness. It is imperative to create the conditions for
inclusive governance based on respect for human rights.

The case of Syria is an unfortunate and perfect
example. The regime's long years of dictatorship over
its people created and nourished the conflict and fuelled
radicalization. The regime's choice of repression as
a one-size-fits-all response to any dissent, its polices
of sieges and forced displacement, and its recent legal
expression under Law Number 10, cannot only lead
to diminished stability. Today, the risk of regional
escalation is real.

After seven years of war in Syria, only a political
transition based on an inclusive intra-Syrian transition,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) will allow
for an exit to the crisis and long-term stability. Any
solution ignoring that dimension will not address the
causes of the conflict. Neither France nor any of its
partners will participate in financing the perpetuation
of this unjust and unstable system. In order to achieve
an inclusive political solution, all concerned parties,
particularly small groups and the Astana guarantors,
must band together in support of the mediation of
the United Nations. France is working actively with
its partners to implement a coordination mechanism
between the two forums on the basis of three primary
priorities: allowing the establishment ofa constitutional
committee that is balanced and effective; implementing
confidence-building measures leading to conditions
conducive to a political process; and preparing
free and transparent elections in which all Syrians
will participate.

We know that the vacuum left behind by the
destruction of all political spaces favoured the
emergence of terrorism in Syria, just as it did throughout
the region. The fight against terrorism is the priority in
our action in the Middle East. Da'esh, in recent months,
has suffered significant military defeats in the Levant,
thanks primarily to the action of the Global Coalition
against Da'esh, in which France has participated since
its creation. While the group has lost its essential
territorial stronghold, the fight against Da'esh in Syria
and Iraq is not yet over. In order to prevent the creation
of sanctuaries, we most sustainably stabilize the
regions liberated by the Coalition. The threat posed by
Al-Qaida in the region is also far from over. It remains

clearly present in the Arabian Peninsula.

Apart from the military effort, France believes that
we should do better collectively in four areas in which
France spares no effort. The first matter concerns the
overwhelming number of foreign terrorist fighters. The
second issue is combating financing for terrorism. That
is why France organized an international conference
on the topic in Paris from 25 to 26 April, which led
to the international community adopting an ambitious
agenda. The third area is the propagation of the
ideology of terrorist groups, in particular through the
Internet, where there is still progress to be made, in
close partnership with the private sector. The fourth
issue is fighting impunity for crimes committed by
terrorist groups. Reaffirming the prohibition of the use
of chemical weapons is essential, while not only the
Syrian army but also the Islamic State in Syria and the
Levant and in Iraq frequently resort to such weapons.
Preventing the re-emergence of chemical weapons
and their spread to non-State actors requires above all
strengthening the means available to the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
establishing a new attribution mechanism to succeed the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism.

In Libya, as in the rest of the Middle East, lasting
success against terrorist groups requires not only a
political solution and a stabilization and reconciliation
process but also strengthening and unifying national
civil and security institutions under the control of
civilian authorities. The national conference process
launched by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General should make it possible to establish
the conditions necessary for elections and for the main
Libyan actors to commit to respecting the time frame
established in Paris on 29 May, in close cooperation,
of course, with Mr. Ghassan Salame, who can count
on our full and complete support. The international
community must be unified in its support for the
commitments made.

Terrorists are also fuelled by organized crime, in
particular all kinds oftrafficking. In that perspective, the
Security Council adopted individual sanctions against
a number of migrant traffickers in Libya. In order to
dry up the resources of criminal and terrorist groups,
it is necessary to combat the economy of predation
and criminalization in Libya, as well as elsewhere.
Combating terrorist groups ultimately means seeking
to put an end to the breeding grounds for recruitment
by ensuring that a lack of prospects does not make a
new generation vulnerable to their rhetoric.

In that regard, the role of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA), among other entities, is
exemplary. Let us hear that in mind a few hours from
a pledging conference that will largely determine the
possibility for UNRWA schools to open for the next
school year. Everyone should very carefully weigh their
responsibilities in that regard. Any space in the region
left vacant by UNRWA will be filled by other actors, in
particular in Gaza, where minors make up more than
half the population.

I come to my last point. Given all the crises
in the Middle East, it is more crucial than ever to
ensure that our approach focuses on the international
framework for crisis settlement through two pillars:
promoting multilateralism and the role of the United
Nations, on the one hand, and respect for international
law, on the other hand. In that regard, the role of the
Security Council is essential. We demonstrated that
by adopting resolution 2231 (2015), which endorsed
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action as a result of
the international community's resolve and pragmatic
and realistic multilateralism. France will continue
to meet its responsibilities for as long as Iran fulfils
its commitments. We also call for a response to our
concerns with regard to the ballistic and regional
activities of Iran. That is necessary for the security of
the region.

However, the silence of the Council with regard
to certain crises will compromise our collective
credibility in the long term. After three conflicts over
the past decade, the Gaza Strip has been on the brink
of collapse and a new escalation for several months.
In that regard, on several occasions we have called
on the Security Council for a clear message that does
not ignore either the responsibilities of Hamas or the
obligations of Israel. We regret the fact that, to date,
we have not been heard. However, we will not give up.
The recent developments cannot be disassociated from
the lack of a political solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
question. It is more necessary than ever to reaffirm the
parameters of the two-State solution, to which there
is no viable alternative and which is enshrined in a
Council resolution. The ongoing settlement activity in
all its forms destroys such a prospect on the ground.
I am thinking in particular of the threat to the Khan
Al-Ahmar community. The Security Council cannot
abandon its responsibility. France stands ready to
contribute to any new development in that regard.

In conflict situations, the role of the Council is
to call on all warring parties to respect the relevant
law. With regard to the situation in Yemen, we should
remind the parties of the need to respect international
humanitarian law and to protect civilians, in particular
women and children. It is imperative that the parties
ensure comprehensive and unimpeded humanitarian
access, in cooperation with the United Nations, and
protect the health infrastructure and personnel, as
resolution 2286 (2016) underscores.

With regard to United Nations mediation, the
Security Council has expressed its unanimous support
for the work of Special Envoy for Yemen Martin
Griffiths and for his efforts to relaunch the peace
negotiations. We remain convinced that the only lasting
resolution of the crisis in Yemen is a political solution.
That is why we should contribute and continue to call
on the parties to engage in good-faith negotiations,
facilitated by the United Nations, with a View to an
inclusive political agreement.

France is convinced that respect for human rights
and international humanitarian law is an essential
precondition for lasting peace in the Middle East.
lmpunity for crimes should not and cannot be an
exception regionally. All victims of violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law
deserve justice. The international community must
work to that end, in particular through mechanisms
to combat impunity that it has set up created or
implemented adopted whether they be international
criminal jurisdiction, such as the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon or the International Criminal Court in the case
of Libya, or to collect evidence in order to prepare legal
proceedings, such as in the cases of Syria and Iraq, in
support of the competent national authorities or as a
substitute for them if such authorities cannot or are not
willing to do so.

In conclusion, Sir, you may rest assured of the
resolute engagement of France in that region of the
world in respect of its principles and in commitment
to its tireless efforts to address the crisis in the Middle
East. We would like to see the Security Council fully
shoulder its responsibilities. France also intends to
contribute to all efforts to establish regional dialogue
mechanisms for the peaceful settlement of disputes and
dialogue for the stability of the Middle East. The future
of the Middle East and the credibility of the Security
Council are at stake.

