Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me begin by
also welcoming Leila Zerrougui to our meeting in her
new role as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). We look forward to working
with her, and she can count on our strong support. Let
me also express my appreciation for the presence of
Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
Okitundu and thank him very much for being with us
today.

Since we last met in this Chamber to discuss
MONUSCO and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
yet another peacekeeper has died in that country. I would
like to express my condolences to his family and to his
country, Pakistan. Deliberate attacks on those working
for peace and stability in the Democratic Republic ofthe
Congo and elsewhere are completely unacceptable. The
worsening security situation is also taking a tragic toll
on the Congolese population. It includes new ethnic and
intra-communal conflicts, continued attacks against
civilians and renewed sexual violence and brings with
it an acute humanitarian crisis. Human rights abuses
and violations are also increasing, especially in the
context of the electoral process. In this regard, violence
by State security forces against peaceful protesters is of
particular concern.

An important step on the path to lasting peace
and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
would clearly be the holding of credible, transparent,
inclusive and peaceful elections on 23 December,
with the ensuing democratic transfer of power as per
the Constitution and the 31 December agreement.
This is something that requires the support of all,
including regional actors, with which coordination
continues to be essential. We welcome the progress
made on technical electoral preparations, including, as
noted by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, the voter rolls, the budget and the electoral
laws, but credible elections also depend on the overall
electoral environment. For the elections to be credible,
it is vital that human rights be respected, promoted and
protected. Confidence-building measures, as per the
31 December agreement, including to ensure women's
full and effective participation, are also essential. We
encourage steps to increase the number of women
candidates, in accordance with the Constitution as well
as the electoral law.

The year 2018 is indeed crucial for the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo, and MONUSCO has a crucial role
to play. The focus of the Mission must continue to be on
protecting civilians and supporting the implementation
of the 31 December agreement, including the elections.
In so doing, it needs to be effective. To protect civilians,
the further strengthening of early-warning mechanisms
and, most importantly, early proactive action is needed,
including through conflict resolution and good offices.
This is in addition to improvements in its military
response, which should include enhanced so-called
enablers and allow for the Force Intervention Brigade
to regain its capability. The Mission's support to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to conduct a credible
electoral process and enable the holding of free and fair
elections is also critical. In supporting this, we would
encourage renewed efforts on the part of the Mission in
its technical assistance and its good offices. Support for
an opening of the political space, confidence-building
measures as per the New Year's agreement, women's
political participation and efforts to build trust among
the stakeholders will be an important form of support
by the Mission for the holding of free and fair elections.
In all of this, the Mission, of course, needs to be
adequately resourced.

Soon a year will have passed since our - the
Council's - experts Zaida Catalan and Michael Sharp
were brutally killed while investigating violations of
Security Council sanctions in the Kasai region. Sweden
appreciates the Secretary-General's commitment
to establishing the truth. The perpetrators must be
brought to justice. Meanwhile, the ability of the Group
of Experts to safely carry out the mandate that has
been given to it by the Council must be supported by
MONUSCO.

In the long run, the recurrent violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo can be resolved only
by addressing its root causes, including not only further
democratization, human rights, good governance and the
rule of law, but also economic development and poverty
alleviation. The Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region outlines measures in this regard and
must be implemented. There must also be an integrated
plan for an overall whole-of-United Nations approach in
support of sustainable peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is the responsibility of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo - but with the assistance of the
whole of the United Nations, the region and other parts
of the international community, including financial
institutions - to enhance efforts towards sustainable
and lasting peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
