The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls the
seriousness of the events that took place in
Kisangani on 14 May 2002 and immediately
thereafter, and expresses its appreciation for the
report and recommendations presented to the
Council by the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR) (S/2002/764),
building on the investigation conducted in
association with the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) into the events to which the Council
had drawn the attention of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights
(S/PRST/2002/17). It reiterates its strong
condemnation of the killings and attacks against
civilians, soldiers and police officers that took
place on 14 May 2002 and thereafter in
Kisangani. The Security Council stresses that the

Rassemblement Congolais pour la Democratie
(RCD-Goma) is responsible for the massacres
that took place after regaining control over the
city's radio station on 14 May. The Security
Council demands that RCD-Goma take the
necessary measures to bring the perpetrators and
those among them who ordered or were involved
in the massacre to justice. The Security Council
stresses that Rwanda has a duty to use its strong
influence to ensure that RCD-Goma complies
with this demand.

"The Security Council stresses that RCD-
Goma will be held accountable for any
extrajudicial executions, including among
members of the civil society or detainees at the
detention centres of RCD in Kisangani. It also
stresses that Rwanda has a duty to use its strong
influence to ensure that RCD-Goma takes no such
action. It requests MONUC to continue its
investigations in cooperation with the OHCHR in
order to gather further information concerning the
massacres in Kisangani and to make
recommendations on concrete measures to be
taken to effectively end impunity. It recalls
MONUC's mandate to extend its protection, in
accordance with its resolution 1417 (2002) of 6
June 2002, to civilians under imminent threat of
physical violence, in the areas of deployment of
its armed units, and as it deems it within its
capabilities.

"The Security Council reiterates that RCD-
Goma must demilitarize Kisangani without any
further delay or condition and stresses this would
prevent any future recurrence of these recent
tragic events. RCD-Goma must also cooperate
with MONUC and OHCHR in their investigations
to identify all the victims and perpetrators in
Kisangani so that the latter will be brought to
justice, and also to ensure an end to all violations
of human rights and to impunity in all areas under
its control.

"The Security Council expresses its serious
concern at the absence of accountability
throughout the Democratic Republic of the Congo
noted in the report of the OHCHR, and calls on
all parties to take immediate steps to ensure an
end to impunity and full respect for human rights.

"The Security Council also expresses its
deep concern at the strengthening of troops in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
expresses particular concern at the situation in
South Kivu, in particular in the Hauts Plateaux
and around Minembwe, where fighting has
increased between the Rwandan Patriotic Army
and Banyamulenge, supported by other armed
forces. It calls for the cessation of this fighting,
which is having a severe humanitarian impact on
the population in the area. It calls on the
Government of Rwanda to cooperate with the
teams from MONUC and OCHA which are to be
sent to the area as soon as possible to establish
the facts, including by providing the necessary
security guarantees.

"The Security Council also expresses its
concern at the rising tensions in the Ituri region
and calls on all parties to exert restraint. It also
expresses concern at the military actions in
Pweto. It requests the Political Committee of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement to address
expeditiously the issue of Pweto, in accordance
with the Kampala and Harare plans for
disengagement and with the decisions taken by
the Joint Military Commission (JMC), and in
accordance with its resolution 1399 (2002) of 19
March 2002.

"The Security Council welcomes the efforts
and good offices of the Republic of South Africa,
in its capacity as Chair of the African Union, and
of the Secretary General, to help the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda reach an
agreement to tackle the problem of the armed
groups and to take forward the withdrawal of
Rwandan troops, in the context of the full
withdrawal of all foreign troops from the territory
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
accordance with the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement
and relevant Security Council resolutions. In this
regard, it encourages the leaders of the two
countries to continue working out ways to address
their fundamental security concerns, and
welcomes the discussions between representatives
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda on the idea of a curtain of troops, as a
mechanism for countries of the region to
cooperate to ensure the security of their common
borders.

"The Security Council requests MONUC
and the JMC to assist the parties in the
development of the curtain mechanism.

"The Security Council reiterates the
importance it attaches to an all-inclusive
agreement on the political transition, taking into
account the progress achieved in Sun City, and in
the

this regard expresses its full support for the
efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General and calls on all actors in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the region to
cooperate fully with him. The Council welcomes
the support of the African Union, in particular
through the Special Representative of the Interim
Chairman of its Commission, for this process.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and all other States in the region.

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and for all MONUC personnel, and
demands that RCD-Goma fully cooperate with
the Special Representative and MONUC in the
implementation of their mandate.

"The Security Council, noting the
encouraging political developments both in terms
of contacts among the Congolese parties and
among regional States, calls on all the parties to
recommit themselves to taking forward these
political processes and to refrain from any
military action that would undermine the progress
for peace."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2002/22.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.15pm.

