Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran):
At the outset, Sir, allow me to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of May.

The people and the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran were greatly distressed to learn that
during the night of 7 May 1999 the Chinese Embassy in
Belgrade, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, came under
attack, resulting in loss of life and property damage. We
would like to convey our sincere condolences to the
Government and the people of the People's Republic of
China for the unfortunate loss of the lives of Chinese
diplomats. Our condolences go particularly to those
families which lost loved ones in this tragedy.

In my capacity as Chairman of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference (OIC) Contact Group on Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Kosovo, I would like to take this
opportunity to express once again the grave concerns not
only of the members of the OIC Contact Group but of the
whole international community, including the Islamic
countries, at the escalating humanitarian tragedy that
continues to unfold in and around Kosovo. The plight of
the refugee and internally displaced Kosovar Albanians
has shocked the conscience of humanity. We salute the
neighbouring countries for so generously shouldering the
burden of caring for the refugees. Members of the OIC
Contact Group have been responsive to the imperative of
burden-sharing at this difficult time and will continue on
their course until the refugees and displaced persons
return to their homes in peace and safety.

Moreover, the OIC Contact Group is deeply
concerned about the ripple effect of the Kosovo crisis.
We believe that the continuation of the current Kosovo
crisis could endanger the fragile peace and security in
other parts of the Balkans. The grave concern of the OIC
Contact Group about the forced flight of an increasing
number of the Muslims from Sandjak and about their

 
taking refuge in neighbouring countries, mainly in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, has been conveyed to the Security
Council.

The OIC Contact Group deeply regrets the failure of
the Security Council to deal effectively with the crisis in
Kosovo and to put an end to the plight of the Albanian
Kosovars. Reiterating that the Security Council has the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, we hope that the Security Council will
accelerate its endeavours in order to carry out its
responsibility under the United Nations Charter in an
effective manner.

In view of all this, the OIC Contact Group has, since
the onset of the crisis, taken a number of initiatives to help
to contain the crisis and to find a peaceful solution. To this
end, the OIC Contact Group decided in its Ministerial
Meeting, held in Geneva on 7 April 1999, to strengthen
contacts with all parties concerned, thus trying to promote
a peaceful, just and lasting settlement of the Kosovo crisis.
In this connection, a high-level delegation of the Contact
Group, headed by the Foreign Minister of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, in April visited a number of capitals,
including Moscow, Bonn, Tirana and Rome. Exchanging
views with officials of various countries, the OIC
delegation explored ways and means of cooperating at the
international level with a view to promoting a peaceful, just
and lasting settlement of the Kosovo crisis.

We wish to recall the declaration of the Ministerial
Meeting of the OIC Contact Group, held in Geneva on 7
April 1999; to confirm our strong condemnation of the
policy of ethnic cleansing perpetrated by the Serbian
authorities against the Albanian Kosovars; and to demand
an immediate halt to all repressive actions undertaken in
Kosovo by the Serbian authorities and the immediate
withdrawal of the Serbian military and paramilitary forces
from Kosovo.

In its statement dated 22 April 1999, the OIC Contact
Group expressed support for the proposals made by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations on 9 April, in
which he called upon the Yugoslav authorities to undertake
five commitments to allow a lasting political solution to be
found through diplomacy to the crisis in Kosovo. We also
support the latest initiatives of the Secretary-General,
including his consultations with concerned officials in
various capitals, his appointment of two envoys and the
decision to undertake a humanitarian-needs assessment in
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, starting in Kosovo.

The OIC Contact Group lends its full support to all
diplomatic efforts and initiatives in search of a just and
durable political solution which would ensure, inter alia,
an end to the Yugoslav policy of ethnic cleansing and the
swift, safe and unimpeded return of all Kosovar refugees
and internally displaced persons to their homes under
international protection.

While appreciating the efforts being made by the
international community and recalling the mobilization
already underway in the Islamic countries to assist the
Kosovar refugees, we emphasize the continued necessity
of providing humanitarian assistance to the refugees in
and around Kosovo with a view to alleviating their
sufferings.

In light of the increasing and continuing plight of the
refugees and displaced persons in and around Kosovo, the
OIC Contact Group decided to lend its full support to the
resolution submitted by the Caucus of the Non-Aligned
Movement and cosponsored it in order to underline the
fact that the worsening humanitarian crisis in and around
Kosovo requires immediate and serious international
attention.

