Mrs. Alingue (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to congratulate the delegation of Malaysia on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and wish you, Madam President, every success - for
yourself and for your team - in taking on your mission;
Chad assures you of its support. I would also like to
acknowledge the excellent Lithuanian presidency
for the month of May and personally congratulate
Ambassador Raimonda Murmokaite and her team for
that success. I also thank the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Residual Mechanism for
their respective briefings and reports.

We take due note of the significant efforts made
by the Tribunals to complete their work in spite of the
obstacles that remain as the completion date of ICTY
approaches. In the six months elapsed, the judicial and
legal activity of the ICTR essentially brought about the
completion of the appeals pending and the transition
towards the Residual Mechanism, which continued
to benefit from its technical and administrative
support. Given that this transition is nearly completed,
there remains one trial on appeal before the
Tribunal - namely, the Nyiramasuhuko et a]. (Butare)
case - before its completion scheduled for this year.
The Tribunal nevertheless continues the reduction of its
staff while providing assistance to Rwandan national
courts in the context of cases that are being transferred
to them.

We also take due note of the activities carried out
during the last six months and encourage all teams to
complete their work on time. However, we regret that
the six fugitives have not yet been found. In this regard,
we call on the countries where they are supposedly
located to show solidarity with the Republic of Rwanda
which must rebuild its nation scarred by genocide by
having the fugitives tried by the Residual Mechanism
and, in particular, by its own national courts.

Regarding the ICTY, it is also actively working
to wrap up its mission, particularly in the context
of its completion strategy. With the passing of two
important rulings during the period covered by the
reports, there remain seven judgements and orders to
be made. We should acknowledge in this regard that
of the 161 accused 147 have received final verdicts.
The ICTY's communication activities and efforts to
heighten awareness continue to develop. However, the
European Union funding for this purpose will end in
August, which suggests that there will be difficulties in
pursuing these efforts.

Delays in keeping on schedule remain for various
reasons. Many postponements of judgements and
appeals will be logged in spite of the predictions made
in the latest report. The health of some defendants, the
slow pace of the process, among other things, have
delayed the Tribunal's work during this period, but the
great challenge remains the departure of staff. Although
these problems are known, they could not be avoided
despite the warning by the Tribunal, which came up
with solutions that unfortunately did not receive the
necessary support of the competent United Nations
entities. In this context, we encourage the Tribunal to
continue implementing its strategy to completion while
continuing to consider appropriate diligent steps that it
intends to take to achieve that end. That having been
said, we believe it is also important that the Tribunal
further streamlines the judicial activities in order to
avoid the accumulation of delays.

Mr. Ibrahim returned to the Chair.
In conclusion, we regret the lack of progress in the
cooperation between the Tribunal and some States of
the region to try alleged perpetrators. In this regard we
encourage States to make every effort to see that these
judgements take place as soon as possible.

