Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): Allow me,
Madam, to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
applaud the initiative you have taken to hold this open
debate on peace, security and development in the Great
Lakes region. We also take this opportunity to thank
and congratulate the Secretary-General and the
Security Council for the various initiatives taken to
address issues related to African conflicts. Those
initiatives have led to tangible results and steady
progress in conflict prevention and the establishment of
peace, stability and security on the African continent.

Africa has, through the establishment of the
Peace and Security Council, created an environment
conducive to the establishment of a strong institutional
partnership with the Security Council in the areas of
international peace and security. South Africa is
encouraged by the visible progress that the partnership
between the United Nations and Africa has made in the
areas of peace and security and urges the strengthening
of that collaboration in terms of Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter. There is a need to create a
structure that will enhance that institutional
cooperation in order to ensure effective and
coordinated action between the Security Council and
the African Union's Peace and Security Council. It was
in that understanding that we welcomed the Security
Council's presidential statement on the institutional
relationship with the African Union that was issued
after their meeting in the Sudan in 2004.

Experience has shown us that cooperation with
regional structures can enhance the maintenance of
international peace and security. We believe that the
result of this meeting should intensify collaboration
between the Security Council and other important
actors in the Great Lakes region, notably the
International Conference on the Great Lakes,
coordinated by the Special Representative,
Ambassador Ibrahima Fall, as well as the African
Union Peace and Security Council. We need to develop
collaborative structures that could include the follow-
up mechanism intended to assist in the implementation
of the regional confidence-building mechanisms
following the second summit of the International
Conference.

The debate today should help us focus attention
on the rapid progress being made in the situation in the
Great Lakes. The progress that is being made through
intraregional discussions is commendable, and South
Africa believes that those discussions, not to mention
the success that the decisions have achieved, contribute
directly to the reduction of tensions in the region.

For example, the reduction of regional tensions is
an important backdrop to the progress being made in
the transition process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo itself. South Africa commends the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
on its progress in voter registration. In addition, South
Africa believes that the operational success of the
constitutional referendum is an important indication
that the preparations being made for the general
election are effective.

That does not mean that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will be able to
surmount all the operational challenges that the
referendum brought to light. The international
community has been generous in the financial support
provided to the electoral process. However, some of
the pledged funds have not yet materialized, and we
call on those that have pledged funds to make them
available. South Africa, for its part, is planning to
provide technical support, training and manpower to
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to support the Independent Electoral
Commission's operations in the field.

The Great Lakes region of Africa is on the
threshold of establishing lasting peace. A lot of work
has been accomplished. South Africa is especially
pleased at the progress being made within the region to
reduce those issues that cause tensions between the
regional States. That progress includes, first, the recent
agreement between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Uganda to deal with the elements of the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) that were active in
Haut-Uele, Orientale Province, and the subsequent
elimination of LRA activities in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Secondly, the recent agreement between Uganda
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to permit
the establishment of a Uganda Amnesty Commission
office in North Kivu will also contribute to the
disarming and repatriation of Ugandan combatants.

Thirdly, the success of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in dealing with the
Congolese Revolutionary Movement (MRC) elements
active in Kilo and Mongwalu and the efforts by the
Congolese Government, in cooperation with Uganda,
to disarm and repatriate those MRC elements that
relocated to Uganda are also commendable. However,
there remain several issues of concern that have been
addressed by the States of the region, albeit without
success. For example, the continued presence of the
Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR)
and Mai-Mai forces in the Kivus remains a serious
threat to regional stability and the integrity of both the
transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the regional security-sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) processes. The
role of MONUC and the national army in identifying
strongholds, and putting military pressure on those
armed groups to join the DDR process is
commendable. South Africa is involved in those
operations under the command of MONUC and will
continue to support those operations.

The death of eight MONUC soldiers from
Guatemala demonstrates that more needs to be done to
ensure stability in the region. In that context, South
Africa urges States in the region to further strengthen
their cooperation in ending the activities of illegal
armed groups. We now have an opportunity to create a
framework that will strengthen democracy, good
governance, the rule of law, the protection of human
rights, reconciliation and the participation of civil
society, including women concerning issues of peace
and security.

We look forward to the holding of the second
Summit of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region which will enhance the dialogue that has
already been established among countries of the
region, most of which had been engaged, not so long
ago, in a bitter struggle against each other. The
International Conference will also ensure that those
countries own and are accountable for the peace
process in the region, in order to cement post-conflict
reconstruction and development.

In that regard, South Africa welcomes the
establishment on 20 December 2005 of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Clearly the Commission
will have a significant role to play in many African
countries, particularly in the Great Lakes region.
Burundi, which is emerging from conflict and has
successfully completed its peace process, should
benefit greatly. The Peacebuilding Commission should
constantly contribute to stabilizing the post-electoral
phase of institution-building, reconstruction and
development in both the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Sudan.

Madam President, we take the opportunity once
again to commend you for holding this debate, which
focuses attention on the importance of resolutions 1625
(2005), 1631 (2005) and 1649 (2005), and we implore
the Security Council to further strengthen those
instruments with the adoption of the draft resolution
now being considered (S/2006/51).

