Mr. Molefe (South Africa): At the outset allow
me to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her
comprehensive briefing on the situation in the Sudan.

South Africa continues to support resolution 1593
(2005), which referred the situation in Darfur since
1 July 2002 to the ICC, mandating it to investigate war
crimes and crimes against humanity. South Africa is
deeply concerned about the continuing violence and
loss of life in Darfur, as indicated by the Prosecutor in
her report. South Africa deplores the fact that violence
has been directed at civilians in particular.

While we note the significant progress achieved in
the peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts in Darfur,
South Africa is concerned by the persistent security
challenges and human rights violations, as highlighted
in the special report of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations on the strategic review of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(S/2019/445). What is of particular concern is the fact
that women and children remain the most vulnerable to
and affected by sexual violence, which continues to be
used as a weapon of war in Darfur.

South Africa calls on the military and security
forces to ensure the full protection of civilians and
respect for human rights and freedoms in Darfur. In
that regard, in line with the 13 June communique of
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
and the 3 June press statement issued by the African
countries represented on the Council, we strongly
condemn and lament the tragic and unjustified loss of
life and remind the transitional authorities in the Sudan
of their obligation to protect civilians and respect their
fundamental rights.

We urge the Transitional Military Council, the
Declaration of Freedom and Change Forces and all
other parties to return to the internal dialogue with
the aim of responding to the legitimate aspirations
of the Sudanese people. Furthermore, we call on the
Transitional Military Council to return to the framework
established by the African Union. We underline the
primacy of African-led initiatives in the search for a
lasting solution to the crisis in the Sudan. It is important
that the Sudanese people chart their own path of peace,
devoid of interference. That is also vital for ensuring
that the substantial progress in peacebuilding achieved
in Darfur is not reversed.

South Africa urges all stakeholders in the Sudan
to engage in constructive dialogue in order to restore
peace and stability in the country. That is also vital for
regional stability.

