Mr. Toure (spoke in French): It is my honour
to introduce the report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (S/2017/111). I should like to inform
the Council of developments that have arisen since
the report was published. First, however, I should like
to describe the context in which these developments
have unfolded.

On 14 October, stakeholders of the political elite
of Guinea-Bissau signed the Conakry Agreement,
paving the way for the country's return to political
and institutional stability and creating the long-term
conditions necessary for the enactment of key reforms
laid out in the road map of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), which has been
endorsed by the African Union, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, the European Union
and the United Nations. In essence, the Conakry
Agreement was intended to mark a definitive departure
from the recurring episodes of instability and create a
foundation for a political renaissance in Guinea-Bissau.

Four months later, the stalement continues with
each passing day. The dialogue, reconciliation and
mutual concessions that characterized the spirit and
letter of the Conakry Agreement have been superceded
by dissent and the polarization of positions. Following
the Abuja summit of 17 December, the ECOWAS Heads
of Government expressed their serious concern in that
regard and urged the stakeholders to comply strictly
with the provisions of the Conakry Agreement. The
United Nations reiterated that call. Despite that urgent
appeal, the political rifts continue to deepen. In that
context, on Monday, 6 February, the Prime Minister
submitted on schedule the Government's programme to
the Speaker of the National Assembly. The Assembly's
timetable for consideration of the programme has
yet to be established. What we are seeing is growing
mistrust among the political stakeholders, fueled
by verbal escalations, reciprocal accusations and
myriad accusations.

(spoke in English)

On 5 January, the Government dismissed all
regional Governors and the Mayor of Bissau. It also
appointed new officials to various governmental and
security institutions. On 20 January, the decision to
rotate the security personnel deployed at the National
Assembly prompted a swift condemnation by the
Permanent Commission of the National Assembly as
being illegal and made without prior consultations with
the Speaker. Four days later, on 24 January, unknown
elements reportedly broke into and took documents
from the Office of the Speaker. Both the Office of the
Speaker and the Parti africain pour l'independance
de la Guinee et de Cabo Verde (PAIGC) have blamed
the Government and linked this incident to earlier
accusations made by Mr. Nuno Nabiam, the runner-
up in the 2014 presidential election. The latter had
alleged that there was a plot to force the convening
of a parliamentary session to adopt the Government's
programme through the removal of the Speaker and
the replacement of the National Assembly's Bureau.
The Prime Minister has, however, dismissed these
allegations, stating that no hostile actions would be
taken against the National Assembly and its leadership.

On 8 February, the Bureau of the National Assembly
rejected a request by the Prosecutor General to lift
the parliamentary immunity of PAIGC President and
former Prime Minister Domingos Simoes Pereira to be
heard as a witness in connection with past contracts
reportedly signed by his Government with private
banks. The Bureau decided that Mr. Simoes Pereira
should be heard by the National Assembly instead.

Yesterday, the African Union Peace and Security
Council convened in Addis Ababa to examine, among
other items, the situation in Guinea-Bissau. The
Council expressed concern over the deteriorating
situation in the country and the lack of progress made
in the implementation of the Conakry Agreement. The
Council reiterated its support for the ECOWAS-led
mediation process and urged all parties to refrain from
any act susceptible of further escalating the situation.

I would like to seize this opportunity to reiterate my
appreciation to the Heads of State of ECOWAS and in
particular to its Chairperson, President Ellen Johnson
Sirleaf of Liberia, for persevering in their mediation
efforts and to the ECOWAS Mediator for the country,
President Alpha Conde of Guinea, for his crucial role.
The United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), in collaboration
with the P-5 partners, will work to support the timely
deployment of a planned high-level ECOWAS mission
to Guinea-Bissau to help advance the political dialogue.

Any breakthrough in the political dialogue will
remain short-lived if the structural causes of the
instability are not addressed. It will therefore be
critical for all national actors to strictly implement the
provisions of the Conakry Agreement, which remains
the framework for any effective and sustainable
resolution of the current political crisis.

Despite the political crisis, Guinea Bissau's
economic performance has been remarkable. According
to the World Bank, the economy is estimated to have
expanded by 5 per cent in 2016, reflecting the impact
of a bumper cashew harvest. That is consistent with
the level of growth recorded in 2015 and compares
favourably to the 2.3 per cent growth in 2014. Sustaining
this economic growth, however, will require stability
and statesmanship. On the social front, the Government
has managed to pay salary arrears of several months,
particularly in the health and education sectors.

On a related note, I am also pleased to report
encouraging steps towards fostering national
reconciliation and social cohesion. From 8 to
11 February, the organizing commission for the national
conference organized an international symposium on
the theme "Facing the past to build the Guinea-Bissau
of tomorrow", at the National Assembly's premises.
The symposium was a welcome step forward for
the peace and reconciliation efforts in an otherwise
deadlocked political environment. The President of the
Republic attended the symposium and promised that he
would convene the honorary committee of the national
conference, over which he presides. UNIOGBIS
will continue its day-to-day technical and fmancial
support to national dialogue efforts at various levels, in
collaboration with the Peacebuilding Fund.

In the continued absence of a fully functioning
Government, the United Nations and international
financial institutions must continue to coordinate efforts
towards mitigating risks and reducing socioeconomic
vulnerabilities, including through business-for-peace
initiatives. To that end, we are currently working to take
forward a partnership initiative between UNIOGBIS,
the United Nations country team, the World Bank and
other interested partners to effectively strengthen local
resilience and promote peace in Guinea-Bissau, in line
with resolution 2282 (2016) which calls for a more
integrated political, security and development approach
to sustaining peace.

In the face ofthis challenging political environment,
UNIOGBIS will review its approach and restrategize in
line with current exigencies. That was why a strategic
review mission, led by the Department of Political
Affairs, travelled to Guinea-Bissau in December
to work with UNIOGBIS and the United Nations
country team to agree on the strategic priorities for
UNIOGBIS in the short to medium terms. The mission
recommended some important structural adjustments
to improve the internal performance of UNIOGBIS
and enhance synergies with the United Nations country
team for better delivery. The main recommendations
of the strategic review mission have been outlined in
the report of the Secretary-General. It is my hope that
the Council will give positive consideration to these
important recommendations.

(spoke in French)
Guinea-Bissau being located in a subregion that
faces important security challenges, it is critical that
the international community strengthen the country's
national capacities to address the complex problems
facing it. The people of Guinea-Bissau are proud,
peaceful, hard-working and aspire only to enjoy better
living conditions. I appeal to the entire political class
to reach beyond all partisan considerations, put the
national interest above all else and focus on the real
problems of the country, including the fight against
poverty and the promotion of sustainable development.
As the political landscape narrows, it is important to
promote dialogue and consultation.

Guinea-Bissau will continue to need the special
attention and support of the Security Council to find
the path to political stability and socioeconomic
development without delay. I take this opportunity to
reiterate my call on all political leaders to ensure that
all their actions and steps conform to the Constitution
and the legislation governing the organs of State.

