Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me
begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Council and by
thanking the Ambassador of Gabon for his very able
leadership last month.

I thank both Special Representative De Mistura
and Ambassador Tanin. I want to thank Special
Representative De Mistura for his briefing this
morning and for his continued exceptional service in
Afghanistan. I ask him to convey to the staff of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) the deep and abiding gratitude of the United
States for the critical work they do in the face of
considerable hardship. That hardship was again made
tragically clear on 1 April, when a mob attacked the
UNAMA compound in Mazar-e-Sharif, resulting in the
deaths of seven United Nations staff members. We
reiterate to their families and loved ones our deepest
condolences. As always, we stand with the United
Nations in the face of such a brutal assault, and again
we urge fellow Member States to provide the United
Nations with the resources it needs to reinforce its
facilities and protect its staff.

Let me briefly highlight three top priorities for
my Government in Afghanistan. First, as President
Obama recently said, July marks the beginning of a
responsible transition that will see Afghan forces
gradually taking the lead in securing their own country.
By 2014, this process of transition will be complete
and the Afghan people will be responsible for their
own security. As Afghan security forces move into the
lead, the United States will continue to reduce its
military footprint, and our mission will change from
combat to support. As President Obama announced last
month, the United States will withdraw 10,000 troops
from Afghanistan by the end of this year. The
remaining 23,000 surge troops he announced in
December 2009 will leave Afghanistan by the end of
summer 2012.

President Obama made this decision from a
position of strength. We have made significant progress
towards our goals. The United States military surge,
together with additional troops committed by our allies
and partners, has helped stabilize more of the country
and shifted the momentum away from the insurgency.
Afghan security forces have improved in quality and
grown by more than 100,000 troops. In some areas,
these improvements have already allowed for the
transition of responsibility for security to the Afghan
National Security Forces.

In the face of violence, terror and intimidation, as
Ambassador Tanin noted, Afghans are defending their
country, establishing local police forces, reopening
markets and schools, and creating new opportunities
for women and girls. We will continue to support them
as they reclaim their country after decades of strife,
long after our military mission has ended.

Secondly, even as we pursue this transition to
Afghan security responsibility, we are redoubling our
efforts to pursue a peaceful end to this conflict. We
support Afghan-led initiatives to reconcile the Afghan
people, including the Taliban. We have taken tangible
steps to advance Afghan reconciliation and
reintegration initiatives, including support to the
Afghan High Peace Council and provincial police and
reintegration councils.
As Secretary of State Clinton said in February
and as President Obama reiterated in June, the
necessary outcomes of any negotiation would have to
include a commitment by reconciling insurgents to
renounce violence, abandon any alliance with Al-Qaida
and abide by the Afghan Constitution, including its
protections for women. As evidence of our seriousness,
we champion the Council's decision to split the
sanctions regime pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
and to establish distinct sanctions for Al-Qaida and the
Taliban. Resolution 1988 (2011) is an important tool
for promoting reconciliation while isolating extremists,
and it sends a clear message to the Taliban: There is a
future for those willing to rejoin the fold of peaceful
Afghan society.

Finally, let me touch briefly on an important part
of Afghanistan's democratic development - its
electoral system. Last year's parliamentary elections,
the first run by Afghans since the fall of the Taliban in
2001 , represented a historic step for the Afghan people.
Afghan electoral institutions - the Independent
Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission - demonstrated professionalism
throughout the process. They performed admirably,
despite a difficult security environment and allegations
of fraud.

We are consulting closely with Afghan officials
and our international partners, including UNAMA, on
the recent announcement by the special elections
tribunal, which called for the electoral results of 62
seats in the Wolesi Jerga to be overturned. We urge
Afghanistan's political leaders and all Afghan
institutions to act within their clearly defined areas of
competence, in accordance with the Afghan
Constitution and electoral law, preserving the
necessary system of checks and balances between the
judicial, executive and legislative branches. The United
States has been clear and consistent about the need for
Afghanistan to detect and deal with fraud related to the
election process, in accordance with the Afghan
Constitution and democratic principles, as provided for
by the mechanisms of the Independent Election
Commission. It is important that Afghanistan's
Parliament fulfil its constitutional role on behalf of the
Afghan people.

Meanwhile, we must continue to strengthen the
capacity of Afghanistan's electoral institutions. Long-
term electoral reform remains key to the country's
democratic future. As we look to the 2014 presidential
elections and beyond, we must ensure that we learn the
lessons of the past several years, for the benefit of
Afghanistan's democratic future.

The year 2011 will be a pivotal one, capped by an
international gathering in Bonn that will mark 10 years
since the international community joined with the
Afghan people to help chart a new path together. The
past decade has seen great hardship and sacrifice, but it
has also produced real progress. With common purpose
and sustained commitment, we will continue to help
the Afghan people build a more peaceful and
prosperous future.

