Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I believe
we all sit here today with a heavy heart because we
have lost our brother and friend. Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
was kind and caring. He always had a smile on his face
and his laughter was contagious. I do not know how we
come to terms with the fact that we lost him so soon. I
have no doubt that he is tellingjokes in heaven. I would
like to extend our condolences to the people of cote
d'Ivoire and to let them know that we feel their sorrow
and pain. He represented them well. With that, I will
say that we have lost the sweetest among us. I think
that he would always want us to remember the reasons
we are here and our goal. I think that that would be the
greatest tribute we could pay to his memory.

I would like to thank Special Representative
Arnault for his briefing. I would also like to welcome
the participation of the Vice-President of Colombia and
presence of the Foreign Minister in the Council.

After a week in which the Council had six separate
meetings in an effort to stop the bloodshed in Syria,
preserving and cultivating an existing peace agreement
takes on special meaning. The Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace, which ended five decades of war in Colombia,
has created the conditions for the just and lasting peace
that Colombians deserve. It was a historic achievement,
but peace in Colombia remains an unfinished project.
All ofus have a role to play in ensuring that it succeeds.

First, we should give credit where credit is due. We
have seen significant and visible progress in the early
phases of the implementation of the Peace Agreement.
In just over six months, the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) handed over thousands of weapons and
explosives. It has also transformed itself into a political
party and participated in elections.

For its part, the Government has begun
reincorporating thousands of ex-combatants into
civilian life. It has established transitional justice
institutions. The challenge remains for the Government
to expand its presence throughout the country. We
cannot allow areas formerly controlled by FARC-EP
to fall into the hands of criminals and illegal armed
groups. That would undo much of the progress of
the peace accord. We encourage the Government to
continue efforts to eliminate Colombia's ungoverned
spaces. The United States also urges the Government to
continue the full implementation of the comprehensive
peace plan, which includes efforts to reintegrate former
combatants into civilian life.

The peace accord provides an important opportunity
to address historical land issues that have driven conflict
and violence in Colombia. We welcome President
Santos Calderon's landmark decree meant to formalize
land ownership for more than 2.5 million farmers.
Improving access to land is essential to transforming
rural livelihoods. Criminal groups and narcotraffickers
have dominated rural areas of Colombia for decades.
With secure land titles, the Colombian people can
provide for their families without feeling beholden
to those groups. It will also help achieve sustainable
solutions to reducing coca cultivation, prevent violence
against human rights defenders, and build a strong
foundation for lasting peace in Colombia.

But peace is a two-way process, and the Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun (FARC) has
significant responsibilities too. For peace to succeed,
FARC must honour its commitments under the
agreement. It must provide compensation to victims of
the conflict. Restoring trust in Colombia's institutions
after so many years of conflict will be extremely
difficult. In fact, it will be impossible ifFARC does not
cooperate. FARC must participate fully and honestly
in the transitional justice process. During my trip
to the region in February, I saw the tremendous role
that Colombia is playing to combat drug trafficking
in Central America. That is another good sign for the
peace process. The success of the Peace Agreement
is inseparable from our shared efforts against
drug trafficking.

The United States and Colombia have set a goal
of reducing cocaine production and coca cultivation
in Colombia by 50 per cent in 2023. We encourage
the Government to recognize drug trafficking for the
damage it does to the social, economic and security
well-being of the country. The Government must
accelerate its counter-narcotics effort. FARC should
also live up to its obligations to end its involvement
in drug trafficking and share any information it has
on drug-trafficking routes. Drugs fuelled the conflict
in Colombia and eroded its Government and civic
institutions. The United States stands ready to continue
to assist in the recovery.

Finally, we would like to thank the Government
of Colombia and the Vice-President for all they have
done to help the Venezuelans flooding into the country
to escape the oppressive Maduro Moros regime. At
a time when Colombians have had their hands full
consolidating the peace of their own country, they
have stepped up to the challenge of helping others.
We are grateful not just for their kindness but for the
leadership Colombia is showing. The United States
is fully committed to supporting Colombia and the
implementation of the peace accord. The challenges are
real, but the outlook is bright. We look forward to our
continued friendship and partnership with a stronger,
safer Colombia in the years to come.

