Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia)(sp0ke in Arabic): I
would like at the outset to welcome on behalf of Tunisia
the heads of State of the African countries and the
Ministers participating in this very important meeting. Their
presence here expresses the special importance they attach
to the issue we are discussing today: the situation in the
Great Lakes region, and particularly in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. My country, Tunisia, which has
made our continent, Africa, one its foreign policy priorities,
shares the sense of importance that has been clearly
manifested today and that is apparent in the statements of
the African leaders this morning and of the heads of
delegation before the Council.

I wish to express to you, Mr. President, our
appreciation for your friendly country and for your personal
efforts in taking the positive initiative of including this
issue in this month's series of meetings dealing with
African issues.

The issue of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is truly a central issue that has broad dimensions and is
related to the situation in the Great Lakes region. The
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
continues, as do tragedies, strife and the exploitation of
the resources of the Congolese people, who continue to
suffer and also at the expense of the entire region and its
security, peace and stability. In this context, we are very
concerned at the deterioration in the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
has become tragic with the increase in the number of
refugees and internally displaced persons, the lack of food
security and the deterioration in health conditions. This
situation threatens any attempt to bring about an end to
the conflict. We call primarily for more support to be
given to the efforts made by United Nations specialized
agencies in providing the necessary assistance to alleviate
the suffering of the Congolese people.

In this meeting we have heard many valuable
statements, in which many African leaders have shown
what is being done - within the Organization of African
Unity, within the Southern African Development
Community or at the personal or individual level, as well
as the tireless efforts being made to deal with the conflict
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes region and to smooth relations between the various
parties concerned. These efforts resulted in the signing of
the Lusaka Agreement, which has enjoyed great support
from the international community, especially from the
Security Council, and is aimed at ending tragedy and war
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Agreement
supports the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and provides for the
security and stability of neighbouring countries, as well as
good relations with them. We hope that all parties will
sincerely and seriously implement this Agreement.

However, six months following the signing of the
Agreement, when the Lusaka mechanism began to
operate, with close cooperation between the Organization
of African Unity and the United Nations, we note that the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
the region generally is still precarious and difficult. There
have been repeated violations of the Agreement, which
represent a real threat to the future of the Agreement and
a return to large-scale war. This is a source of serious
concern for us.

We reiterate our position that there is no alternative
to a negotiated peaceful settlement between the parties.
We call on them to respect the Ceasefire Agreement and

 

to fulfil their commitments. The international community
must help them achieve this objective. We must support the
Joint Military Commission to enhance its efficiency. Within
this framework, the international community must reaffirm
the importance of respecting the territorial integrity,
sovereignty and unity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as its natural resources.

The United Nations is still focusing on the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The Secretary-General has prepared a new
report (S/2000/30) in which he has proposed gradual
measures to be taken by the United Nations to deploy
military observers and to send a large-scale peacekeeping
mission. However, due to the complexity of the conflict and
the vast area of the country, this mission is considered one
of the most difficult in United Nations history. Therefore,
we must have the necessary political will and must plan
carefully for this mission and its mandate, and we must
provide the requisite financial and logistical resources.

Tunisia supports these proposals and reaffirms its
readiness to participate with its available resources. It calls
upon the international community and the donor States to
assume responsibility and calls upon all parties to the
conflict to cooperate with the mission, to provide
unhindered access to its personnel and to accelerate its
implementation and success. This is their first
responsibility.

We wish to commend the cooperation between the
OAU and the United Nations in the implementation of the
Lusaka Agreement, particularly through the Joint Military
Commission. We commend the support given by some
States to provide it with resources. We register great
satisfaction over the work of the Political Committee, and
we call upon the parties to continue their efforts.

The Security Council has recently been asked to
shoulder its responsibility with respect to African issues and
to accelerate its pace on those issues. Some have said that
the Democratic Republic of the Congo will constitute a test
of the Council's commitment; that test is taking place
today. The Council must prove its commitment to follow up
its previous resolutions on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and to implement them, and to work quickly to
protect the Lusaka Agreement.

As a new member of the Security Council, Tunisia
assumes its own role by calling upon the Congolese
leadership to make every effort to engage in national
dialogue and to achieve national reconciliation. In that
context, we welcome the agreement by the Congolese
parties on the appointment of the former President of
Botswana as neutral facilitator of the political negotiations
among those parties. We encourage him in his work, and
wish him and our Congolese brothers every success.

Again, we believe that there is no alternative to
dialogue, mutual understanding and national
reconciliation; were these to exist, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo would make great headway
towards peace. We call for the provision of assistance to
the Congolese parties so that they may begin their
dialogue in an atmosphere of independence and
seriousness.

We hail the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative for the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mr. Kamel Morj ane, and the entire United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for their intensive efforts to address the conflict in
that country. We hope that today's meeting will contribute
to the establishment of a dialogue among the parties to
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in the Great Lakes region with a view to reaching a
common understanding of what is needed to put an end
to the conflict.

The stability, peace and security of the region cannot
be achieved overnight; they require time, political will,
patience and mutual trust among all the parties, as well as
genuine implementation of what has been agreed upon.

The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is related to the situation in the Great Lakes region
and to developments on the other negotiating tracks. We
must therefore think of the common, fundamental regional
issues that we ought to consider in a broader framework
and to which we must find a comprehensive solution.

Tunisia has for many years followed developments
in the Great Lakes region, and has sought to bring about
rapprochement in that region; indeed, President Zine El
Abidine ben Ali hosted a second summit meeting of
leaders of the Great Lakes region in March 1996. Tunisia
calls for the convening of an international conference on
the Great Lakes region under the joint auspices of the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity.

