Mr. Mulet: My briefing will focus on the
persisting tensions in northern Kosovo since the
Council's latest discussions on the situation a few
weeks ago.

As mentioned in the briefing of Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Farid Zarif on
30 August (see S/PV.6604), following the 25 July
events the Kosovo Force (KFOR) mediated a common
understanding between all sides that KFOR would be
responsible for the administrative boundary
crossings - Gates 1 and 31 - in the North until at
least today, 15 September. That understanding was
intended to manage the situation until Belgrade and
Pristina resumed the dialogue facilitated by the
European Union in Brussels on 2 September. The
implementation of the understanding led to a gradual,
although not full, de-escalation of tensions in northern
Kosovo and the removal of almost all roadblocks that
had been set up by members of the Kosovo Serb
community.

The 2 September meeting in Brussels dealt as
planned with the issue of the Kosovo customs stamps,
which had initially triggered Pristina's embargo on the
Serbian goods and been one of the reasons given for
the police operation in northern Kosovo on 25 July.
Indeed, agreement was reached on the mutual
recognition of customs stamps by Pristina and
Belgrade. We understand that other customs-related
issues, including the establishment of customs checks
at the two gates in the North, were not addressed in the
agreement.

The Security Council will recall that, prior to
25 July, the European Union Rule of Law Mission
(EULEX) was in charge of the gates and exercised
partial customs controls by recording the traffic at the
gates and scanning documents. The information gained
in that manner was shared with Kosovo police and
customs, and with Serbian authorities Via the EULEX
Liaison Office in Belgrade. With EULEX police,
EULEX customs also conducted joint random security
checks.

As 15 September drew closer, the Kosovo
authorities began announcing that they intended to
establish full border and customs control functions at
the gates after the expiration of the 15 September
deadline for the KFOR regime there. In that regard, we
understand that an operational plan has been prepared
by Pristina, in coordination with EULEX, KFOR and
11-49879
some other international stakeholders, to be
implemented in a phased manner, starting tomorrow,
16 September. The current plan, according to
information we obtained from various sources, entails
EULEX resuming customs and border police duties at
Gates 1 and 31, accompanied by two local officers at
each of the two gates - one Kosovo customs officer
and one Kosovo border police officer. We understand
that efforts will be made to deploy one ethnic Albanian
officer and one ethnic Serb officer. We also understand
that, at this stage, there will be no revenue collection at
the gates. According to EULEX, for commercial goods
entering the Gate 31, customs fees will need to be paid
at the Mitrovica South Customs Terminal.

A joint statement issued yesterday by the EU
Special Representative and EULEX refers to the
agreement reached on 2 September regarding the
recognition of the customs stamps and notes that the
EU Special Representative and EULEX were consulted
by the authorities in Kosovo on the process of
implementing that agreement and the EU expects the
embargoes relating to trade between Serbia and
Kosovo can now be lifted. The head of EULEX, Xavier
Bout dc Marnhac, stated that

"This is all about improving the rule of law in the
north which is in the interest of all law-abiding
citizens and is what EULEX is for. There will be
mixed teams at the gates. The operational work
will be done by EULEX, according to its
mandate."

In a press conference announcing the Kosovo
authorities' plan for the implementation of the
agreement, Kosovo Prime Minister Thaci, stated that
the plan was part of the overall "vision of the
Government of Kosovo for the citizens of Kosovo
living in the northern part of the country" that "will
serve to expand the programme of local Government
reform embedding and expanding the presence and
authority of the Republic of Kosovo there". He added
that he was sending a message "to all Serbs in northern
Kosovo that the Government of Kosovo is in service to
all citizens regardless of ethnicity".

At the same time, Pristina's plans for the
establishment of customs controls at the gates are
strongly opposed by the Kosovo Serbs in the North,
who continue to reject the authority of the Kosovo
institutions. In reaction to these recent statements, a
number of peaceful protests were organized during the
11-49879
past week in the North, with the participation of
Serbian schoolchildren, judicial and medical
employees and others. Overall, an atmosphere of
concern and anxiety seems to prevail, with the Kosovo
Serbs showing increased vigilance and readiness to
react to developments - for example, by
re-establishing road blocks at the main bridge in
Mitrovica, as well as the main roads in the North.

A number of local political representatives have
also rejected the 2 September agreement on the
customs stamps and have strongly criticized KFOR and
EULEX for a lack of status neutrality, due to their
support for Pristina's plans. In anticipation of
developments at the gates, it has been announced that
all public institutions and private businesses will be
closed in northern Kosovo tomorrow, 16 September.
Today, we were informed that, at 9 p.m. local time,
Gate 1 was closed by KFOR due to approximately 100
Kosovo Serbs who had gathered there. Although not
officially closed, Gate 31 has been sealed off by a
Kosovo Serb-owned truck, completely blocking the
road.

For its part, Belgrade has stood firm against
Pristina's stated plans to establish customs checks in
the North - an issue it expected to discuss in the
context of the EU-facilitated dialogue. Serbian
President Tadie stated in a press conference that "the
fact that Serbia has been informed about Pristina's
intentions does not mean that we accept these
intentions". He said that Serbia would do everything it
could for that not to occur, and warned the
international institutions that "if it occurs, they bear
responsibility for all the eventual consequences". He
added that "This is now an attempt to impose unilateral
solutions by KF OR and EULEX, who are obliged to be
neutral in status" and that, for Serbia, "it is especially
distressing that those who are ready for this sort of
unilateral action are ready to do so with the use of
force".

In the light of what I have mentioned, we are very
concerned that the implementation of the announced
plans could lead to a hardening of positions on the
ground, threaten stability and lead to another outbreak
of violence. Although not consulted on the substance of
those plans by Pristina or other international
interlocutors, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo has proactively
approached all sides to gather information, facilitate
communication and send messages - to both Belgrade
3
and Pristina, as well as to the northern Kosovo Serb
leaders - advocating calm and discouraging unilateral
action or the use of force and violence. During the past
few days, Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zarif has also met with many key
interlocutors to personally convey that message, and
facilitated a meeting between the northern Kosovo
Serb leaders and the Deputy Commander of KFOR.

UNMIK will continue to work closely with all
sides to identify a way forward that will aim to
safeguard security and peace throughout Kosovo and
avert a new crisis. We also expect that all international
presences in Kosovo will discharge their mandated
duties accordingly. But above all, it rests with the sides
to demonstrate their full commitment to dialogue,
reconciliation and peace, rather than unilateral action
or the use of force. Today, Council members have the
opportunity to send a clear message that Pristina and
Belgrade need to take responsibility for preventing the
recurrence of violence in northern Kosovo, tomorrow
and in the future. We are opposed to unilateral action,
on the one hand, and opposed to overheated rhetoric by
any party, on the other, including any action that would
threaten the gains and future of the dialogue.

