Ms. Mogherini: I thank the Lithuanian presidency
for the invitation to participate in today's meeting,
which we value greatly. We are here to share with
the Security Council the urgent need to address the
tragedies that we are facing in the Mediterranean.

The year 2015 looks even worse than the previous
year, despite the fact that 3,300 migrants died in 2014
trying to enter the European Union by sea, which
means that three out of four people who perished
while crossing a border anywhere in the world died
in the Mediterranean Sea. This tells us that our first
priority is to save lives and prevent further loss of life
at sea. We in the European Union believe that this is a
responsibility that we all share, not only as Europeans
but also globally.

This is an unprecedented situation, and an
exceptional situation requires an exceptional and
coordinated response. There is an urgent need to
respond in an immediate and joint way - an emergency
response to a structural phenomenon that is here to stay
if we do not act effectively on its deep, real causes,
namely, poverty, conflict, crisis and human rights
violations throughout Africa and the Middle East and
beyond, including what is being seen in the situations
in Syria, Afghanistan and the Horn of Africa.

We are aware of the fact that there is no one magic
solution, but that there must be a comprehensive
response to a complex problem. It is not only a
humanitarian emergency but also a security crisis,
since migrant networks are linked to, and in some
cases finance, terrorist activities; which contributes to
instability in a region that is already unstable enough.

Addressing the situation is, first of all, a moral duty
for us, but it is also in the shared interests of all the
countries involved, the ones around the Mediterranean
as well as countries of origin and transit. We are here
to act immediately and to act together. We need an
exceptional response. I would like to say the European
Union is finally ready take responsibility - by saving
lives, welcoming refugees, address the root causes ofthe
phenomenon and dismantling criminal organizations.

We need to address these challenges with two basic
principles: partnership and a comprehensive approach.
First, we need close partnership with the countries in
the region, regional organizations, starting with the
African Union, and the wider international community,
in particular the Security Council. Secondly, we need
to act in a comprehensive way to address all related
issues - the immediate humanitarian emergency, the
security situation and the root causes in countries of
origin and transit. I would like to stress that sometimes
the countries of transit become countries of destination
themselves. Tackling the root causes means tackling
poverty, unequal access to resources - be they natural
or financial - conflicts, crises, and violations ofhuman
rights. What we need today is shared solidarity, a long-
term vision and immediate action, in full partnership
at the regional and global levels. That is why it is so
important for me to be here today.

The European Union will do its part. We have
already discussed, last month here in New York, how to
address this tragedy. As I stressed then, the European
Union is increasing its work to address the root causes
of the tragedies, and tackling trafficking and smuggling
in the Mediterranean. Since then, we have worked on
this with the African Union, including by holding our
college-to-college meeting in Brussels a few weeks ago.
In two days from now, on Wednesday, the European
Commission will present a new European agenda on
migration, offering solutions to both the immediate
challenges and ways to better manage migration in all
its aspects in the longer term, taking a new approach
and taking on new responsibilities. We will propose
to increase our settlement efforts and to enhance
legal opportunities to reach Europe. As European
Commission President Juncker said in the European
Parliament a few days ago, if we close the door to all,
people will come in through the windows.

On the other side, the Security Council has also
called for the full implementation of the Protocol
Against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and
Air, and urged all Member States to address illicit
migration flows and to contribute to dismantling
smuggling networks in the region. We all know that we
need to work on the whole set of issues related to these
tragedies. Tackling only one aspect will not lead to a
solution, and we need to work not only together - as
Europeans first of all, we have understood this - but
also with the regional and global communities.

On 23 April, we Europeans decided to step up
our efforts to tackle the humanitarian tragedy in
the Mediterranean. This includes efforts to disrupt
trafficking and smuggling networks. The European
Council decided to immediately strengthen the
European Union presence at sea, reinforcing the existing
Operations Triton and Poseidon. Their capacities are
being strengthened by tripling the financial resources
available to them and by the sending of additional
maritime assets. On that occasion, European leaders
also asked me to propose actions to disrupt the
business model of human trafficking networks across
the Mediterranean. The statement of the European
Council of 23 April asks the High Representative to
"undertake systematic efforts to identify, capture and
destroy vessels before they are used by traffickers",
in accordance with international law. To that end,
my presence here in the Security Council today is so
important for us.

In recent weeks, we have prepared for a possible
naval operation in the framework of the European Union
Common Security and Defence Policy. The mandate of
that operation is currently being elaborated with the
European Union member States in Brussels, and will
be discussed at the meeting of the European Union
Foreign Affairs Council exactly one week from now, on
18 May, with the possibility of the first decisions being
taken on that opportunity.

We want to work with the United Nations, in
particular the Security Council. We also want to work
withthe Office oftheUnitedNationsHighCommissioner
for Refugees. Yesterday, I again spoke with Antonio
Guterres. Our teams have already intensified their
common work, as it is our firm intention to always
respect international law, international humanitarian
law and human rights. That is a core, fundamental
value on which the European Union was built, and
as I said, it is our firm intention to honour it. We are
taking responsibility; we are working hard and fast, but
we do not want to and we cannot work alone. We need
partnership if we want to put an end to these tragedies.
We need to think and act together. We need to share
responsibilities. It is a European responsibility and a
global responsibility.

For the European Union, multilateralism is
key. Work in partnership is key. Respect for and the
promotion of human rights and international law are
key - on issues like the one before us, more than ever.
Let me explicitly assure the Security Council that no
refugee or migrants intercepted at sea will be sent
back against their will. Their rights under the Geneva
Conventions will be fully honoured.

Let me be very clear also on another critical
point - Libya. This is not all about Libya; we know that
very well. This can happen in other parts of the world,
but we all also know very well that the vast majority
of human trafficking and smuggling in recent months
is happening in Libya - or rather, through Libya. As
long as there is no unity Government that will exercise
its legitimate authority over the entire territory of the
country and its land and sea borders, the situation is
likely to continue this way. That is why the European
Union is not only supporting but supporting actively and
with full determination the United Nations-led process
of dialogue to reach an agreement on the formation of a
Government of national unity.

The European Union is politically, logistically
and financially supporting this process. I am myself
in close, daily contact with Bernardino Leon in that
respect. In Brussels, we hosted a meeting ofmayors and
municipal representatives from all over Libya recently,
as well as a business dialogue. Ten days ago, I myself
was in Tunis with Bernardino Leon to meet and talk
to all Libyan parties taking part in the dialogue. Our
message to all Libyans is clear. The European Union is
ready to support them in any possible way to make sure
that Libya becomes the prosperous, stable country it
can and deserves to be, united against all challenges the
country and its people are facing, and Europe will be at
their side in the ways they will decide and determine.

In the meantime, Europeans and Libyans need to
work together in partnership to fight trafficking and
smuggling organizations. That is a Libyan interest
and responsibility; it is a Mediterranean interest and
responsibility; itis aEuropeaninterest andresponsibility;
it is an African interest and responsibility; and, I would
say, it is a global interest and responsibility. We do not
and we will not act against anyone except in partnership
with all. We need to work together, and we are here to
work together.

That is also why we are stepping up our cooperation
with and support to key countries in Africa and the
Arab world, such as Tunisia, Egypt, the Sudan, Mali
and the Niger. We are also stepping up cooperation
with Turkey in view of the situation in Syria and Iraq.
We are increasing our work within existing dialogues
and partnerships, as well as regional efforts, such
as the Rabat and Khartoum processes. These are
fundamental elements of our comprehensive approach
to addressing all migration-related issues. We have
already established mobility partnerships with
Morocco, Tunisia and Jordan, and a dedicated dialogue
with Lebanon. These are comprehensive partnerships
that cover all migration-related aspects: legal
migration and mobility, with visa facilitation; the fight
against irregular migration; asylum and international
protection; and migration and development. We are
working with regional partners in building capacity for
maritime border management and search-and-rescue
operations.

It is also important that the European Union and the
countries party to the Rabat and Khartoum processes,
as well as the African Union, work in close partnership
on this issue. We therefore very much welcome the
prospects for convening a special summit in Malta in
the autumn, as I have already discussed with Ms. Zuma
recently. We are addressing together the issues of
poverty, war, human rights, and unequal distribution
of and access to resources, be they financial or other
kinds. We need to do this in partnership with all the
countries involved on an equal footing and in full and
mutual respect.

The European Union is ready to do its part. That
has not always been the case, I know. Now, I believe, we
are ready to do it. I believe that we are ready to address
challenges that affect us all and to do so not only from
a security perspective, but first and foremost from a
humanitarian perspective. The European Union can do
a lot - it will do a lot - but we cannot do it alone. This
has to be a common global effort. That is why we count
on the Security Council's support in saving lives and
dismantling criminal organizations that are exploiting

peoples' desperation.

Let me end by quoting Pope Francis, who has
said that "there are stories that make us cry and feel
ashamed". I call on the Security Council today to help
us all to stop crying and stop feeling ashamed.

