Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Before
getting to the main part of my statement, I would first
like to congratulate you, Sir, and all your team warmly
on your conduct of our work during this month. I
would also like to thank you for organizing this useful
synthesis meeting. In your concept note for the meeting,
you asked us not just to review the highlights of the
month but also to look ahead and focus on cross-cutting
issues and our methods of work.
In guiding our work, especially in closed
consultations, you consistently worked to reconcile the
importance of managing our time well with the desire
to make our discussions more interactive. The two
informal interactive dialogues held this month enabled
Council members to have a fruitful exchange with key
personnel, first on the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and later on
the review of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
To that I would add another welcome attempt to inject
a dose of interactivity into the Council's informative
open debates, as was the case during the meeting on
the role of the United Nations police, presided over
by Foreign Minister Bishop (see S/PV.7317). All those
efforts geared to greater interactivity, launched a few
months ago and improved over time, have undoubtedly
helped to enrich our debates and ultimately provide us
with better ways to shape the Council's action.

Considering that this has been a month full of
activity, I would like to emphasize a few specific
initiatives. In the wake of the adoption of resolutions
2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014), Mr. President, you chose to
organize an open debate at the ministerial level devoted
to the issue of terrorism and violent extremism (see S/PV.7316), sadly justified in the light of the ongoing
challenges posed by the threat ofterrorism and the need
for decisive action to combat it. The barbarism of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, whether through
the atrocities committed against the Syrian and Iraqi
peoples or the murder of those working to bring help
and assistance to people in need; the unspeakable
brutality of Boko Haram; the insidious appeal that
this extreme ideology has for more and more young
people around the world are all elements that demand
resolute action on the part of the international
community. The presidential statement we adopted at
that meeting (S/PRST/2014/23) will help to strengthen
the international community's action and cooperation
on the issue. It is now up to us to work to ensure that the
Council's measures go into full effect. In that context, I
would like to reiterate our belief that respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms must be an integral
part of our strategy against terrorism, or we run the risk
of the cure being worse than the disease.

It was also during your tenure, Mr. President, that
the Security Council held its first ever meeting on the
role of the United Nations police in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. The adoption of resolution 2185 (2014),
our first on police functions, is a useful addition to the
tools at our disposal for peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and reforming the security sector. It also constitutes
recognition of the increasingly important role that the
United Nations police plays in conflict situations and
peacebuilding, as we saw in that debate and in our
meetings on Liberia (see S/PV.7310) and South Sudan
(S/PV.7305), to cite only two examples.

The role of the United Nations police will also be
one of the many topics to be discussed during the review
of United Nations peacekeeping to be conducted by the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations. We
greatly appreciated the opportunity we were given this
month for a discussion with the Panel, and we hope that
the Council, like the other interested parties, will have
the chance to contribute throughout the review process.
As I said during our informal interactive dialogue, it
is particularly important that we establish synergies
with the reviews of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture and of the role of women in peace and
security, which will be conducted simultaneously.

Only yesterday, the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Valerie Amos, gave us the
latest update on the humanitarian situation in Syria
(see S/PV,7324). The figures speak for themselves and
I will not repeat them here. Through its adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014), the Security Council created a
framework enabling aid to be provided to populations
in need by the most direct routes possible. Thanks to
that resolution, almost 300,000 more people have been
able to benefit from humanitarian and medical aid.

It is vital to maintain that momentum, and in order
to do so the Security Council must play its part. We are
confident that we will be able to rely on the support of
our colleagues in the Council to renew very shortly the
decision made in resolution 2165 (2014) on operations
that cross borders, conflict lines and United Nations
monitoring mechanisms and thereby continue to give the
Office for the Coordination for Humanitarian Affairs,
as well as humanitarian agencies and personnel, the
support it needs from the Security Council to help those
trapped in the conflict in Syria.

I would like to say a lot more - to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing a meeting on general
issues relating to sanctions (see S/PV.7323), and to talk
about the situations in South Sudan, the Middle East,
Libya and Iraq, to mention only a few of the issues
we are dealing with - but I am not sure that it would
be a very good idea, from the point of view of the
efficiency of our work, to exceed the time allotted to
me to speak. I will therefore stop here, but I cannot fail
to offer Ambassador Cherif and the entire delegation
of Chad our best wishes for their presidency of the
Security Council in December. They can count on our
cooperation and support.

