Mr. AlJarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I have
the honour to address the Security Council today on
behalf of the States members of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC). At the outset, allow me to
congratulate the Kingdom of Spain on its presidency
of the Security Council and the fact that its Foreign
Minister is chairing today's meeting.

We meet once again in this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, at a time when the
occupied Palestinian territory and, in particular, the
occupied city of Jerusalem have been witnessing a
dramatically deteriorating situation as a result of the
escalation of Israeli military aggression against the
unarmed, defenceless Palestinian people and their holy
places. Israel's arrogance, disregard for international
law and disrespect for agreements with the Palestinian
side, as well as the total impunity that it enjoys for its
violations and crimes, have brought the situation to a
dangerous juncture.

On more than one occasion, the OIC - most
recently on 1 October at an extraordinary meeting of
the OIC Council of Foreign Ministers, held in New
York in the margins of the general debate of the General
Assembly at its seventieth session - has warned of the
consequences of the continued Israeli provocations,
incitement and attacks on the Al-Aqsa Mosque and has
condemned those attacks as an unprecedented assault
against the inalienable religious rights of Muslims all
over the world. They also constitute a violation of the
freedom of worship and the sanctity of holy places. If
they are not halted, they will further fuel extremism,
violence and racism and contribute to igniting religious
strife, endangering the prospects of peace and stability
in the region.

We renew our warning once again - as the
PalestinianPresident statedbefore the GeneralAssembly
three weeks ago (see A/70/PV.19) -that the continuation
of Israeli aggression against Islamic and Christian holy
sites in Jerusalem risks setting off a religious war, for
which only Israel would bear the responsibility. The
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, cannot ignore those dire warnings.

We cannot talk about the recent escalation separately
from its context. It follows decades of occupation,
oppression and the denial of the fundamental rights of the
Palestinian people. Furthermore, the current escalation
is continuing within the context of unprecedented levels
of Israeli aggression against the Palestinian people,
Israel's attempts to change the historical status quo at
Haram Al-Sharif, and the unparalleled increase in the
levels of terrorist attacks and crimes perpetrated by
Israeli settlers with the protection and encouragement of
Israeli forces. The Organization of Islamic Cooperation
reiterates the importance of preserving the Jordanian
Hashemite custodianship of the Islamic and Christian
holy sites in Jerusalem, including Haram Al-Sharif, as
has been exercised by His Majesty King Abdullah II
ibn Al Hussein.

One example of Israeli crimes was that committed
against the Dawabsha family. A young boy, barely
two years of age, was burned alive two months ago
by Israeli settlers. That reminds us of similar crimes
perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant. Furthermore, Israel's repeated attacks on
the Al-Aqsa Mosque represent only one aspect of the
terrorism that has been fuelled and protected by the
Israeli occupation. Recent legislation adopted by the
Israeli Knesset allows the occupation forces to shoot
at Palestinian demonstrators in the occupied city of
Jerusalem, which represents an official cover and
endorsement of the criminal operations and an explicit
provision of impunity for the killing and oppression
of the Palestinian people, ensuring the further loss of
innocent lives and worsening the injustices committed
against the Palestinian people.

The Organization of Islamic Cooperation strongly
condemns the policy of execution and deliberate murder
carried out by the Israeli occupation forces against the
Palestinian demonstrators in the occupied Palestinian
territory, particularly in occupied East Jerusalem. Some
of those acts, in which children have been targeted,
were captured by media cameras. Furthermore, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation condemns the
unprecedented escalation in the acts of violence and
terrorism by extremist settlers against Palestinian
civilians. Only this past month, Israeli violence has
claimed the lives of more than 45 Palestinians and
wounded more than 1,800 people, including women and
children.

Those crimes and violations show the horrible
reality of the occupation and the racist nature of Israeli
policies, targeting the Palestinian people, their land
and holy places. Moreover, the recent Israeli crimes
and practices have exposed and revealed Israel's lies
regarding its army's ethical code of conduct. How can
one leave an injured child to bleed after having shot
him? How is it possible that a teenager is shot only
because his smile provoked an armed and fanatical
Israeli settler? There is no definition for such acts other
than that of shameful war crimes. The perpetrators
of those crimes must be held accountable, and justice
must be done. The International Criminal Court was
established for such a purpose.

While the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
warns against the dangers posed by the Israeli
aggression to regional and international security and
stability, we call on the Security Council to shoulder
its responsibility by taking measures to stop the crimes
and violations committed by the Israeli occupation.
There is no doubt that the Israeli authorities consider
the silence of the international community in response
to its crimes to be an encouragement to continue with
acts of State terrorism. That silence encourages them
to commit further violations against the unarmed and
defenceless Palestinian people throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.

We renew our support for achieving peace based
on the two-State solution in accordance with the
Arab Peace Initiative and international norms, but we
underscore that it is not acceptable to remain silent or
merely to express indignation and concern about the
unspeakable Israeli war crimes, genocide and atrocities
that have been committed against the Palestinian
people. It is no longer possible to continue tolerating
the occupation while treating Israel as a State above
the law that practices terrorism and arrogance with
impunity. The perpetrators of those heinous crimes
should be prosecuted and brought to justice, and the
foreign occupation must end.

The current serious developments affirm the call
issued at the recent meeting of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation's Council of Foreign Ministers
for the Security Council to intervene earnestly and
immediately with a view to providing international
protection for the Palestinian people. The Council
must take a decision that establishes a political path to
preserve the two-State solution, based on the relevant
United Nations resolutions, and set a time frame
for ending the Israeli occupation, with international
guarantees and binding implementation mechanisms.
We expect the Council to do its best to restore security,
stability and peace, based on right and justice for the
peoples of the region rather than violence, occupation
and conflict, and to work towards enforcing its many
resolutions that seek to ensure the Palestinian people's
exercise of their inalienable and legitimate national
rights, particularly the right to self-determination in
their independent State ofPalestine with East Jerusalem
as its capital.

