Ms. DeShong (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I, too, would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Executive Director Coninsx for their briefings. We are especially grateful as well to civil society representative, Ms. Mona Freij, for her presence and briefing. We honour her work and the powerful words she shared, and we applaud her bravery and that of all the women who stand against the worst excesses of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da'esh).Today's meeting is undoubtedly an important opportunity for the Security Council to reaffirm its condemnation of all forms of violence, including terrorism. Indeed, despite all our efforts, terrorism remains a pressing challenge and one of the most serious threats to international peace and security. As noted in the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2020/95), the issue of foreign terrorist fighters remains acute. An estimated half to two thirds of the more than 40,000 persons who joined the so-called caliphate are alive. That means that foreign terrorist fighters are on the move, returning home or relocating to other theatres of conflict. Given the current assessment of the financial reserves available to ISIL at $100 to $300 million, we encourage all Member States to fully adhere to their obligations under resolution 2462 (2019). It is incumbent upon us to ensure that those financing, planning, perpetrating and supporting terrorist acts are brought to justice. At the same time, we wish to alert the Council to the fact that well-meaning but ill-fitting regulatory attempts to combat the financing of terrorism have had unintended effects on the banking system in small island locations. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, like many other countries around the world, has put mechanisms in place to combat those scourges. The establishment of our financial intelligence units is a critical tool in that area. My delegation strongly supports the Accra initiative to address threats posed by terrorism and transnational organized crime in West Africa. The launch of a joint United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and INTERPOL project, to be implemented in 2020, to facilitate information exchange on foreign terrorist fighters in Europe, Central Asia and the Middle East is one that we particularly hope will make a positive impact in the region. We also applaud the investigative efforts of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, including its role in collecting key documentary, digital, forensic and testimonial material in support of domestic proceedings to hold ISIL accountable for its crimes. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is of the firm view that addressing the multidimensional threats to international peace and security - in this instance those resulting from terrorism - requires gender-aware and gender-responsive analysis and action. Therefore, we really appreciated the briefing by Ms. Coninsx in that regard. Action and operational plans must include gender-just approaches that centre on the participation of women; promote survivor-centred remedial and reparatory actions against sexual and gender- based violence; and address the overall differential involvement in, and effects of, terrorism on women, men and children. In that connection, there is a need to design actions that are attentive to the other forms of difference and inequality that produce the condition of dispossession often exploited by terrorist organizations. Global and regional security challenges have increased in recent years, becoming more complex, multidimensional and fluid. In response to the concerns of terrorism and in an effort to enhance and guarantee a safe and free region, the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) counter-terrorism strategy was implemented in 2018. Formulated in keeping with and in support of, the United Nations Global Counter- Terrorism Strategy, adopted by the Secretary-General in 2006, the CARICOM strategy incorporates prevention, deterrence, denial, disruption, defence and response. We welcome the common joint Caribbean Community- United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism high-level regional conference on counter-terrorism strategies and preventing violent extremism, to be held in Trinidad and Tobago in March, as mentioned by Under-Secretary- General Voronkov. We are really looking forward to that event in the Caribbean. The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy represents the most comprehensive and effective decision taken by the international community to eliminate that dangerous threat. We welcome its seventh review, which will provide an additional opportunity to consider an improved and more effective translation of all its four pillars into concrete actions and measures. In our view, the issues being discussed here today can contribute to a meaningful outcome of the seventh review of the Global Counter- Terrorism Strategy. In closing, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is of the view that the fight against terrorism calls for hard work based on, among other things, collective action and intelligence-sharing to find and identify the perpetrators of the threat, pinpoint their locations and understand their strategies and goals.
