Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, let me thank you, Mr. President, and your
country for the initiative of convening this important
meeting. Egypt believes that competition over limited
resources, in particular shared water resources, may
increase the chances of conflict, especially given the
negative impact of climate change. That is already
evident in a number of conflicts on our agenda in the
Security Council.

Egypt has raised its water scarcity problem at many
international and regional forums. Egypt has a single
source of fresh water, namely, the Nile River. Egypt
derives 97 per cent of its water resources from the Nile
River and is entirely dependent upon it. Egypt is part of
the dry belt area of North Africa, where it rarely rains.
Egypt is also water deficient; it uses 102 billion cubic
metres per annum, whereas its total available water
supply from conventional resources is 58.8 billion
cubic metres per annum. That includes Egypt's share
from the Nile River, as well as water from rain, floods
and aquifers. Egypt is below the water poverty line,
as the per capita share decreased to 625 cubic metres
per annum and is likely to decrease further to 470
cubic metres per annum when the population reaches
120 million by 2025.

Egypt believes that water should be a tool for
cooperation, development and water security. Hence,
together with its brotherly countries in the Nile River
basin, in 1999 we launched the Nile Basin Initiative,
which seeks to enhance cooperation among all the
countries of the basin to achieve common goals and
interests. The Initiative has been highly successful. We
are now seeking to consolidate our gains and restore
its inclusive nature, following Egypt's suspension
of its participation in the Initiative's activities.

It is worth noting that Egypt believes that the
establishment of a Nile basin commission should be
based on sound principles that respect the interests of
all countries and are in conformity with the established
rules of international law. Such a commission should
include all Nile basin States, without exception,
in order to achieve the desired goals. However, we
have a number of concerns regarding the incomplete
framework agreement, including the fact that the
agreement recognizes the violation of the principle of
consensus that led Egypt to suspend its participation in
the technical activities of the Initiative since 2010.

Egypt still believes in the importance of serious
and constructive dialogue to restore the inclusive nature
of the Initiative and to settle the outstanding disputes.
Egypt welcomed President Museveni's kind invitation
to hold the Nile Basin States Summit on 17 June in an
endeavour to break the current impasse on this vital
issue.

Egypt believes that cooperation is the optimal
way to determine the best use of the Nile River. Such
cooperation can take the form of bilateral projects with
Nile River countries in order to make use of the water
without compromising the interests of other countries.
The Declaration of Principles on the Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam was concluded among Egypt, Ethiopia
and the Sudan on that basis. We would like to stress
the importance of all parties' full compliance with and
implementation of the provisions of that declaration.
Egypt believes in the vital role of preventive diplomacy
in preventing future conflicts on shared water resources
through the following tools.

First, we must follow the two principles of "no
harm" and "prior notification" among co-riparian
countries. In that regard, when countries upstream
develop projects on a shared water course without
rigorous studies showing the potential harm to countries
downstream and means of adaptation, by so doing they
are flagrantly violating those two principles.

Second, States must honour their obligations under
international law, including bilateral and multilateral
agreements on transboundary water resources. They
must refrain from unilaterally developing projects on
a shared water course without consulting with other
riparian States. It is worth noting that undertaking
consultations in accordance with legal rules and in
good faith will be for the good of all and will ensure the
sustainable use of the shared water course.

Third, everyone should know that any unilateral
measures on shared water resources will not produce
the desired outcomes ofa given project, but rather harm
the interests of other riparian countries in various ways,
such as a decline in the arable land area, a reduction
in energy production, increased environmental
degradation and poor water quality, rendering it unfit for
human use. We should be cautious and seek to prevent
this from happening in order to avoid internationalizing
these issues, which will be inevitable in the case of a
conflict that threatens international peace and security.

Fourth, we should avoid interpreting the principle
of the fair and equitable use of shared water resources
in a way that harms other riparian countries. How can
a certain usage be described as fair and equitable if it
harms the interests ofother countries, in particular those
downstream, and threatens their stability and security?

Fifth, other non-State international actors,
in particular international donors, banks and
construction companies, should respect international
standards regarding water facilities on transboundary
watercourses. Such facilities should not be funded
or erected without the prior approval of all riparian
countries, in particular those downstream, in order
to avoid disputes and prevent future conflict among
riparian countries.

Sixth, information should be exchanged on
successful international expertise in the field of
shared water resource management. A comprehensive
confidence-building approach should be adopted
in good faith, avoiding any unilateral measure that
would harm not only downstream countries, but the
hydrological cycle of the shared watercourses.

Seventh, the United Nations should play a clearer
role in developing cooperation mechanisms among
riparian countries along international rivers, building
capacity to optimize the use of water and working to
prevent water-related conflicts. This includes raising
awareness about international law principles governing
the use ofinternational rivers and enhancing compliance
with these principles.

Water can contribute to or threaten international
peace and security, and therefore requires further
attention so that related problems can be addressed in
a timely manner. Egypt is therefore of the view that it
is high time for the Security Council to take action and
produce an outcome that reflects all of the important
points to which I have alluded in my statement today.
We call on the Security Council to begin consultations
on producing an outcome of this important meeting
that would form the basis for future Security Council
resolutions or debates on preventing conflicts that
might arise in relation to shared water resources.

