Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the briefing by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, as well as her efforts to step up
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel.

The Sahel continues to face vulnerabilities in the
area of comprehensive security. The growing activity
of terrorist groups has affected the efforts to achieve
sustainable peace and speed up the implementation of
the Integrated Strategy, thereby jeopardizing security
and the safety of the inhabitants of the region. The
heightened violence by those groups makes it urgent
that we undertake national, regional and international
efforts to combat this scourge in a coordinated way so
as to prevent the proliferation of such organizations and
the escalation of violent extremism.

Regional and international coordination are also
urgent, given the porous borders and the vast territories,
which the countries of the region are barely able to
control. We therefore appreciate the efforts of the
States members of the Lake Chad Basin Commission
and of Benin in establishing and implementing a joint
multinational force to confront terrorist groups. We
encourage the countries of the region to follow that
example, all the while ensuring that the operations
of those forces are governed by international law and
human rights.

The deterioration in the security situation hampers
the implementation of the Humanitarian Strategic
Response Plan for the Sahel and efforts aimed at
saving lives and improving the resilience and ability
of Governments to manage the work of development
actors. The prevailing insecurity has served to create
a transit corridor from sub-Saharan Africa to North
Africa and Europe for people seeking protection
and who are exposed to trafficking. We are greatly
concerned about the situation facing displaced persons
who board boats bound for Europe with a legitimate
hope of finding a better world.

The complex emergency affecting the Sahel is
one of the most protracted humanitarian crises of
recent times, and is aggravated by food insecurity,
malnutrition, epidemics and natural disasters.
We reiterate the importance for the international
community to contribute to the financing of the relevant
humanitarian appeals. It is also imperative to further
strengthen the coherence of United Nations efforts in
the Sahel to create conditions conducive to the return
of refugees and internally displaced persons.

It is essential for States to continue to promote gender
mainstreaming and integrate women into all sectors of
public live. We note the efforts to implement resolution
1325 (2000) and the adoption in countries of the region
of laws on gender parity in public institutions - an
initiative we hope others will emulate.

The young people ofthe Sahel have few prospects of
a better future. It is urgent to promote investments in the
education, health and employment sectors and to create
opportunities for young people, thereby preventing
migration, radicalization and the recruitment of young
by terrorist groups.

We reiterate our support for the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, which is a model of
preventive action to prioritize projects to address the
structural causes of instability. The Strategy will allow
the Sahel region face the threat together and holistically
and to set up mechanisms for interaction and joint
cooperation among regional and local authorities.

