Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
begin by welcoming His Excellency Mr. Nebojsa
Radmanovie, the Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and thanking him for his comments.
Let me also welcome High Representative Inzko back
to the Council and thank him for his comprehensive
briefing and service in support of the Dayton Peace
Agreement.
Fifteen years ago this month, a Peace Agreement
was initialled in Dayton, Ohio, that helped end a
terrible war and established a framework for a lasting
peace. The United States made a commitment back
then to help Bosnia and Herzegovina achieve peace
and prosperity. We stand by that commitment today.

We are optimistic that Bosnia and Herzegovina
can develop into a strong, stable democracy that
respects the interests of all its citizens. The Bosnian
people have made enormous strides in the past 15 years.
Still, as the High Representative has indicated, much
more work needs to be done for the country to fully
realize its Euro-Atlantic future.

To move ahead with the closure of the Office of
the High Representative, the objectives set by the
Peace Implementation Council's Steering Board on
State and defence property issues must be met, together
with the rest of the 5+2 conditions. The defence
property issue also prevents Bosnia and Herzegovina
from reaping the benefits of its NATO Membership
Action Plan.

Constitutional reforms are also urgently needed to
address basic human rights concerns, make
Government more responsive to its people, and help
meet the requirements for Euro-Atlantic integration.
These decisions cannot be imposed from the outside,
but the United States will remain engaged and we will
help however we can.

Let me make three points in addressing the High
Representative's report (see S/2010/575, annex). First,
the United States welcomes Bosnia and Herzegovina's
recent achievements. International observers consider
the 3 October general elections generally free and fair.
We look forward to the formation of Governments that
can make progress on the pressing reform agenda. We
also welcome Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress
towards meeting the conditions for European Union
(EU) visa liberalization, which will spur economic
development and open the door to greater regional
integration. The United States further appreciates
Bosnia and Herzegovina's assumption of significantly
increased responsibilities in the international
community, including its service on the Security
Council and its important contributions to the
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan.

Secondly, we share High Representative Inzko's
concerns about what he describes as a deteriorating
political climate. Election campaigning is no excuse
for provocative and divisive political rhetoric. Leaders
need to work together across ethnic and party lines.
The United States is concerned about the expressions
of public support by some politicians for war criminals
indicted or convicted by the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia. We also condemn denials of the
Srebrenica genocide, which are simply indefensible.
Such attitudes undermine respect for the rule of law,
impede reconciliation and hinder inter-ethnic
cooperation. We expect Bosnia and Herzegovina to
meet all of its obligations towards the Tribunal, and we
expect it to take seriously its commitment to
implementing its domestic war crimes strategy.

Thirdly, let me affirm United States support for
the Office of the High Representative and the use of
executive powers when necessary. Numerous Security
Council resolutions have affirmed the High
Representative's Bonn powers and affirmative
responsibility to exercise them to ensure peace,
stability and compliance with the Dayton Peace
Agreement. All parties are required to respect and
implement the High Representative's decisions.

Following the formation of Governments, we
expect Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders to make
decisive progress on the outstanding elements of the
5+2 agenda for transition from the Office of the High
Representative to an EU Special Representative. We
look forward to constitutional and other reforms
necessary for the country to present a credible
application for EU candidacy.

We also note that the EU's presence - the
European Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR) - continues to contribute to a safe and
secure environment. It should be maintained. We
support renewal of the EUFOR mandate, which the
Council is currently discussing, and the continuation of
a credible EU military presence.

The United States remains fully committed to the
framework established by the Dayton Agreement. We
look forward to continued reforms as the country's
citizens and elected leaders assume full responsibility
for their future, eventually leading to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's full membership in the European Union
and NATO.

