Mr. Danon (Israel): I would like to thank
Poland for taking the initiative of convening this
important meeting.

Before I begin, I want to take a minute to highlight
the terror attacks that took place over the weekend,
which symbolize the real threats to peace and security
in the region. On Thursday, two young Palestinians
armed with knives suddenly began attacking police
officers in Jerusalem. One can look online at Youtube
and see the horrible images of young boys inciting and
attacking policemen. On Friday, a Palestinian drove his
car into two young Israeli adults as they were waiting
at a bus stop. On Saturday evening, the Israeli Defense
Forces stopped three armed terrorists from breaching
the Gaza security fence and attacking nearby civilian
communities. All of that happened in a matter of a
few days.

In addition, Hamas - an internationally recognized
terrorist organization - continues to hold hostage two
Israeli civilians and the abducted bodies of two fallen
Israeli soldiers, and refuses to return them home. They
also refuse to allow the International Committee of the
Red Cross to visit and provide information on their fate
and condition. The families of Lieutenant Hadar Goldin,
Sergeant Oron Shaul, Abera Mengistu and Hisham
Al-Sayed deserve to be reunited with their loved ones.
The international community cannot continue to stand
idly by as that evil ploy persists. The State of Israel will
not rest until all of its citizens are returned to our land.

We live in a historic age. Seventy years ago the world
bore witness to the greatest story in generations - the
re-establishment of the Jewish State in the Land of
Israel. That rebirth did not begin a new story. Instead,
it was the newest chapter in the continuing saga of
the Jewish people in the Middle East. Forty years ago
history was made yet again when a handshake between
Egyptian President Anwar Sadat and Prime Minister
Menachem Begin demonstrated to the world that Egypt
recognized the legitimacy of the Jewish State in the
Middle East, proving to the entire Arab world how we
can all live together in peace and security.
Today an unprecedented wave of normalization
is sweeping the region as Israel continues to develop
and improve relations with its Arab neighbours. In
June, Bahraini Foreign Minister Khalid Bin Ahmed
Al-Khalifa declared,

"Israel is part of the heritage of this whole region
historically. The Jewish people have a place
among us".

That is an extraordinary statement. The Foreign
Minister's words affirmed what is self-evident - that
the Jews are a part of the region's past, present and
future and that we have a right to sovereignty. That is
what sets the foundation for blossoming relations.

However, as I sit here today, the Palestinian
leadership has yet to recognize that historic right. On
the contrary, it keeps denying the Jewish historical
connection to the land of Israel and our right to
sovereignty. It is clear that the Palestinian leadership is
trying to prevent the normalization of relations within
the Middle East, which could unlock the great potential
of the region. This afternoon I direct my remarks to the
Palestinians and to all the Arab people throughout the
region. Here is my message: Israel is not their enemy.

We saw growing prospects for regional peace
and stability in the 1990s. In a climate of renewed
negotiations, Israel and Jordan reached another historic
peace agreement. Now, nearly three decades later,
Israel and our Arab neighbours find ourselves in a
similar environment. We have very good relations with
many countries in our region. More than that, Israel and
our Arab neighbours share a mutual understanding of
the region's threats and opportunities. We are deeply
involved in confronting extremism and terrorism across
the Middle East.

Yet the climate of today's relationship-building is
different in one large respect. Looming over us is a
dark cloud of the threat posed by the Islamic Republic
of Iran. The Islamic Republic of Iran's blatant pursuit
of nuclear weapons for militant purposes, in violation
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),
should indicate to everyone in the Chamber that the
regime does not want nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes. Iran's ballistic missile arsenal, the largest in
the Middle East, violates numerous Security Council
resolutions. Just last month, the Islamic Republic of
Iran test-fired a medium-range missile over 1,000
kilometres. Members should look at a map and think
about where such missiles could reach. Previously fired
missiles were adorned with the phrase "Israel must be
wiped out" in bold letters in Hebrew on their sides.

The regime's support for terrorism has a global
reach and is widely documented. Iran contributes more
than $7 billion annually to terrorist groups. Just two
weeks ago, the Islamic Republic of Iran announced
that it would increase its financial backing of Hamas
from $6 million to $30 million a month. Its support
of Hizbullah has contributed to the destabilization of
Lebanon. Its involvement in Syria has continued to
fuel the horrific civil war there, which has resulted in
hundreds of thousands of casualties. Such malicious
behaviour serves only one purpose - to export the
Iranian revolution.

Yet Tehran is succeeding only in one key
respect - bringing Israel closer to its Arab neighbours.
The Warsaw summit in February proved that Israel
and Arab countries can come together for regional
collaboration. In their statements, Arab Foreign
Ministers stood alongside Israel against the regime that
hijacked Iran and asserted our right to defend ourselves.
Behind closed doors, even here in this building, many
of the region's leaders freely admit that the main
threat to the Middle East is Iran. Most of the violence,
terrorism and chaos engulfing the region leads back to
one place - Tehran. Our Arab neighbours understand
that Israel is the leading force in the fight against
radicalism and terrorism. And an increasing number
of Arab countries are forging new ties with Israel. The
common challenges require Arab leaders to tell their
public what they already know to be true: Israel can be
a partner.

We also see extremism within the Palestinian
leadership. As Tehran openly calls for Israel's
destruction, Ramallah uses other means to undermine
the Jewish State's right to exist. That was best
demonstrated just last week when, in response to
a report on racism and discrimination within the
Palestinian Authority (PA), instead of acknowledging
the facts - it was not us, it was the United Nations
Special Envoy - what did the representative of the PA
do? He quoted from an anti-Semitic and revoked United
Nations resolution that stated that Zionism was racism.

Such despicable language exposes the Palestinian
Authority's anti-Semitism as it continues to incite
hatred among its people against Jews and the Jewish
State. The extremism of both Tehran and Ramallah is
increasingly at odds with the growing sentiment among
Arabs that Israel is and will continue to be a part of the
region. Despite the situation, Israel remains interested
in a dialogue through bilateral direct negotiations. So
far, the Palestinian leadership refuses that path. Some
of the challenges between Israelis and Palestinians are
not only bilateral; they are regional. Regional problems
require regional solutions. Therefore, I call on regional
actors that no longer see Israel as the enemy to be
involved in finding a solution, just as they pledged at
the Bahrain summit. The Arab people must understand
that Israel is not the problem. In fact, Israel is part of
the solution. We can be partners in creating a better
future for the region. To that end, I want to address my
next statement to the Arab people. I shall speak to them
now directly.

(spoke in Arabic)

I say to Arab people throughout the region what
is already known in Egypt and Jordan. Israel is not
the enemy.

(spoke in English)

Normalization is in our mutual interests. I would
like to emphasize that it does not come at the expense
of promoting dialogue with the Palestinian people. We
are ready to engage in direct negotiations. However, I
must ask, will the Palestinians even come to the table?
In his ground-breaking speech in the Israeli Knesset,
our Parliament, President Sadat said,

"There are moments in the life of nations and
peoples when it is incumbent on those known for the
wisdom and clarity of vision to overlook the past,
with all its complexities and weighing memories, in
a bold drive towards new horizons".

President Sadat's words were as true then as they are
today. Israel eagerly awaits the time when a Palestinian
Sadat will emerge to join us in a bold drive toward
the future.

