Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank the
representative of Peru for his briefing in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Counter-
Terrorism Committee.

As we heard from Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov last week (see S/PV.8178), military successes
have left Da'esh weakened and fragmented. But we
must remain vigilant, as Da'esh affiliates continue to
demonstrate resilience, foreign terrorist fighters seek
to return home from the battlefield or try to join new
theatres elsewhere around the globe, and individuals
and small cells continue to pose a threat. Critical
infrastructure remains an attractive target to these
groups, which is why the United Kingdom supported
the adoption of resolution 2341 (2017) last year and
why that resolution remains the important part of the
Security Council's counter-terrorism efforts.

A central feature of that resolution is to highlight
States' responsibilities to develop and continuously
improve their strategies for protecting critical
infrastructure from terrorist attacks, and I am glad that
the representative of Peru emphasized this point in his
briefing to the Council today. The United Kingdom's
national security strategy recognizes the importance
of securing our critical infrastructure from all risks,
including terrorism, and is fully aligned with our
counter-terrorism strategy. That alignment is important
because risks to critical infrastructure can come from
criminality or natural hazards as well as from terrorist
attacks. Our security is enhanced if we develop plans
that help us prepare for and respond to multiple
eventualities and if we ensure that there is coherence
between all stakeholders, from first responders through
counter-terrorism agencies to those responsible for
managing major incidents and emergencies.

Civil aviation, in particular, remains a target for
terrorism because of the potential for iconic attacks
and widespread fear and disruption. Guarding against
that risk, therefore, remains a key priority for the
United Kingdom.

Building on our work here in the Council, where we
adopted resolution 2309 (2016), the United Kingdom is
investing in new technology that will enhance aviation
security, and we worked closely with the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) on its Global
Aviation Security Plan, which was adopted in October.
The plan sets out a range of tasks for ICAO States and
industry that will help protect civil aviation from a
range of threats to security, including terrorism. We
were pleased that the Security Council welcomed
ICAO's Plan in its recent resolution 2396 (2017), and
we reiterate that resolution's call to ICAO, States, the
civil aviation industry and all other stakeholders to
implement the Plan in full.

I want to emphasize the importance of developing
strong partnerships between States and with private
industry in order to help us counter the terrorist threat
to our critical infrastructure. Here in the Council
we regularly affirm the importance of enhancing
cooperation between States to counter terrorism, but
it is a point that bears repeating once again. In an
increasingly globalized world, our infrastructure relies
ever more heavily on networks and supply chains that
are transnational in nature. To protect it, we have to
continue and increase our sharing of information
and expertise.

But, as we heard in the statement made by the
representative of Peru just now, partnerships with the
private sector are also vital. The private sector often
owns or manages parts of our critical infrastructure,
or the data and technology that underpin it. It therefore
has a duty to protect those assets, and Governments
have a duty to make sure that it does so responsibly, and
with sufficient understanding of the risks it faces. The
United Kingdom's Centre for the Protection of National
Infrastructure is a good example of how that can work.
The Centre is a governmental technical authority
that provides resources, guidance and expert advice
to businesses to help guard against external threats,
whether they come from international or domestic
terrorism or from other sources. The Centre works with
private industry to keep it up to date on threats, and helps
it to implement appropriate and proportionate protective
strategies that include a combination of physical,
personnel and people, and cybersecurity measures. In
his statement, the Permanent Representative of Peru
highlighted the importance of ensuring that States
define the infrastructure that is most critical to them so
that their resources can be prioritized most effectively.
The United Kingdom endorses that principle and
therefore ensures that the assistance of the Centre for
the Protection of National Infrastructure is targeted to
the most crucial elements of our infrastructure, whose
loss or compromise would have the greatest impact.

In conclusion, we must continue to ensure that our
infrastructure is protected against evolving terrorist
threats, and resolution 2341 (2017) remains a positive
step in support of our common defence.

