Mr. Crowley (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2077 (2012).
South Africa remains concerned about the scourge of
piracy and its negative impact on the political, social,
economic and humanitarian situation in Somalia. We
applaud the efforts of various States and organizations,
such as the United Nations Development Programme
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in
combating piracy.

We recall that article 100 of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea affirms the duty
of all States to cooperate as far as possible in the
repression of piracy on the high seas. Moreover, article
105 permits all States to seize a pirate ship and exercise
universal jurisdiction over persons committing piracy.
On its part, South Africa is a signatory to the Djibouti
Code of Conduct concerning the Repression of Piracy
and Armed Robbery against Ships in the Western
Indian Ocean and the Gulf of Aden. In the region of the
Southern African Development Community, we have
deployed naval assets for anti-piracy operations in the
Mozambique Channel.

South Africa continues to insist that piracy off the
coast of Somalia must be put in the context of the peace
challenges facing Somalia. In our View, a solution to
the problem of piracy off the coast of Somalia demands
holistic solutions and an end to the current conflict.
Piracy remains a symptom of a greater problem, namely,
the political, security and economic challenges on land.
The international community should therefore focus
more closely on, and direct more resources towards,
addressing the root causes of the Somali conflict, while
also maintaining the required pressure at sea against
perpetrators of piracy.

As stressed by the African Union Peace and
Security Council, one of the many issues that have to
be addressed in our search for solutions in Somalia
must include curbing illegal dumping and the illegal
plundering of Somali resources, including illegal
fishing and the dumping of toxic waste off the coast
of Somalia. Somali authorities must be assisted in
ensuring that the benefits of Somali resources are
enjoyed by Somalia and its people.

We note that the report of the Secretary-General on
the protection of Somali natural resources and waters
indicates that

"some observers claim that the international
naval presence to suppress piracy, authorized by
the Security Council, has in fact inadvertently
facilitated a resurgence of illegal fishing in Somali
waters"

and that "Due to a lack of a formal monitoring, these
claims cannot be verified" (S/2011/66], para. 44).
Similarly, the report refers to unconfirmed allegations
of illegal dumping off the coast of Somalia. In that
regard, the report notes that "Robust investigations
would be required as the security situation improves"
(ibid., para. 55). However, the report of the Secretary-
General contained in document S/2012/783 states
that there is no evidence of such activities currently
in respect of illegal dumping and that there is little
evidence to date to justify the claim that illegal fishing
and dumping is one of the reasons for forcing Somali
youth to resort to piracy.

My delegation finds it extremely difficult to
reconcile the inferences drawn by the latter, given
the lack of formal investigation or monitoring to fully
examine the issue. It is difficult to accept that the 2012
report, with its obvious methodological limitations,
could erase those historical claims and allegations in
the absence of thorough investigation or monitoring.
Those issues must be fully monitored and investigated,
no matter how inconvenient the allegations may be if
they are verified.

We hope that, in the context of paragraph 26 of
resolution 2077 (2012), those States and organizations
with a naval presence in the area will provide the
Secretary-General with the information necessary to
enable the Council to take that matter further. We look
forward to receiving further updates by the Secretary-
General on the issue of illegal fishing and dumping. If
we fail to take decisive action in that regard, we risk
creating the impression that the Council is willing to
act to curb piracy only because the vital economic
interests of some countries are threatened.

Finally, South Africa supports the call in paragraph
4 of resolution 2077 (2012) for Somalia to declare an
exclusive economic zone (EEZ). However, the absence
of a declared EEZ cannot be used to justify the illegal
exploitation of Somali resources in the zone. There is
nothing in the Convention on the Law of the Sea that
suggests that the existence of an EEZ is subject to its
declaration by the coastal State. Therefore, even as we
await the declaration of an EEZ by Somalia, fishing
and dumping in the maritime zone 200 nautical miles
from its coastline without the consent of its authorities
is illegal.

The international community must remain resolute
in condemning both piracy and the illegal fishing
and dumping of toxic waste off the coast of Somalia,
which are all reprehensible criminal activities under
international law.

