Mr. Richardson (United States of America): The
Security Council has taken a very important action today
in passing - unanimously - this resolution. This is the
unambiguous message to the leaders of Iraq: the Security
Council is united in its determination that Iraq must
comply with the resolutions of the Council and that Iraq
must reverse its decisions challenging the Council and the
international community. It is not for Iraq to set the terms
of its compliance; Iraq must simply comply. And, as this
resolution demonstrates, there will be consequences for
Iraq if it fails to do so.

Iraq's course of action must now be clear: to
announce the reversal of its unacceptable decisions and
pledge its full, immediate and unconditional compliance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions.

Sadly, Iraq has been following a different path. The
Deputy Prime Minister, since arriving in New York, has
insisted that his primary goal is to get the sanctions on
Iraq lifted. But he has learned today that the lifting of

 

sanctions must follow compliance, and not precede it. And
he asserts that it is the sanctions, not Iraq, that are wrong.
Iraq does not seem to understand that its objective can only
be reached through full compliance.

Let us not forget that, after years of trying every trick
to deceive the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) inspectors, on 29 October Iraq sought to bar
UNSCOM. inspectors with American citizenship, out of the
more than 20 nations represented in the organization. Then
it blocked UNSCOM. inspections, interfered with
monitoring operations, and menaced UNSCOM
reconnaissance aircraft. All of these actions are gross
violations of Iraq's obligations under Security Council
resolutions. And, as this resolution states, threaten
international peace and security.

Iraq has failed in other areas mandated by the Council
and it has given no sign that it will cease activities and
policies intended to threaten its neighbours. Indeed, it gives
every indication that it intends to continue to develop a
dangerous arsenal of weapons of mass destruction. Which
is what this is all about.

In 37 previous reviews of Iraq sanctions, the Security
Council has concluded that Iraq has not met the simple
conditions for lifting sanctions. The current crisis is not just
more of the same at a higher volume. It is a violation of the
United Nations Charter itself, as well as a categorical
rejection of Council resolutions. And, in response, the
Council has imposed the first new sanctions on Iraq since
the Gulf War.

Because Iraq's obstructionist actions have been taken
under orders of the highest authorities in Baghdad, the new
sanctions target only Iraq's leaders, not its people. The
Deputy Prime Minister arrived this week to lobby
delegations that Iraq is too impoverished to face continued
sanctions. The Council enacted resolutions 986 (1995) and
1111 (1997) to protect the Iraqi people from the Iraqi
Government's insistence on guns instead of butter. The
Iraqi regime waited a year before accepting the resolution
and ever since has tried to manipulate its implementation.
In September, the Council had to adopt resolution 1129
(1997) to make up for Iraq's refusal to sell oil under this
programme.

The United States feels, just as does every member of
this body, compassion for the Iraqi people and empathy for
their plight. That is why the United Nations and the
Sanctions Committee have gone to great lengths, battling
Iraqi obstructionism at every step, to ensure the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. That is why, thanks to the
Sanctions Committee's efforts, implementation of
resolution 1111 (1997) is moving forward. And that is
why we are prepared to examine ways to further improve
the delivery and effectiveness of humanitarian aid in the
interest of the people of Iraq.

The United States looks forward to the day when the
sanctions against Iraq can be lifted. It is not our desire to
see Iraq, a land of past greatness which could be great
again, permanently saddled with United Nations sanctions.
But Iraq must first comply fully and unconditionally with
the requirements of relevant Security Council resolutions.
Iraq has known this all along. There is a light at the end
of the tunnel and the Iraqi leaders control the switch.

Today we are here to get Iraq to reverse its decision
to challenge UNSCOM. Neither the Secretary-General,
nor his envoys nor the Security Council has been willing
to negotiate Iraqi compliance with Council resolutions.
Today's resolution marks our determination to continue to
proceed together on a firm and united course. Iraq should
heed today's message. Iraq must abandon its hope to
escape its obligations through deception or defiance.

Today's resolution is a clear call for Iraqi
compliance and a reaffirmation that the Council is willing
to use the tools of the United Nations Charter to ensure
compliance. Iraq should get that message.

