Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting on a topic to which Argentina attaches
great importance, that is, the partnership between
the United Nations and regional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security. Your
presence and participation here today, Mr. Minister,
shows how relevant and how substantive this debate is. I
would also like to acknowledge the enormous work and
the quality of the work done by your delegation at the
United Nations and as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council, under the leadership of Ambassador
Cherif. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his statement and for presenting his biennial
report on cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and other organizations, as well as for
his recommendations on the means to strengthen that
cooperation. We would also like to thank in particular
the High Representative of the African Union for Mali
and the Sahel, His Excellency Mr. Pierre Buyoya, for
his statement.

We all know that the Charter of the United Nations
encourages the Security Council to use regional
agreements in carrying out its primary responsibility
to maintain international peace and security. The
future of United Nations field operations is inextricably
linked to the process of regionalization of peacekeeping
operations. Argentina therefore acknowledges the
important contribution of the African Union and of other
relevant organizations and regional and subregional
arrangements in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

I note that in our first Security Council presidency,
Argentina proposed the issue of the role that we have
with regard to regional and subregional organizations
to contribute to international peace and security. We
focused specifically on the promotion of peace under
Chapter VI of the Charter. I think the topic of this
debate is a common concern and responsibility.

In recent years we have seen how new agreements
and subregional organizations are playing a
fundamental role in both the prevention of conflict
and the establishment and promotion of peace. These
are undoubtedly examples of the contributions of
agreements and organizations that have developed new
capabilities to act in the field of international peace
and security, as we have seen in various peacekeeping
operations in the Economic Community of West
African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Southern African Development
Community.

It is true that the contribution of regional
organizations complements the work of the United
Nations by incorporating knowledge of the specific
context, including elements that are important to
know, to understand and to take on in resolving the
deep-rooted causes of conflicts. Moreover, it is those
regional organizations that have a special social and
political interest in the situations, such as geographic
proximity and the confidence that local actors
generate. Those attributes have been recognized as
being extremely valuable and positive, and they are
comparative advantages of great value. The United
Nations, for its part, provides its universal composition
and its legitimacy, along with its operational
capacity and experience. However, it is necessary to
acknowledge that this decentralization tendency is also
a consequence of the need to overcome the structural
or operational shortcomings of the system of collective
security through the use of regional organizations.

The Council has the role of authorizing the
deployment of different types of field operations and
of establishing an operation's mandate and conditions
of deployment. That means that the peacekeeping
operations led by regional organizations are adapted to
the mandates and goals of the United Nations. But it
also means that the Security Council must be capable
of listening to what regional organizations are saying,
because we have just said that those regional actors have
greater knowledge, a specific interest and a relationship
of trust that we have to respect and uphold.
However, I would like to point that this tendency
towards decentralization to regional and subregional
organizations cannot be a recourse that is thought
of in terms of a lesser responsibility for the Security
Council. It is not a delegation of responsibility by the
Security Council, but rather a strategy of cooperation,
trust and joint leadership. Nor can it be a cheaper
solution for peacekeeping operations. It is a matter of
a cooperation that is not thought of as a dispersal of
resources, but rather of proper financing, the necessary
capabilities and the crucial element of cooperation and
complementarity.

Furthermore, in our View, it is essential for United
Nations mandates and objectives to be implemented
with respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity and
national unity, and in keeping with the provisions of
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law. Likewise, regional organizations have
an obligation to keep the Security Council apprised
of their activities not only in order to promote due
accountability but also because this serves as an early-
warning mechanism allowing for corrections to be
made during the deployment and implementation of
a peacekeeping operation, thereby strengthening that
which works.

Relations between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations must be based, therefore,
on established objectives and joint strategies that
provide for, as has been said, genuine cooperation.
The political, operational and financial conditions
must also be established so that regional organizations
and agreements can take on their responsibilities for
the maintenance of peace and security. That includes
the provision of specialized technical assistance by
the United Nations in the planning and deployment
of regional operations as well as in the application of
concepts of operations with a view to strengthening its
administrative and command and control structures,
improving information and communications technology
infrastructure and providing capacity-building
where necessary. The establishment of appropriate
coordination mechanisms between the United
Nations and regional organizations is also necessary.
Finally, financing mechanisms that provide sufficient
predictability and sustainability should be established.

Argentina underscores the need for the three basic
principles that continue to characterize United Nations
peacekeeping operations - the consent of the parties,
impartiality and the non-use of force except for legitimate
self-defence or to fulfil the mission mandate - to be
strictly respected in the process of outsourcing. At the
same time, we believe there is a need to underscore that
the role and responsibilities of the United Nations and
the Security Council with regard to those operations
led by regional organizations that involve establishing
peace have not yet been fully defined, including in terms
of financing, which is among the points included in the
concept note provided by the presidency (S/2014/879, annex). This is a sensitive discussion, which must take
place in both the Council and the General Assembly,
and which must encompass not only the operational,
logistical and financial dimensions but also, as a
priority, the ethical and political ones. It is unacceptable
to continue indefinitely postponing such a debate and,
at the same time, blurring the lines between the various
types of operations on the ground, which seems now
to have become a repeated and prevalent occurrence.
However, such confusion runs the risk, on the one
hand, of abandoning the principles of impartiality and
the non-use of force that have always guided the work
of the Organization to date, and which must continue to
do so, and, on the other hand, of failing to clearly and
fairly assign responsibilities to the various stakeholders
involved in the maintenance of international peace and
security.

In conclusion, all Members ofthe Organization- in
particular the permanent members of the Council, while
theyretainthatstatus-mustassumetheirresponsibilities
for maintaining international peace and security, and
engage in this debate ensuring that, among other things,
any support provided by the United Nations fully
comply with the policy of due human rights diligence
in the context of United Nations support to security
forces outside of the Organization, and the particular
responsibility borne by the permanent members of the
Security Council for maintaining international peace
and security be met effectively.

I would like to express Argentina's disgust and
our solidarity with the people and the Government
of Pakistan. That horror goes hand in hand with the
commitment we must all make to bring to an end all
forms of extremism and terrorism that are spawning
cruel forms of violence and putting all of us at risk.
In situations of risk and weakness, our system must
respond not with further militarization but with
integrated missions that incorporate the promotion
of equality, sustainable human development and the
independence of States to determine their own futures
in the face of all of these challenges. The existence
of such violence extremism and terrorism calls for
strengthening the role of regional organizations with
full respect for the principles of the Organization we
share, the United Nations.
