Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for organizing today's open debate with
regard to the sixth report of the Secretary-General on
Children and armed conflict (S/2006/826) and to thank
you for taking the time to preside personally over this
important meeting. I also wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Coomaraswamy, the Executive Director of
UNICEF, Ms. Veneman, and the representative of Save
the Children, Mr. Oling Olang, for their comprehensive
briefings.

Greece fully associates itself with the statement
to be delivered later by Finland on behalf of the
European Union. However, I would like to make the
following remarks.

In our view, the sixth report on children and
armed conflict fully addresses the main issues
underlined in Security Council resolution 1612 (2005)
and submits specific and well-focused
recommendations which deserve our careful
consideration and eventual support.

In particular, we appreciate that specific
information is provided with regard to the recruitment
and use of child soldiers, as well as to other grave
violations of children's rights. The fact that the report
identifies around 40 armed groups in 12 conflict zones
as being involved in the recruitment, killing, maiming,
abduction, rape, sexual abuse and exploitation of
children raises the greatest concerns. The fact that
these crimes are committed against the most vulnerable
groups such as girls, refugees and internally displaced
children makes the situation even worse and, by all
accounts, intolerable.

It is encouraging that the issue remains high on
the agenda of the Security Council, which, by adopting
six resolutions since 1999, has contributed to the
international recognition of the responsibility to protect
the human rights of children in armed conflict. In
particular, we appreciate the important developments in
connection with the implementation of resolution 1612
(2005), which have enabled the Council to undertake a
more pragmatic approach to further promoting all
related issues at hand.

The first major step in that context has been the
gradual setting up of a monitoring and reporting
mechanism, starting with situations on the Council's
agenda. During the initial phase, the mechanism has
produced country-specific reports with well-
documented and therefore reliable information. Of
course, and as indicated in the report of the Secretary-
General, its full implementation is a complex issue. We
believe, however, that it will eventually serve the
purpose of its establishment in an effective way. The
recent report of the independent review of the
mechanism clearly points in that direction.

The second important development was the
establishment, in November 2005, of the Working
Group of the Security Council on Children and Armed
Conflict, chaired by France. Greece is convinced that
the Working Group can assist the Security Council in
better evaluating the reports of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism and in formulating appropriate
actions to protect children affected by armed conflict.

I would also like to underline the importance that
Greece attaches to fighting impunity by bringing
perpetrators to justice. It is the primary responsibility
of States to take all necessary relevant measures. In
addition, the International Criminal Court can ensure
accountability for international crimes committed
against children.

Another significant issue is that much more has
to be done with regard to elaborating and implementing
action plans to end the recruitment of child soldiers
and to ensure their release by the parties concerned.
The Office of the Special Representative, UNICEF, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations should be commended for the crucial role
they play in that respect.

With regard to post-conflict situations, special
attention should be given to ensuring that all
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes include provisions to address the specific
needs of children associated with armed groups, such
as reunification with their families, medical support,
education and vocational training.

Protecting children in armed conflict requires
hard work and a variety of measures, which

presupposes the will and active involvement of
national Governments, armed groups and the
international community. The underpinning of all
efforts is the ability to conduct a continuous dialogue
with all parties to an armed conflict. In that regard, the
role of the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and UNICEF is commendable and
very important.

In concluding my remarks, I would like to
emphasize once more that we all share responsibility
for the loss of innocent lives and the tremendous
suffering of children in armed conflict. Therefore, and
notwithstanding the challenges and difficulties, we are
obliged to work to create a safe, secure and enabling
environment for the development of the world's
children.

