Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Sellassie for her briefing today and for
her important work. We appreciate her close work with
the countries and people of the Sahel region and with
international partners towards achieving sustainable
security and prosperity for the people of the Sahel.

The States of the Sahel region face many complex
threats to peace and security. Among the most visible
and pressing of these is threat from violent extremism
posed by Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Boko
Haram and other terrorist groups. But there are other
challenges as well: enduringly weak institutions and
flagging governance reforms, as we witnessed recently
in Burkina Faso; cyclical environmental shocks that
have contributed to a situation in which 20 million
people experience food insecurity; refugees and
internally displaced persons who need basic assistance
in Mali; vast and sometimes ungoverned spaces; fragile
economies and poverty. These factors all contribute to
unnecessary suffering and create the conditions under
which terrorists and transnational organized criminal
organizations thrive. These challenges are neither
unique to distinct States nor new, and the threats they
pose unfortunately do not end at national borders.

We commend the Sahel States for their efforts to
address these intertwined challenges, including their
commitment to disrupting extremist networks, such
as their sustained efforts in Mali that began with
Operation Serval and the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali and continue today with their
contributions to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. The
international community must work towards reinforcing
the region's capacity and commitment to addressing all
of these threats, both to their individual countries and
across the region, in a manner that continues to protect
and respect human rights and the rule of law.

We have already seen the benefits of the region
enhancing its own coordination and cooperation to
address transnational security challenges. At the
initiative of the region, the Group of Five Sahel
is working to enhance security and development
cooperation through such funding initiatives as
the Priority Investment Programme, which aims at
pairing donor institutions with Sahel Governments,
infrastructure projects and the establishment of a
Group of Five Sahel secretariat. Furthermore, the
7 October Lake Chad Basin Commission summit in
Niamey underscored the commitment of the regional
Governments to improving coordination to address the
threat of Boko Haram to the subregion.

But there will be much to do over the next year. We
welcome the important work that has been done so far
to integrate national strategies within the region, but
our primary focus should not be so much on process
as on outcomes - that is, what are the concrete efforts
to combat violence and terrorism that work best in the
Sahel region, and what can we, as the international
community, do to support them? A comprehensive
and coordinated strategy is important, no doubt, but
the measure of our success must be real solutions that
impact real people's lives - solutions that address
security, humanitarian, human rights and governance
problems.

The United Nations - including through the
Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Sahel, as well as the Special Representatives for
West and Central Africa - is an integral part of those
efforts. The high-level engagement of these officials
with senior Government and the particularly close
relationships that they have developed with the leaders
of African Union Commission, the World Bank, the
African Development Bank and the European Union
have clearly increased coordination. Deconflicting
overlapping or redundant initiatives should remain
central to their efforts. If that is to be successful, it
is also important that the Sahel States take strong
ownership of this engagement, and cross-pollination is
emphasized not just at the senior political levels, but at
the working level as well.

For our part, the United States is fully committed
to supporting regional counter-terrorism efforts and to
the wider promotion of stability across the Sahel region.
President Obama, recognizing the danger posed to the
region and beyond by this nexus of failing institutions,
insecurity, humanitarian challenges and poverty,
announced the Security Governance Initiative in
August, through which the United States has committed
$65 million for the first year to developing the security
sector institutional capacity in six partner countries,
five of which are either part of the United Nations Sahel
initiative or its immediate neighbours. The Initiative
will provide tailored support to national capacity-
building and security-sector governance, including
through access to justice, countering transnational
threats and contributing to regional and international
security and stability. Across the Sahel, the United
States provides assistance to build the capacity of
military, law enforcement and civilian and civilian
actors through the Trans-Sahara Counterterrorism
Partnership and other initiatives.

We also remain committed to continuing our long-
standing efforts to address the serious humanitarian
and development challenges in the region. The United
States has provided over $275 million in 2014 for
humanitarian aid to the region. In a region where, as the
Special Envoy has told us, some 20 million are food-
insecure and some 6.5 million children are at risk of
moderate or severe malnutrition, we have focused the
largest proportion of that funding on the humanitarian
sectors most in need: agriculture and food security,
nutrition and economic recovery. We applaud the
efforts of the Regional Humanitarian Coordinator for
the Sahel, Robert Piper, to integrate humanitarian and
development efforts throughout the region, including
through coordinated support to refugees, internally
displaced persons and affected host communities.

For those bilateral and multilateral programmes
to be truly successful, the Governments in the region
must also redouble their efforts to make institutional
and governance reforms - a critical pillar of the
United Nations Sahel strategy. As we saw in Burkina
Faso recently, when political leaders turn their focus
away from their commitment to constitutionally
mandated processes, such as democratic elections,
then the Government loses its legitimacy and the trust
of its people. It becomes less stable, not more so. The
transitional Government of Burkina Faso must pay
particular care to ensure that effective preparation
is conducted for the previously scheduled national
elections in November 2015.

No matter how much humanitarian assistance is
provided, without important governance, rule-of-law
and democratic reforms, no amount of international
support will lead to the concrete positive gains that
the peoples of the region desire, we all seek and the
region requires. We welcome Special Envoy Sellassie's
efforts to continue to encourage the region's leaders
to undertake the kind of difficult institutional reforms
needed for lasting peace. I again thank her for leading
the implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel. We anticipate strong results
from her work over the coming year and look forward
to our continued cooperation towards achieving peace,
stability and prosperity in the region.

