Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to congratulate the Minister for
Foreign Affairs ofthe Republic of Korea, in his capacity
as President of the Council, for having organized this
open debate. We also wish to congratulate the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria for the distinguished manner
in which she led the Council's work last month.

My delegation welcomes the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/7) adopted on the occasion of the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004). Iraq has acceded to all international treaties
and conventions on the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and has voted in favour of all the
relevant international resolutions. On more than one
occasion, we have expressed our support for efforts
to strengthen the universality of those international
instruments and their implementation in order to realize
the objectives for which they were promulgated. Iraq
welcomed the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) by the
Security Council and considers it an effective tool for
strengthening international measures to deal with one
of the major threats facing the international community,
and for preventing weapons of mass destruction from
finding their way into the hands of non-State actors and
terrorist groups.

At this juncture, I would like to reiterate Iraq's
respect for and total commitment to the international
treaties and conventions in accordance with paragraph
1 (e) of article 9 of the Iraqi Constitution, which
stipulates that the Iraqi Government respects and
implements Iraq's international obligations in the fields
of the non-proliferation, development, production
and use of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons
and related equipment, and prohibits any effort to
develop, manufacture and produce them, including
for related equipment, material, technology or means
of communication. The Government of Iraq has taken
a series of measures and steps, including the adoption
of legislation, to prohibit the proliferation of nuclear
weapons and their means of delivery and to impose
suitable local controls on the relevant materials in order
to prevent the illicit trade in such materials. Over the
past few years, Iraq has enacted several laws aimed
at enforcing the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and combating money-laundering and
terrorism.

I would like to focus on some of the steps my
Government has taken pursuant to its commitment to
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). Most important
is our submission of four national reports for the years
2005, 2006, 2007 and 2013, which included legislative
measures and activities for implementing the resolution.
We have submitted one national report that includes
experiences, lessons learned and practices, and another
on cooperation and assistance in implementing the
resolution. Iraq's national control agency has taken
effective measures to monitor the export and import of
dual-use materials that coordinate with the European
Union's laws relating to resolution 1373 (2001) regarding
the illegal use of such materials.

My delegation regrets North Korea's lack of respect
for the decisions of the international community in
continuing its experiments, contrary to international
conventions and agreements.

We have submitted proposals to the Secretary-
General in accordance with the General Assembly
resolutions entitled "Measures to prevent terrorists
from acquiring weapons of mass destruction", that
include the following.

First, we should achieve the full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004)'s provisions on preventing
non-State actors' access to weapons of mass
destruction and related materials, and countries
should be encouraged to voluntarily submit additional
information on the steps they have taken or intend to
take.

Secondly, we should work together to devise
international, regional and subregional strategies
aimed at developing joint measures that can contribute
to preventing non-State actors from acquiring weapons
of mass destruction and related materials, and their use
by terrorists.

Thirdly, Member States should be urged to
strengthen their national efforts, and encouraged to
cooperate among themselves and with regional and
international organizations in strengthening their
national capacities to prevent terrorists from acquiring
weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery
and the related materials and technologies needed to
produce them. My delegation is grateful to the United
States of America, Switzerland and the European Union
for organizing training courses aimed at strengthening
Iraqi capacity in the areas of chemical, radioactive,
biological and nuclear security, and border control.
In conclusion, the implementation of international

resolutions on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, including resolution 1540 (2004), requires
that practical measures be taken through the collective
efforts of all members of the international community,
not limited to any particular groups, and that developing
States' ability to build their technical capacities be
improved so they can fulfil their obligations according
to the relevant resolutions. We also wish to thank the
Republic of Korea for taking the initiative to convene
this meeting, which is so important to international
peace and security.

