I would like to start out by adding our voice to those of other members in wishing Deputy Special Envoy Matar a speedy recovery and thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for the information about her situation. We also thank the Special Envoy for his briefing today on the situation in Syria. South Africa fully supports the efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen and his Office as he continues to work towards finding a lasting solution to the conflict in Syria, which would culminate in the drafting of a new Constitution, the conducting of free and fair elections and the restoration of Syria's sovereignty, unity, independence, territorial integrity and economic prosperity. In this regard, South Africa welcomes the upcoming session of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva, and we commend the efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen aimed at convening it. Long-awaited progress by the Constitutional Committee has indeed been an important step on the path to a Syrian-led and -owned political process. The Constitutional Committee plays an important role in fostering political discussion and trust among Syrians and in ensuring that the voices of all Syrians are heard. We call on all the participants at the third session of the Constitutional Committee to actively engage in the substantive discussions on the Committee's agenda. The only way forward is through meaningful dialogue on how best to move Syria from a war-torn State to a peaceful and stable member of the international community. In order to achieve this, the people and the Government of Syria, represented in the Constitutional Committee, require the Security Council's full support and the continued backing of the United Nations as a whole. In support of the Constitutional Committee process, the parties must ensure that violence and hostilities in the country come to an end. South Africa therefore supports the Special Envoy's call for a complete and immediate nationwide ceasefire, in line with the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. A permanent ceasefire would allow the political process to continue in an environment where an inclusive Syrian-led dialogue can take place. Additionally, the parties should continue to engage in trust and confidence measures. Given the rapid spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Syria and the cramped conditions in detention centres with limited water and sanitation, we call on the parties to release detainees and political prisoners, especially women and children, as well as the sick and elderly, who are most susceptible to this virus. South Africa welcomes the measures taken by the Syrian authorities to slow the spread of COVID-19 and the continued support of the United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners that have continued to work in challenging circumstances to provide the necessary assistance to those in need. The spread of the COVID-19 virus has made the need for this assistance even more urgent. In order to aid in this effort, the international community must lift the unilateral coercive economic measures imposed on the Syrian Government. These measures exacerbate the already dire humanitarian situation, which has been further affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, and place an additional burden on those who so desperately need humanitarian aid and assistance. South Africa fully supports the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Syria and reiterates its concern at the continued presence of foreign and armed forces in the country. External interference in Syria must come to an end, especially in terms of the support provided to these armed groups. We are also concerned at the continued presence of terrorist groups operating in parts of the country. We reiterate that, while all States have the sovereign right to address the threat of terrorism in their own countries, actions to counter terrorism must comply with international human rights law and international humanitarian law responsibilities and obligations. In conclusion, South Africa believes that the political and humanitarian tracks in Syria are interlinked, and we call on all stakeholders to promote progress on both tracks to ensure a sustainable and peaceful settlement to the conflict. As has been stated before on numerous occasions, there can be no military solution to the conflict in Syria. South Africa hopes that the discussions in Geneva next week are able to move the political process towards a peaceful, stable and secure Syria.
