Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I will be
brief, and I wish to comment on what I think has been
another excellent discussion on three levels.

First, with respect to style, I am deeply impressed by
the informality here. I think it is what the founding fathers
of the United Nations - there were no founding mothers,
I regret to say - had in mind, and I congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your colleague from London for that.

Secondly, I am interested in what I think is an
emerging consensus on most aspects of the problem here,
and therefore I wish to focus on a point that I will return to
repeatedly in the coming weeks, as will my colleagues. I
think Ambassador Andjaba of Namibia put it very well in
his characteristically eloquent and forceful statement. This
goes to the question of what we are going to approve. Let
it be clear for my Government - and, I believe, for every
Government here - that there is going to be support for
peacekeeping in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
There is no question about it. Everyone here is conscious
of Rwanda, particularly on a day when the United Nations
has courageously issued a report of self-criticism for the
second time in a month, and I congratulate the Secretary-
General and his colleagues for that candour and courage.

The issue therefore is not whether we are going to
support peacekeeping in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I repeat, it is not whether our country will support
it - I believe the nation-States here are going to support it
- it is not whether, it is when and how. I am very glad
that Mr. Miyet is with us today, because I think that there
is a general message here, certainly for my Government
and, I believe, for many others, which is that we want to
vote for the resolution, but we need to know what we are
voting for: the mandate, the size and the costs.

There are many different ideas kicking around right
now, and reasonably so; this is a very difficult problem.
But I urge the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
continue the consultations it has been having with many
Governments here, including our own. I have heard some
Ambassadors represented here - as well as some of our
colleagues who have not spoken but who are attending this
meeting and have the deepest vested interest in this issue,
because their countries are in Central Africa - express
confusion as to what the project is. I hope that as a result
of this meeting we will be able to accelerate, intensify
and clarify what it is that we will be asked to approve.
That requires a lot of staff work internally, and our
Government is prepared to do that.

Again, Mr. President, I wish to express my very
profound appreciation for what you have done. I know
that you had all of this planned before. I said that January
would be the month of Africa for the United States in the
Security Council. I think you have effectively proved that
December is also a month of Africa under your skilful
and visionary presidency.

