Ms. Frechette: Mr. President, let me begin by
welcoming you to this house and thanking you for all
that your country does, both for the United Nations and
for Africa. As a stable multiparty democracy with a
rapidly growing economy, Mauritius is one of Africa's
most striking success stories. Your example should
encourage and inspire all Africans as they seek to
implement the New Partnership for Africa's
Development, with its commendable emphasis on
human rights, the rule of law, and African self-help.

Let me also welcome the new Secretary-General
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), who has
the daunting responsibility of overseeing its
transformation into the African Union. We all hope that
this change will be reflected in a transformation of the
continent's fortunes, and we look forward to an ever
closer and more effective partnership between our two
organizations.

Our own Secretary-General much regrets that he
cannot be here today. He welcomes the Council's
sustained focus on Africa, which still occupies on
average 60 per cent of its time, at a moment when
many people's attention is focused elsewhere.

I should also thank you, Mr. President, for the
very useful set of guidelines for this meeting that your
Permanent Representative circulated earlier in the
month. The clear and comprehensive list of questions it
contains should help to focus all our minds.

In my own statement, I shall concentrate on just a
few of those questions, without attempting to revisit all
the deep-rooted causes of conflict in Africa. These
were amply covered in the Secretary-General's report
of April 1998 and in subsequent reports, as well as in
resolutions of this Council and of the General
Assembly. Some of them, indeed, fall outside the
agenda of this Council. They should, of course, be
tackled as a matter of great urgency but in the context
of other forums, such as the forthcoming world
conferences on financing for development and on
sustainable development.

But I must at least mention HIV/AIDS, if only
because it is now the greatest single threat to Africa's
social and economic development and is a factor that
contributes to most, if not all, of those deep-rooted
causes of conflict. The whole United Nations system is
engaged, alongside the peoples of Africa, in the
struggle against this terrible scourge, and this is
certainly not the moment to relax our efforts.

But today, I suggest that we can most usefully
focus on issues where this Council has direct
responsibilities and possibilities for action, and
particularly that we should take advantage of
Mr. Essy's presence to concentrate on building a
stronger relationship between the United Nations, the
OAU and the subregional organizations that are such
an encouraging feature of the African landscape.

In this context, one asks whether the United
Nations has played its role in supporting regional
initiatives, especially when this Council's authorization
is required for peacekeeping operations. The answer, in
our opinion, is that consultation and cooperation
between the United Nations and the various African
regional arrangements have increased considerably in
recent years, especially in West Africa and the Great
Lakes. With the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) in particular, the United Nations has
worked closely on security issues in the Mano River
Basin. High-level delegations from both subregions
have come here for consultations, while the Council
has also sent its own fact-finding missions to Africa.

As far as the OAU is concerned, there have been
regular meetings between our secretariats, both at the
top and at the level of experts. But these contacts could
definitely be strengthened further. In particular, we
need to step up our cooperation with the political
mechanisms that some of the subregional organizations
have created, so that we can work with them in
developing integrated approaches to conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peace-building. Such
approaches must involve cooperation, not only in the
areas of politics and security, but also across a wide
range of issues, such as human rights, humanitarian
relief, the struggle against HIV/AIDS, and economic
and social development.

I hope that the establishment of the United
Nations Office in West Africa and the proposed
international conference on the Great Lakes will in
their different ways help improve institutional links
and so build confidence among the countries of those
two subregions as they seek to promote such integrated
policies.

But let us not delude ourselves. None of this will
get very far unless there is real political will - both on
the part of African leaders to pursue the quest for
peace, and on the part of members of this Council to
act decisively in their support for Africa.

It is also vital that we help our African partners to
strengthen their own logistical capacities, especially in
the area of peacekeeping. The OAU, subregional
organizations and many individual African States have
shown a commendable interest in assuming a bigger
role in peacekeeping in Africa, but at present their
capacity to do so is severely restricted by lack of
training and resources, especially shortages of
equipment and of the basic supplies that any unit needs
to sustain itself in a theatre of operations. It is therefore
essential that the international community make a more
serious and concerted effort to build up and sustain
these regional capacities.

The United Nations is already facilitating
contacts between African contributors to United Nations
operations, on the one hand, and donor States that can
provide logistical and equipment stocks, on the other, and
we would be happy to do more in this vital area. We have
also been working with the OAU and the subregional
actors, through information-sharing, training and staff
exchange, to improve their capacity for supporting
peace operations. I might mention in particular the
inter-agency mission which visited West Africa in
March last year and made several recommendations for
improving the capacity of ECOWAS.

Similar considerations apply to the recovery
programmes of post-conflict societies. Your guidelines,
Mr. President, rightly identify the effective
implementation of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes as a vital component of post-
conflict peace-building. Indeed, too many peace
processes in Africa have been broken because this
crucial aspect - and particularly the reintegration
component 4 was either neglected or not sustained. In
current and future cases, it must be placed on a solid,
long-term financial footing.

Other closely related aspects, and similarly
crucial, are national reconciliation and accountability
for atrocities. These two processes are so important to
the success of our missions that I suggest the Council
might wish in future to include them in United Nations
mandates and to recommend that their funding be put
on a more solid basis.

In the specific case of Sierra Leone, the
Secretary-General has shown great faith in the political
will and commitment of Member States by agreeing to
establish the Special Court mandated by this Council in
spite of a shortfall in funds so far pledged of $1.4
million for the first year and $7.4 million for
subsequent years. It is yet to be determined whether
this is a satisfactory model for financing institutions of
accountability in conflicts elsewhere on the continent
and, indeed, beyond it.

Your questionnaire, Sir, asks how effective
sanctions imposed by the Council have been and to
what extent they have served their purpose as
preventive or coercive measures in African conflicts.
Most of them, as you know, have centred on arms
embargoes. Their effectiveness has been limited by
various factors, including insufficient political support,
porous and unpoliced borders, inadequate
infrastructure, lack of resources for monitoring and
implementation, and - once again - inadequate
regional or subregional capacities.

But progress has certainly been made since the
Council has taken to establishing panels of experts to
investigate violations. These bodies have been able to
identify criminal networks involved in sanctions-
busting and have developed far-reaching, practical
proposals for monitoring. In both Sierra Leone and
Angola, illicit sales of diamonds and other national
resources have been made more difficult and this has
significantly diminished the ability of armed groups to
defy the will of the international community, as
expressed by this Council.

In its response to the events of 11 September
2001, the international community has shown a new
unity and determination in dealing with those who seek
to use commercial and financial transactions for illegal
and violent ends; and, in resolution 1373 (2001), this
Council has found a new and promising mechanism for
ensuring compliance with its decisions. I hope the
Council will now use this new-found political
momentum, and perhaps invoke a similar mechanism,
to reinforce its call on Member States to make the
violation of arms embargoes that it has imposed a
criminal offence under their national laws.

Resolution 1373 (2001) also notes the close
connection between international terrorism and
transnational organized crime, illicit drugs, money-
1aundering and illegal arms trafficking. All of these
activities play their parts in conflicts in Africa and I
hope the connection may lead the Council to focus
more attention on illicit traffickers.

More broadly, the events of 11 September
reminded us all of the danger to international order that
can arise when structures of governance anywhere
break down and a State or region becomes a zone of
anarchy and refuge for outlaws. Since the risk of this
happening is as great in Africa as anywhere, it would
be doubly wrong to allow these events to distract us
from Africa's problems. On the contrary, this Council has
stronger reasons than ever to consider what it can do to
strengthen State structures and encourage effective,
accountable government in that part of the world.

I make no claim to have given a comprehensive
list of all the actions needed to remove the causes of
conflict in Africa, let alone to promote durable peace
and sustainable development. As I said at the outset,
many of those actions Iie well outside the purview of
this Council, but I believe I have mentioned a number
of points where the Council can usefully take action.
My colleagues and I will listen with close attention
to the comments and suggestions that will be made in the
course of these discussions. Rest assured that we are
ready and eager to help implement the workable set of
recommendations which I hope will indeed emerge.

