Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): Let me congratulate the
United Kingdom on its leadership of the Security Council
this month. I thank the Secretary-General, Antonio
Guterres, for presenting his first report (S/2017/189) on
the situation in Afghanistan. Allow me to also thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Tadamichi Yamamoto, and the Chair of
the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission,
Ms. Sima Samar, for their respective briefings.

Given the severity of the situation in my country,
I would like to devote my statement today to the
challenging security situation, hidden agendas, the
peace process and the ever-increasing necessity for
regional and global cooperation.

In recent months, dozens of terrorist attacks across
Afghanistan have claimed scores of innocent lives. In
January, three simultaneous terrorist attacks in Kabul,
Kandahar and Helmand provinces killed or maimed
more than 160 people, including six United Arab
Emirates diplomats. In February, the Supreme Court,
our symbol of justice, was attacked, thereby causing
numerous fatalities. Last week, two separate attacks
in the heart of Kabul killed many civilians. Finally,
just two days ago, Afghanistan's largest hospital was
attacked, leaving more than 140 killed or wounded,
many of whom were doctors, nurses or patients. The
Taliban has claimed responsibility for most of those
attacks, but regardless ofwhose names are labelled upon
them, our own investigations have clearly established
that they were generally plotted beyond our borders and
on the other side of the Durand Line.

That is the fundamental factor that needs to be
addressed. The Security Council promptly issued a
press statement (SC/ 12743) condemning those attacks
in the strongest terms, for which we are thankful. The
statement underlined,

"the need to bring perpetrators, organizers,
financiers and sponsors of these reprehensible acts
of terrorism to justice".

It also urged

"all States, in accordance with their obligations
under international law and relevant Security
Council resolutions, to cooperate actively with the
Afghan authorities in this regard."

That is indeed what Afghanistan has been asking for
over the course of many years. My Government and my
people would like to know why, after countless terrorist
atrocities and specific Security Council statements
condemning them, we are still witness to impunity for
the perpetrators and orchestrators of endless violence.

Let me be very clear: the conflict in our country is
not homegrown, as some desperately and deceptively
try to portray it. On the contrary, it is the nexus ofillicit
narcotics, violent extremism and State sponsorship of
terrorism, with their regional dimensions and global
consequences. Tragically, it has morphed into an
undeclared war by a neighbouring State that has for
many years continued to coordinate, facilitate and
orchestrate violence through proxy forces and more than
20 terrorist networks. Those groups benefit from a full-
fledged external infrastructure to keep Afghanistan
off-balance, for motives that are inconsistent with our
desire to live in a peaceful and prosperous region.

In earlier statements to the Council, we have
emphasized, time and again, Pakistani actions that
sustain terrorist activities in our country. Today, let
me quote the leading Pakistani officials themselves.
General Pervez Musharraf, who led Pakistan for eight
years as President, proudly commented in a 2015
interview with The Guardian newspaper that

"Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence had given
birth to the Taliban to counter Indian action
against Pakistan".

Last year, Mr. Sartaj Aziz, the Prime Minister's
Adviser on Foreign Affairs, went on record to say that
Taliban leaders reside in Pakistan and that they have
influence over them. A couple of weeks ago, Mr. Ashraf
Jehangir Qazi, former Ambassador of Pakistan to the
United States, Russia, China and India and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to Iraq and
Sudan, wrote in The Herald magazine of Pakistan,

"[a]fter the Soviet defeat and withdrawal, we
(wittingly or unwittingly) unleashed a ruinous civil
war and imposed a barbaric and medieval Taliban
upon the hapless Afghan people".

His words only confirm the truth that "Pakistan talks
one policy, but walks the other".

In a 2013 article in The New York Times, Mr. Husain
Haqqani, another former Ambassador of Pakistan to the
United States and Sri Lanka, categorized in clear terms
the ongoing links between Pakistan's State apparatus
and the Taliban and mentioned in the context of peace
talks that

"the Taliban and their Pakistani mentors have
hardly changed their arguments or their tendency
to fudge facts".

The quotes and admissions that Ijust read out were
not rhetoric from Kabul or emblematic of a blame game,
as is often claimed by a known Member State. That was
Pakistan talking.

Against that backdrop, in February, a series of
unfortunate terrorist attacks in Pakistan killed dozens
and wounded many more innocent men, women
and children. As has always been the case, Afghans
always share the pain and anguish of their Pakistani
brothers and sisters. However, the Government of
Pakistan, immediately and without any regard for any
investigative process or clear facts, blamed Afghanistan
for the attacks and resorted to increased breaches of
its territorial integrity, closing main border crossings,
blockading trade and transit and harassing our nationals
travelling to, or living in, their country. Such measures
constitute a clear violation of the principles of the
World Trade Organization and the rights of land-locked
countries, including their access to the sea.

From January until today, we have recorded at
least 59 instances of violations of Afghan territory by
Pakistan's military forces, including three violations of
our airspace, over 1,375 cross-frontier artillery shellings
which caused dozens of casualties, the displacement
of 450 families in the middle of a cold winter in our
eastern provinces, the burning of our forests, illegal
construction of infrastructure near the frontier region,
and hostile maneuvering of tanks and heavy weaponry.

The travesty of decorum in neighbourly relations
did not cease there, as the familiar pattern of the
obfuscation of facts and diversionary tactics took
over. We were then issued by the Government of
Pakistan a list of 76 so-called suspected terrorists in
Afghanistan which, after close inspection by us and
our international partners, was found to be in desperate
need of verification.

Our reaction to all these provocations has been
sober and methodical. We have submitted 25 protest
notes to the Government of Pakistan and, in the past
few weeks, have summoned their Ambassador to
Kabul on three occasions. We have submitted to their
Government a list of 86 known terrorists and 32 Taliban
training centres, including Haqqani network centres,
asking for their immediate closure. We have asked for
a third-party verification of the two sides" efforts. No
response has yet been received. The Secretary-General,
the Security Council and other international partners
are all appraised of these developments.

While terrorist attacks in Pakistan are strongly
deplored by our Government, we are surely witnessing
the blowback effects of using violent proxies as
instruments of foreign policy, which was adopted by
decision-making circles in that country in the 1980s
and is still being pursued to this day. In other words, the
chickens are coming home to roost. We have reminded
our Pakistani counterparts on many occasions that you
reap what you sow. We say once again that it is time for
Pakistan to change that failed policy for its own sake,
desist from using radical terrorists as a foreign policy
accessory, and genuinely join the international fight
against all forms and shades of terrorism.

By making Afghanistan bleed, Pakistan is not
only trying to create a stalemate on the battlefield, but
it is also hindering the political track. Hoping to gain
legitimacy for groups, such as the Taliban, Pakistani
decision-makers continue to use plausible deniability
and shifting blame, as part of their defensive tactics
while manipulating geopolitical fault lines to their
advantage. They forget that legitimacy in my country
flows through the people and constitutional order,
not through acts of terror, intimidation and forced
imposition of extremist thinking and radical behaviour
by misinterpreting and misusing our sacred religion
of Islam. Talks leading to a peace process can only
succeed when policy is revised, the use of sanctuaries
is prohibited, terrorist financing is curbed and violence
is renounced. Peace cannot be achieved by paying lip
service and pretending to be a selective victim.

As we speak, the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces are battling, with great resilience and
determination, a network of regional and global terrorist
groups, who have come to Afghanistan with various
objectives. In 2016, our forces prevented the Taliban
and terrorist affiliates from capturing major population
centres. In January, we adopted a four-year national
security strategy, which focuses on bolstering combat
capabilities, leadership development and improving
unity and coordination of command. The fight against
terrorism will continue with even greater resolve, on
the basis of our security strategy. That said, continued
support from our international partners remains
critical for the sustainability of our forces over the long
haul. In that light, I wish to reiterate here again that
Afghanistan's strategic partnerships will in no way be
a detriment to any country within our region or beyond.
On the contrary, investments in Afghanistan's security
are in fact an investment in regional and global security.

For years, the lack of a meaningful and results-
oriented channel of dialogue aimed at addressing the
root causes of tension between Kabul and Islamabad
has created a huge trust deficit. Reducing this deficit
requires political will and healthy interactions between
our two countries. On our part, if we look at the record,
Afghanistan has always been ready to engage in
constructive and results-oriented dialogue.

We welcome any earnest and transparent initiative
to help us reach that stage of dialogue. In our view, the
Quadrilateral Coordination Group and the recent six-
party Moscow conference on Afghanistan can be useful
in that endeavour, if utilized and coordinated properly.
These initiatives, among others, emphasize a set of
guiding principles, most notably that any peace process
should be Afghan-led and that the region must support
the Afghan Government in its quest for sustainable
peace. Moreover, they also recognize the importance of
having all relevant regional and global actors on board
in a constructive manner.

We know from previous experience that any
prospect of success in peace efforts rests on a number
of important principles.First, any attempt at resolving
current and/or historic issues between Governments
requires strong national political will and an impartial
and agreed upon international arbitrator in good
standing. Secondly, all sides need to define and agree
on the scope of dialogue and negotiations, leading to
a specific set of deliverables and outcomes that can
be supported by regional stakeholders and eventually
guaranteed by the international community. Thirdly,
all sides need to be willing to address the root causes
of conflict, not its byproducts, and resolve areas
of contention by adhering to and making use of
international law, pragmatic precedence and/or other
best practices andjudicial norms, and avoiding presumed
realpolitik assumptions. Fourthly, given Afghanistan's
sensitive geopolitical position, all peacebuilding and
anti-terrorism efforts in the long run need to have all
key stakeholders on board, take the complexities of an
evolving regional and global security architecture into
account, and agree to a status that assures stability,
balance, non-interference, sovereignty and positive
engagement in Afghanistan. Fifthly, keeping principles
of sovereignty and non-interference central to our
objectives requires Afghanistan to become a symbol
of international cooperation, where global and regional
powers set aside their rivalries and short-term interests
by agreeing to cooperate in a spirit of confidence for
long-term mutual benefit.

In a few days we will celebrate Nowruz - the
start of our New Year and the first day of spring - a
festive occasion that symbolizes peace, solidarity and
togetherness among our people and the wider region at
large. But as recent attacks have shown, Afghans will
celebrate with a heavy heart. On the other hand, with
their planned so-called spring offensive, the Taliban
and other terrorist groups are adamantly focused on
producing more horror, panic and fear, leaving little
room for joy among our men, women and children.

This time, we hope to collectively counter their
new season of murder and mayhem. Our brave and
courageous national security forces are ready and highly
determined to defend our people with full confidence
and strength. We survived the post-transition 2015; we
countered and defeated every major plan of the terrorist
groups and their foreign backers to capture and control
the main population centres in 2016; and in 2017 we
will, with the Council's support and by the grace of
God Almighty, humiliate and destroy the enemies
of peace and security in Afghanistan. We are fully
committed to making sure that our New Year will be
one in which we will open the way for durable peace
in our country, our region and around the world. We
join Secretary-General Antonio Guterres in his appeal
to the international community for making 2017 a year
of peace. For us, it starts at home.

