Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): We are very pleased to see
you, Sir, presiding over this meeting of the Council on this
very important subject. I should like to commend Canada
for putting this issue on the Council's agenda for this
month in the context of its pursuance of the human security
agenda.

While sanctions are not mentioned per se in the
Charter of the United Nations, they are certainly a tool
available to the Security Council, short of military force, to
use against States Whose policies and actions constitute a
threat to the peace, breach of the peace or act of
aggression. This is provided for in Article 41 of the
Charter. However, because of the grave, unintended
collateral impacts of all-encompassing sanctions, these
measures have given rise to serious concern on the part of
the international community. The challenge before the
Council now is to design sanctions regimes that work
effectively with minimal unintended collateral impacts and
with the unqualified support of the international community.

We commend the efforts made by a number of
countries, such as Switzerland, Germany, the United
Kingdom and Canada, and, of course, the important seminar
organized by the International Peace Academy this
morning.

Malaysia, as a matter of principle, is against the
imposition of sanctions on any country unless the Security
Council, after careful consideration, has determined that the
State or country in question is indeed a threat to the peace,
is committing a breach of the peace or is guilty of
aggression which requires the direct, collective response of
the international community short of the use of military
force. It is Malaysia's conviction that sanctions against a
country and people should be resorted to only when all
other peaceful measures have been exhausted and have
failed. As an instrument of coercion, they should be used
with great caution because of their unintended grave
consequences to the innocent population of the targeted
country. We also believe that before the imposition of
sanctions there should be a pre-assessment report on the
likely impact of the planned targeted measures. When
sanctions are finally imposed, there should be a periodic
evaluation of the sanctions and an early comprehensive
assessment of their impact. These assessments provide an
objective and scientific basis for an overall evaluation of
the effectiveness or otherwise of the sanctions imposed by
the Council. Such assessments are an invaluable and
indispensable tool in assisting the Council to determine
the appropriate steps that may be taken in respect of
specific sanctions regimes.

In most instances, it has not been easy to effectively
implement a sanctions regime except when it serves the
particular interests of one or more of the permanent
members of the Council - the sanctions on Libya and
Iraq being the obvious cases in point. In these two
instances, the sanctions were carried out with almost
religious zeal. The recently imposed sanctions on
Afghanistan - or, more specifically, the Taliban -
would be another case in point since, again, without the
required pre-assessment of the likely impact of the
sanctions, a series of measures were decided upon by the
Council through its resolution 1267 (1999) and additional
measures, as contained in the presidential statement of 7
April 2000, are now being contemplated.

Sanctions, as provided for in the Charter, are meant
to be provisional in nature and should be implemented
accordingly - that is, provisionally and not permanently.
Also, in their implementation, serious consideration
should be given to exemptions on humanitarian grounds.
It is regrettable that more often than not the Council is
quick in imposing sanctions but slow in lifting them when
the conditions that had prompted the sanctions are no
longer in existence. The sanctions on Libya, which were
only suspended and not lifted, are a clear case in point.
Clearly, if sanctions are to secure the strong support of
the international community, it is imperative that
sanctions that have served their purpose be formally lifted
by the Council.

With the exception of the sanctions on Iraq - the
only existing comprehensive sanctions today - there is
now a clear preference on the part of the Council to
impose the so-called targeted sanctions whereby certain
elites or groups of individuals or entities are targeted with
a View to coercing them to comply with certain stipulated
requirements or a general change of behaviour or policy
before the sanctions can be lifted. This, clearly, is a more
acceptable and humane form of sanctions. However, as in
the case of comprehensive sanctions, there should be
careful and exhaustive analyses of the likely impact of
these targeted sanctions. Among the pertinent questions
that should be considered in depth are those of the extent
and location of the assets of the targeted elites, the kinds
of measures that are likely to have the greatest impact on
the intended targets and the positive elements that can be

 

built into the sanctions regime to motivate compliance by
the targeted individuals or entity. Conditions for the lifting
of the sanctions at the appropriate time should also be
incorporated in the sanctions regimes.

Malaysia has serious reservations and will not support
the imposition of sanctions beyond a time-frame that is
necessary or feasible. This is because experience has shown
that sanctions rarely work on the intended target or targets.
Instead, they have brought unmitigated suffering on
ordinary people. Sanctions directed at an elite or ruling
class will have a direct and indirect effect on the population
under their control in virtually every aspect of their lives,
be it air travel, trade and commerce or other economic
activities covered by the sanctions. This is because targeted
elites do not live in splendid isolation; they live in societies.
Indeed, sanctions sometimes have the unintended effect of
entrenching or even strengthening the very targets they
were intended to coerce. In the end, it is the innocent,
ordinary people living in areas under their control that pay
the price, not the intended target or targets. Hence the
importance of ongoing assessment of the impact of
sanctions, which should be modified if deemed necessary,
or even lifted if they prove to be ineffective, so as to spare
the people from further unnecessary hardship.

If sanctions are meant to be an alternative to military
action, then surely their implementation must take
cognizance of and respect the basic principles of
international humanitarian law, such as the concept of
"proportionality" in the damage inflicted, and the necessary
distinction between civilian and military targets. There are
also other international conventions and legal instruments
that sanctioning authorities cannot simply ignore. In its
implementation of sanctions regimes, the Council must
demonstrate that every possible effort is being made to
avoid violating the basic rights of the general population.
That should also apply in respect of non-United Nations
sanctions regimes, such as those imposed unilaterally or
regionally.

The widespread humanitarian suffering that
comprehensive economic embargoes in particular can cause
raises the moral question as to whether the Security Council
can violate social and economic rights and/or civil and
political rights in the pursuit of international peace and
security. It is of course recognized that targeted regimes
retain the primary responsibility for the continuation or
lifting of the sanctions that have been imposed on them and
for the well-being of their people. However, this does not
absolve the Council of its own responsibility to ensure that
the fundamental rights of the population in the target
country are respected or preserved. The imposition of
sanctions, while legitimate and provided for in the United
Nations Charter, must also be humane in implementation,
or else it will lose the support of the international
community, which is necessary for the effectiveness of
the sanctions regime and the credibility of the Council.

A more effective strategy for the use of sanctions
should be based on an understanding of why sanctions
succeed or fail. The institutional capacity of the United
Nations system must be enhanced, including the
mechanisms for monitoring and impact assessment, as
well as with respect to the technical assistance and
specialized expertise which should be made available to
the respective sanctions committees. Greater uniformity
and consistency are needed not only in Security Council
resolutions and the guidelines for monitoring and
enforcement provided to Member States and regional
organizations, but also in the national legislation and
administrative procedures of Member States.

A smart sanctions strategy should be part of a
carrot-and-stick diplomacy designed to bring about the
negotiated settlement of disputes. Coercive measures,
when applied, should be combined with concrete
incentives for compliance as instruments of persuasive
diplomacy. Targeted financial sanctions, arms embargoes
and travel bans offer promise as a means of focusing
coercive pressure on decision-making elites while
minimizing humanitarian and third-party costs. Such
measures are more likely to receive the international
cooperation necessary for effective monitoring and
enforcement.

The analogy of smart sanctions to smart weapons
systems is very apt indeed. While the United Nations
talks about comprehensive sanctions as a blunt instrument,
the supposedly precise targeting of smart sanctions, like
smart bombs, is meant to reduce collateral damage, that
ubiquitous term used to refer to unintended targets.
Unfortunately, many civilians have become victims of the
so-called smart bombs. They are smart to the extent that
men can make them so. Let us hope that smart sanctions
will perform much better than smart bombs in minimizing
the collateral damage on the unintended target: the
general public.
Sanctions affect third countries in that they often
impose extremely high economic costs on the major
economic partners of target States. This aspect of the
problem is well recognized in Article 50 of the Charter,
but it is very rarely invoked, or if invoked, is seldom

 

seriously addressed. Despite calls from Member States for
these costs to be spread equitably, this rarely happens.
Assistance to disadvantaged States has been ad hoc and
inadequate. It is true that some provisions for third-party
compensation have been made, but mostly in those cases
where the interests of major powers have been engaged in
the pursuit of sanctions, notably in the former Yugoslavia
and Iraq. No such aid has been forthcoming in the case of
the African sanctions regimes. Where little or no assistance
is available, the affected States may have no choice but to
continue surreptitiously with their traditional economic
relationships in order to avoid economic hardship to
themselves. On occasion, they do so openly, as was clearly
the case with respect to the sanctions regime on Libya,
when the Organization of African Unity decided in 1998 to
cease complying with the United Nations sanctions directed
against Libya.

Prolonged trade sanctions have social costs which are
hard to measure and hard to reverse. Furthermore, for a
sanctions regime to be effective, there are significant
management and enforcement costs involved. The costs to
the sanctioning States involve legal innovation and/or
reform, the ongoing detailed information-gathering for
targeting and impact monitoring, enforcement and providing
humanitarian aid. High administrative or transaction costs
may also be incurred in planning and implementation
monitoring, reporting, coalition- and consensus-building,
and so forth. This requires adequate, competent and
dedicated human resources, which the Organization often
has been reluctant to fund. In some cases the frozen assets
of the target country can be used to offset some of the
costs. What is clear is that cheap sanctions are unlikely to
be effective sanctions. Capacity constraints exist within the
United Nations Secretariat and United Nations sanctions
committees, as well as within regional groupings of States
that impose sanctions and humanitarian agencies operating
in sanction-affected countries. These constraints must be
addressed.

In examining the question of more effective and
humane United Nations sanctions, we cannot but consider
the sanctions imposed on Iraq as an example of a sanctions
regime that went very wrong. The sanctions imposed on
Iraq are the most comprehensive embargo ever devised. The
prolonged economic strangulation of that country, combined
with the destruction resulting from the Gulf War in 1991,
has created one of the worst humanitarian crises of the past
decade. This has already been highlighted by my delegation
in a recent statement made in the Council. Suffice it to say
that these sanctions have had a devastating impact on the
people.

By continuing to maintain economic sanctions on
Iraq in the full knowledge of its deplorable consequences,
the Security Council will continue to undermine the spirit
and letter of the Charter of the United Nations, thereby
undermining the confidence of the international
community in the Council itself. It is time for us to view
the matter, beginning with an immediate impact
assessment of the decade-long sanctions. Only a
comprehensive assessment will be able to tell us in an
objective way whether the sanctions on Iraq have been
carried out in the right way or what went wrong and what
needs to be done in the interest of ending the plight of the
ordinary people.

In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the issuance
of the note by the President of the Council to establish a
working group to develop general recommendations on
how to improve the effectiveness of United Nations
sanctions. Today's debate and the presidential note
demonstrate the Council's serious response to the need for
a serious examination of the sanctions issue in the context
of our time. It is to be hoped that the deliberations of the
working group will be able to make in-depth examination
of, inter alia, all of the issues identified in the note and
to report its findings to the Council by 30 November
2000.

However, as in all cases pertaining to the Council,
the findings are not as important as the manifestation of
the necessary political will on the part of Council
members to follow up on the Council's decisions which
will be made on the basis of these findings. I think we
are all generally aware and know how to improve
sanctions. What remains is political will. Unless there is
this political will, this exercise will not mean very much.

