Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his clear and
detailed briefing. I would also like to express to him
and his team our appreciation and recognition of the
continued work carried out and efforts made this year.
We encourage them to keep up the same spirit and
dynamism in their work next year.

Unless there are further insurgencies, I believe that
this will be the last meeting on the Palestinian question
of this working year. The delegation of Equatorial
Guinea is extremely concerned that, despite all the
support and effort, we have been unable to achieve any
political progress in both the disputes between Israelis
and Palestinians and the intra-Palestinian relationship.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is convinced of
the important role that the United Nations has always
played with regard to the Palestinian question, but also
believes that the Security Council and the international
community must conduct a deeper moral and political
examination of what and how much we are doing and
in what way and if we are taking the right approach.
Seventy years is too long to wait for the resolution of a
conflict that is unrelenting in taking human lives on all
sides, keeping millions of Palestinians displaced and
hindering the development of Palestinian society, while
unravelling the basic livelihoods of some localities, as
has been the case in the Gaza Strip. The amount oftime
that this sad reality has lingered on is completely unjust
and could create scepticism in international public
opinion about the will and spirit that drives our work
of managing peace and security in the Middle East, in
particular the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Every year, we advocate new draft resolutions to
alleviate the conflict, which is all well and good, but
what about the many resolutions that have already been
adopted? The history of the conflict has proven that it
is extremely difficult to adopt draft resolutions on this
matter in the Council, which demonstrates how rational
and fair the existing resolutions are. We must therefore
all support strict compliance with those resolutions,
which, in our opinion, provide a balanced solution to
the problem.

We regret and strongly condemn the heavy
exchanges of gunfire between Israeli forces and Hamas
militias in November, the magnitude of which caused
severe alarm among the population and led to several
deaths and infrastructure damage. In that regard, we
call on Hamas and other Palestinian organizations
in the area to refrain from any provocation against
Israel. Likewise, we urge the Israeli security forces to
respect international humanitarian law by evaluating
their responses to those threats. We therefore call on
the parties to respect the provisions of resolution 2334
(2016).
We welcome the efforts of the United Nations that,
together with its partners and donors, has continued to
improve the humanitarian and economic situation in
Gaza. We hope that such inroads can garner further
international support. However, in order to achieve a
secure and sustained settlement in Gaza, it is important
to guarantee a stable security environment, for which
we have always demanded the return of the Palestinian
Authority. That compels us to join Egypt's actions to
promote reconciliation among the Palestinian parties,
while bearing in mind that security in the Gaza Strip
would help to alleviate the tension with neighbouring
Israel.

History has starkly taught us that the conflict
has no military solution. The Republic of Equatorial
Guinea therefore reiterates that the political solution
to the Palestinian question must comprise a two-State
solution that is negotiated by the parties, within the
1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The interests of both parties must always be taken
into account. Likewise, we urge the Security Council
not to remain indifferent in the face of the stalemate
in negotiations between the parties and to work to
implement measures that allow for compliance with
its own resolutions. We ask that written reports on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) be published,
as was requested by 10 members of the Council.

Finally, the United States peace plan that has been
initiated by Ambassador Nikki Haley deserves our due
attention, as it currently lacks detail. We welcome the
plan and hope that it will be fair and convincing in
the eyes of the international community. We wish to
take this opportunity to pay well-deserved tribute to
Ambassador Haley for her leadership during her time
here at the Security Council.

