Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ambassador Djani, Permanent
Representative of Indonesia, for his briefing on the work
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). We would like to thank Ambassador Djani
and his team for their conscientious stewardship of
this subsidiary body of the Security Council. We look
forward to productive cooperation in the future and
will fully support him in his endeavours.

Resolution 1540 (2004) is rightly considered a
cornerstone of the global non-proliferation architecture.
The Security Council's adoption of it by consensus in
2004 was the result ofajoint initiative ofRussia and the
United States aimed at establishing a robust legal and
law-enforcement bulwark to prevent weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) from falling into the hands of
non-State actors, including terrorists. That means that
for the past 15 years we have been able to work together
to identify a problem that is now manifest in extremely
serious forms.

The particular value of resolution 1540 (2004)
consists in the fact that it is a mechanism for
cooperation, not coercion or the imposition of so-
called solutions. Its adoption launched an era of
cooperation in the collective work of countering one
of the world's most serious threats to global stability.
The responsibility for implementing the resolution lies
with States. International and regional organizations,
industry, business, academic and scientific circles and
other sectors of civil society play a very important
but secondary role in helping States to implement
specific provisions. Resolution 2325 (2016), adopted in
accordance with the results of the 2016 review process,
helped to further strengthen the 1540 Committee's
non-proliferation mandate, facilitating the exchange of
best practices for its implementation and improving the
effectiveness of assistance to States in need of it, while
taking their specific requirements into account.
We believe firmly that the goal established by
resolution 1977 (2011) of conducting comprehensive
reviews of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) should be a priority for the Committee. In order
to prepare properly for the process it is important
first of all to ensure that States, international and
regional organizations, business and academic circles
develop recommendations and proposals that in the
event of a consensus-based adoption will underpin the
Committee's new mandate for the period following
25 April 2021. In that regard we believe the Committee
could hold an open meeting to which all interested
stakeholders would be invited. Brainstorming would
help to identify additional directions for cooperation.
We want to point out that the approach to assessing the
operations of the Committee and its Groups of Experts
should be a professional one guided by the principle
of "first do no harm". Surrounding the Committee
with additional bureaucratic structures, limiting the
continuity of experts' contracts or artificially promoting
radical but unconsidered proposals could lead to
additional bureaucratization and create obstacles rather
than enhancing the effectiveness and efficiency of this
important body's activity.

Combating the proliferation of WMDs is one of
Russia's military and political priorities. Like any other
difficult issue, what it needs is concerted, coordinated
effort on the part of all States, without exception. We
need engagement and cooperation, not confrontation.
We are interested in reaching common positions
with our partners with the purpose of advancing
the non-proliferation agenda as quickly as possible,
especially considering that the problems in this area
continue to worsen. In the light ofthe continued activity
in the Middle East of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and other terrorist groups, which have acquired
the technology for producing chemical weapons use
and are making active use of it, the significance of
collective efforts to prevent the terrifying problem of
chemical terrorism is only increasing. We should act
quickly, especially given the fact that as the situation
in Syria is resolved, the terrorists, including those with
practical experience in the area of chemical weapons,
will try to seek refuge in third countries and continue
to ply their destructive trade there.

For our part, we intend to continue participating
actively in the Committee's work. We look forward
to constructive and productive cooperation with all
partners in the interests of ensuring the fullest possible
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004) in order to prevent weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery from falling into the hands
of non-State actors.

