Mr. Widodo (Indonesia): Let me begin, Mr.
President, by extending to you my delegation's
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
at a time when the Security Council is considering an
issue of critical importance to all of us. Let me also
commend Ambassador Wang of China for the able
manner in which he conducted the work of the Council
last month.

This urgent meeting of the Council has, rightly,
been called to consider a highly volatile situation -
and, indeed, an explosive one - in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem, which
threatens to engulf the whole Middle East region.

For quite some time now, Indonesia has observed
with deepening concern the progressive deterioration
of the situation of the occupied territories. The
ominous manifestations of this grave situation - the
seizure and occupation of Orient House and other
Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem, targeted
assassinations and incursions into Palestinian lands,
closures of Palestinian towns, and deadly military
actions resulting in heavy Palestinian civilian
casualties, including children - are aggressive and
illegitimate practices by Israel, the occupying Power, in
total contravention of international law and
conventions and resolutions of international legitimacy.
They also reflect its intentions to renege on past peace
accords, commitments and agreements already
concluded with the Palestinians.

On two previous occasions the Security Council
failed by a slim margin to adopt a draft resolution by
which a United Nations observer force would be
dispatched to the occupied Palestinian territories to
protect the people from suppression and persecution at
the hands of the Israeli authorities. Now, months later
with even more scores of Palestinian deaths and
wounded, the question that begs to be answered is
when will the Security Council assume its
responsibility to stop this culture of violence of
protracted occupation.

This grave state of affairs is apparent to the entire
international community. It is inconceivable that the
occupying Power speaks of pursuing the path to peace
and calls for an end to the violence, as there can be no
doubt that the occupying Power is seriously
endangering the peace process by taking measures
contrary to it both in letter and spirit.

Such unilateral action is a fatal blow to the peace
agreements and undermines all the arduous past efforts
undertaken towards attaining comprehensive peace in
the region. These illegal measures are creating a new
status of conditions on the ground and are thereby
transforming the political status of Jerusalem. What
makes this action even more reprehensible is that it
violates one of the central issues of this conflict.

Given the current dangerous situation and its
potential to fall into the abyss of a new and more
vicious cycle of violence and bloodshed, the Security
Council is duty-bound to take urgent and remedial
action. This should include calling upon Israel to
immediately end its occupation of Orient House and
Palestinian institutions and cease all acts that are
detrimental to the safety and well-being of the
Palestinian people. Israel should accept the undeniable
fact that lasting security can never be achieved while it
continues its arbitrary policies and transgressions
against the Palestinian people.

It is crucial that wisdom, foresight and leadership
prevail. The only path out of this crisis and towards
achieving lasting peace is the resumption of peace
negotiations based on the full implementation of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), including the land-for-peace principle. Towards
this end, it is essential that the process implementing
the Mitchell recommendations begin in the presence of
international monitors.

In conclusion, this political conflict of more than
half a century has exacted too much suffering and
taken too many lives. This is a conflict that has as its
crux the occupation of a land and the just struggle of
the Palestinian people for national independence and
self-determination continuing well into this new
millennium. Thus, those who seek to reverse what is
irreversible are endangering their own security, and
peace will remain elusive. Hence, this situation should
brook no further delay. The Security Council is
strongly urged to take resolute action in order to

forestall a worsening situation with incalculable
consequences.

