Mr. Garcia Belaunde (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first of all to express Peru's appreciation for
the convening of this meeting to address the issue of
peace and security in Africa, where the majority of the
cases on the Security Council's agenda originate.

The interrelatedness between underdevelopment
and violence is particularly flagrant in the armed
conflicts in Africa, in countries of marked instability
where low levels of development go hand in hand with
weak State structures and, generally, with a fragile rule
of law. This explains the lack of equity in income
distribution, as well as the low level of political and
social inclusion of ethnic groups within a State. In this
context, it should come as no surprise then, that once
violence erupts, it often spreads to neighbouring States
through the actions of illegal armed groups and
through the wave of refugees and of internally
displaced persons, turning what were initially internal
conflicts into humanitarian emergencies, and then
finally into threats to regional peace and security.

Facing challenges of such magnitude, the
Security Council must maintain a strategic vision that
sees peace and security in Africa as the result of a
skilled management of four main variables: prevention,
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, the humanitarian issue and post-conflict
management.

We know full well that conflict prevention is less
costly than ending conflicts. Effective conflict
prevention in Africa should be based on long-term
programmes that are geared towards meeting the basic
needs of the population, adopting inclusive policies
and working to improve social and economic
indicators. In this undertaking, the principal
responsibility lies with the African Governments,
whose efforts deserve the support of the international
community and of the international financial
institutions.

Regional cooperation is a second element. Peru
recognizes the achievements that have been made in
building a continental and subregional collective
security system for Africa. This approach must be
further developed as, pursuant to Chapter VIII of the
Charter, regional arrangements are assigned the
principal responsibility for resolving the regional
conflicts affecting them. Early warning, mediation
before conflict escalation, reconciliation,
reconstruction and stabilization must all be the subject
of cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional African organizations.

On the humanitarian question, the priority for
peacekeeping operations must be the protection of
civilian populations through the timely deployment of
peacekeeping forces, in order to halt violence and
prevent new humanitarian catastrophes. These efforts
must include the fight against impunity, and further
mechanisms must be established in order to punish acts
of genocide.

Finally, there is a need to adequately tackle the
post-conflict situation in order to reinforce peace
through the forging of inclusive economic, political
and social processes. This undertaking entails
neutralizing remaining hot beds of violence and
empowering countries to address global phenomena
such as climate change or pandemics. To that end, the
international community must support reconstruction,
the building of democratic institutions, the promotion
of development and political and social reconciliation.

The Peacebuilding Commission, created for this
very purpose, must meet the challenge of serving as an
effective complement in order to support and sustain
the collective security system.

Achieving peace and development on the African
continent is necessary for international stability. With
the support of the international community, Africa's
leaders and peoples must fulfil the promise of a future
of freedom, a future free from the hunger and terror
that marked the period of colonization.

