Mr. Punkrasin (Thailand): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the member States of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) -
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao
People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar,
the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam.

At the outset, ASEAN would like to congratulate
Japan on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February. We
commend Japan for organizing an open debate on this
important issue for our region. We would like to extend
our warm welcome to Mr. J ose' Ramos-Horta, President
of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste. We also
commend the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative for Timor-Leste for their tireless
dedication and hard work to support Timor-Leste.

ASEAN stands firmly in solidarity with the
Government and people of Timor-Leste in their nation-
building process and their admirable effort to achieve a
stable, democratic and prosperous Timor-Leste.
ASEAN's support for the United Nations in Timor-
Leste has always been strong and consistent. Member
States of ASEAN have contributed their troops and
police observers to successive United Nations missions
in Timor-Leste, including the current United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

ASEAN welcomes the remarkable progress
achieved by the Government and people of Timor-
Leste in overcoming various challenges to nation-
building and commends the resilience that the country
has shown in response to the events of 11 February
2008. We welcome the fact that the overall situation
has returned to normalcy and that the security situation
remains calm, while notable progress has been made to
address the two major residual consequences of the
2006 crisis, namely, the issues of the petitioners and
the internally displaced persons.

ASEAN believes that a holistic approach is
important to ensure that Timor-Leste progresses
smoothly from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and to
durable peace, security and development. Peace,
stability, development, the rule of law and good
governance are all interrelated and mutually
reinforcing. Therefore, ASEAN supports the holistic
approach of UNMIT, as reflected in the four mandated
priority areas - review and reform of the security
sector; strengthening of the rule of law; economic and
social development, particularly in the rural areas; and
the promotion of a culture of democratic governance
and dialogue.

ASEAN strongly believes that national ownership
should not only continue to be a principle that guides
every work of UNMIT, but also be the ultimate goal
that the international community should strive to
achieve.

ASEAN believes that, guided by strong
leadership and assisted by international cooperation,
Timor-Leste is moving forward and in the right
direction. But many daunting challenges remain.
Therefore, ASEAN strongly believes that substantial
and sustained international partnership will continue to
be vital to assisting Timor-Leste in building on past
gains and laying a solid foundation for the future.
Taking into account the express wish of the
Government of Timor-Leste for a continued robust
UNMIT presence, ASEAN is supportive of the
Secretary-General's observation that an extension of
the UNMIT mandate for a period of 12 months at the
current composition and strength is essential.

While the international community should
continue to be consistent in its support for the stability
and security of Timor-Leste, ASEAN believes that
concerted and sustained international assistance to
support the socio-economic development of the
country is no less significant. Investment in human
capital and in the livelihood of the people, particularly
at the community level, is an investment in the long-
term peace, stability and prosperity of the country. In
this regard, we are pleased that the Government of
Timor-Leste and UNMIT recently signed the five-year
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
for 2009-2013, which, in our view, constitutes a good
framework for achieving national solidarity and
development.

Development is always close to the heart of
ASEAN because we know that development, peace and
security are interlinked. So far, many ASEAN member
States have been working with the Government of
Timor-Leste on development and technical assistance
programmes, in accordance with the needs and
priorities of Timor-Leste in areas such as human
resources development, capacity-building, poverty
alleviation, employment generation, rural development,
infrastructure development, agriculture, fisheries and
public health.

In conclusion, ASEAN would like to reiterate our
support for the work of the United Nations in Timor-
Leste. ASEAN will continue to stand in solidarity and
friendship with the Government and people of Timor-
Leste, who are our friends and regional partner, in their
nation-building effort and wishes them success in
overcoming future challenges. ASEAN will continue to
engage with Timor-Leste. We look forward to Timor-
Leste's attendance at the 42nd ASEAN ministerial
meeting as a guest of the Chair and its participation in
the sixteenth ASEAN Regional Forum in Thailand later
in 2009.
