Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I wish to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Sahel, Mr. Romano
Prodi; the President of the World Bank, Mr. Jim Yong
Kim; and other representatives for their participation in
and presentations at today's meeting.

The Sahel region continues to face security,
political, humanitarian and human rights challenges.
Those include terrorism, transnational crimes such as
drug trafficking, and political instability arising from
weak governance. The humanitarian situation remains
dire with hundreds of thousands of displaced people
and millions facing the threat of hunger.

Against that backdrop, my country fully supports
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
A comprehensive and coordinated approach is indeed
critical in tackling that multifaceted crisis. In that
context, the high-level meeting on the situation in
the Sahel, held in September, provided a valuable
opportunity to raise awareness of the challenges and
to reaffirm the importance of the United Nations
integrated strategy to the region.

The Republic of Korea also highly commends
the joint initiative of the Secretary-General and the
President of the World Bank to visit the region together
last month in spearheading the implementation of the
strategy. The visit included the participation of the
African Union, the European Union and the African
Development Bank, and clearly demonstrated the
importance of an integrated approach to effectively
addressing the underlying causes of the Sahel crisis.
We believe that the pledges of over $8 billion will be
instrumental in helping the Sahel region to realize its
potential.

Allow me to highlight a few areas that my delegation
considers to be essential to the effective implementation
of the integrated strategy. First, the political will of
the Governments concerned and their national and
regional ownership are crucial. The regional nature of
the integrated strategy calls for strengthened efforts
towards building trust and confidence among all
Governments of the region. In that regard, we welcome
the holding in Bamako of the ministerial meeting on the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, and of
the regional conference on border security between the
Sahel and Maghreb regions, held in Rabat last month.

Secondly, another element required for success is
ensuring overall coherence and complementarity to
maximize the effectiveness of assistance and avoid
duplication. That applies not only to coordination
among international and regional organizations, but
also to donors, regional Governments and United
Nations agencies as a whole.

Thirdly, to ensure tangible progress, it is important
to set clear short-term and long-term priorities and to
establish well-defined benchmarks. The priorities and
benchmarks need to be developed in close coordination
with the Governments of the region.

Finally, we appreciate the role ofMorocco in working
out the presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/20), which
we support.

It is essential that the international community
maintain its engagement and commitment to the Sahel.
The Republic of Korea continues to support the efforts
to promote peace and development in the region.

