Mr. Lee (Republic of Korea): First of all, I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate on East Timor. I should also like to
express my delegation's appreciation to Secretary-
General Kofi Annan for his introductory statement and
to Assistant Secretary-General Hedi Annabi for his
briefing on the Secretary-General's report (S/2002/432 and Add.l) earlier in this debate, last Friday.

We are gathered here today to share our profound
delight at what we, the international community, have
achieved in East Timor over the past two and a half
years and to ensure that that tremendous achievement
is a sustainable one. Having overcome a history of
devastation, East Timor now stands as a budding
independent State, the formal launching of which is
less than a month away. Over the past few months, we
have witnessed such historic milestones as the adoption
of the country's Constitution and the election of its first
President, setting the stage for an independent East
Timor.

At this juncture, let me express, on behalf of the
Government and the people of the Republic of Korea,
my warmest congratulations to the leaders and the
people of East Timor on having fulfilled their yearning
for a free, independent State despite enormous
hardships and challenges. Our special congratulations
go to His Excellency Mr. Kay Rala Xanana Gusmao,
the President-elect. During the earlier part of this
meeting, held last Friday, his presence, together with
that of His Excellency Mr. Mari Alkatiri, Chief
Minister, honoured all of us. My delegation is fully
confident that, with his proven leadership, President-
elect Gusmao will set his country on the path to long-
term peace and prosperity.

During the course of building an independent
State, the United Nations has played a pivotal role
through the United Nations Transitional Administration
in East Timor (UNTAET), whose work covers not only
security and political dimensions but also social and
economic development. The Mission embodies the
aspirations of the international community to peace,
freedom and democracy. My delegation believes that
its success in East Timor more than vindicates the
relevance and strengths of the United Nations in
current international affairs. In that regard, we truly
commend the dedication of the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello,
and their staffs.

The Republic of Korea is proud to have taken an
active part in the international efforts for nation-
building and for reconstruction in East Timor. We have
been contributing a significant number of peacekeeping
forces to the military component of UNTAET since its
inception, thus helping to ensure a stable security
environment for a smooth transition to independence.
Bilaterally, the Republic of Korea has continued to
extend humanitarian and development assistance to
East Timor. Furthermore, since June last year we have
maintained in Dili a permanent diplomatic presence,
which will be upgraded to the embassy level.

With regard to the Secretary-General's report as it
relates to the successor mission to UNTAET, the
Republic of Korea fully supports the proposal to
establish a United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET), a key element of which is a
milestone-based approach towards the Mission's
gradual withdrawal over a two-year period.

At this point, my delegation would like to
congratulate Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma on his
appointment as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for East Timor. His charm and
competence are well known in the diplomatic
community in New York.

My delegation is also in full agreement with the
Secretary-General's observation that, given the
remaining challenges to security and stability as well as
the fragile economy, it is essential that the international
community remain engaged in this new State. Now is
the time, not for complacency, but for renewed
attention and support to East Timor.

Having taken a keen interest in the historic
process of nation-building in East Timor, we eagerly
anticipate the inauguration of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of East Timor on 20 May, and we
very much look forward to working closely with the
new Government as it joins the global family of
nations. Once again, I should like to convey the wish of
the Government and the people of the Republic of
Korea for continued peace and prosperity in East
Timor.

