Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to start by thanking Ms. Patricia O'Brien, Under-
Secretary-General for Legal Affairs and United Nations
Legal Counsel, for her briefing. We have noted that
there has indeed been some positive progress on
bringing Somali pirates to justice, as evidenced by the
increased number of prosecutions and of countries
pursuing prosecutions, which we welcome. At the same
time, we also note that the peace process in Somalia
still faces many challenges and that piracy is still
rampant, which is a cause for concern. I wish to make
the following points with regard to the fight against
piracy off the coast of Somalia.

First, detaining and prosecuting Somali pirates
and ending impunity are crucial steps in our fight
against piracy off the Somali coast. We support the
continued focus on this issue by the international
community and we believe that the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/360) lays a good foundation
for future work in this area.

Secondly, we appreciate the willingness of
Tanzania to host an extraterritorial specialized court.
We have also noted that there are multiple challenges
in establishing anti-piracy courts, both within and
beyond Somalia. We call on the international
community to step up its efforts and address problems
gradually, on the basis of respect for the will of the
Somali people, to reach a viable and effective solution
to this problem.

Thirdly, strengthening the judicial capacity of
Somalia and other countries in the region goes hand in
hand with establishing anti-piracy courts both within
and beyond Somalia. The United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime have both done a great deal of work in that
regard, for which we express our appreciation. We call
on the international community to continue to provide
assistance to Somalia and other countries in the region.

Fourthly, the root causes of piracy off the coast of
Somalia lie on land. As such, our response should
tackle both the symptoms and the root causes, with the
overall objective of achieving peace and stability and
promoting economic and social development in that
country. To that end, the Transitional Federal
Government and the international community should
pursue a comprehensive strategy in promoting
balanced interventions on all fronts.

