Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I also join in the expressions of appreciation extended
to Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, particularly for the
excellent briefing and report he has given us on East
Timor's process of independence and on the
participation and presence of the United Nations in that
country after 20 May 2002. I also wish to acknowledge
and welcome the presence of Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta,
Senior Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
East Timor. My country also appreciates the
participation of the Honourable John Howard, Prime
Minister of Australia, in this discussion, and we
welcome the presence of Ms. Liz O'Donnell, Minister
of State for Foreign Affairs of Ireland.

We join all those who, at this table and beyond it,
have expressed their views in support of maintaining
international cooperation to consolidate the peace
process that will lead to the emergence of a new
independent State, consistent with the will expressed
by the people of East Timor. The international
community and this Council should be very proud and
pleased when East Timor joins the international family
as an independent nation next May.

However, we believe that the months prior to the
official declaration of independence remain critical for
guaranteeing the stability and security of this new
State, particularly in the holding of presidential
elections next April. Therefore, we believe that the role
of the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET) is fundamental for maintaining
the stability of the process and avoiding the emergence
of troubles onto the political scene.

Mexico welcomes the progress made by
UNTAET to lay the political foundations of a new
State. We commend that body's contribution to national
reconciliation, the assistance afforded for the creation
of operational machinery to bring about a new
administration. The rule of law, the administration of
justice, respect for human rights, border security, the
advancement of the national reconciliation process and
the return of refugees in conditions of security and
dignity f those are all matters of special importance
that will require international support and priority
attention from the new Government. This international
support, we believe, should continue under the
leadership of the United Nations.

The prosperity of the new State will, in great
measure, depend on the efficiency, determination and
honesty with which justice is administered and with
which violence and crime in East Timor are suppressed
and punished.

We support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General contained in his report (S/2002/80),
both with respect to the extension of UNTAET's
mandate and to its reconfiguration. We await with great
interest the detailed proposals of Secretary-General
Kofi Annan for UNTAET's successor mission. We
believe that the presence of the United Nations
following the independence of East Timor should
continue to preserve the three key elements set forth in
the Secretary-General's priorities: a military
component, a civilian police component and, of course,
a civilian component of support for the transition to the
new governmental administration. All of this should be
done within a time period that will not jeopardize the
stability and progress that have been achieved.

We reiterate our support for basing the successor
mission on the principle that operational
responsibilities should be devolved to the East
Timorese authorities as soon as is feasible through an
ongoing process of mission assessment and downsizing
over a period of two years starting from independence.

Mexico believes that, in addition to taking
account of the views of the East Timor authorities,
countries that contribute troops to UNTAET should
also be consulted during the reconfiguration period
before and after independence. To ensure the success of
our exit strategy, their opinions must be taken into
account with respect both to the drawdown of troops
and to the situation on the ground. We hope that those
countries will contribute their experience to the
training of the East Timor Police Service, with a view
to ensuring a more secure environment.

Mexico believes, too, in the need for ongoing,
close dialogue between the new East Timor authorities
and Indonesia. Progress is needed on resolving pending
issues such as border delimitation including maritime
boundaries, fighting cross-border crime and
establishing a framework of political, economic and
educational cooperation that would bolster friendship
between the two nations.

In that context, Mexico hails the establishment of
an Ad Hoc Human Rights Court in Indonesia to deal
with violations that took place in East Timor in 1999.
The political will of the President of Indonesia was
reflected in her appointment of 18 judges, who will
join the 12 recommended by the Indonesian Supreme
Court. We hope that the work of the Human Rights
Court will progress with the speed warranted by the
situation.

As others have said at today's meeting, East
Timor provides one of the best examples of the
possibility of putting together an integrated strategic
partnership to resolve a conflict in keeping with the
maintenance of international peace and security and,
beyond that, to make possible the orderly birth of a
new nation which, we hope, will become a proud, full-
fledged Member of the United Nations. The presence
of the United Nations as a prominent actor in the
political process that will culminate in the emergence
of the new State has been facilitated by the experience
and technical capacity of the multilateral system as a
whole.

Cooperation between East Timor and the
international community must be tightened in order to
maintain stability, help remove threats to internal and
external security and, above all, promote the economic
and social development of East Timor. The efforts of
the United Nations system, and its advocacy and
coordination with the participation of other States, are
essential to promote public and private investment in
the economic development of East Timor. This
economic and social development and the well-being
and prosperity of the citizens of East Timor will be the
foundation of the independence and self-determination
of East Timor and the source of their viability.

Let me conclude, Mr. President, by thanking you
for the outstanding way in which you, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Mauritius, have guided the work of
the Council.

