Mr. Oyarzun Maechesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by thanking the Secretary-
General for his statement and for his presence today. As
the majority of speakers before me have done, I would
like to focus my remarks on the Quartet report and on
the road before us at this moment. Spain welcomes the
publication of the report at long last for two simple
reasons. First, the report states that the two-State
solution will no longer be viable if the status quo is
maintained. Secondly, the report calls for the urgent
implementation of a series of recommendations by the
parties. At the same time, it recognizes the role that is
to be played by the international community.

Throughout today's open debate, we have heard
various assessments of the report, and there will be
more assessments to come during the course of the day.
Nevertheless, there is an essential element that I think
we can all agree upon, and that is the fact that the two-
State solution is becoming ever more distant with every
passing day. Political, territorial and socioeconomic
concerns are leading to that distancing.

Spain rejects the use of violence and terrorism under
any circumstances. Attacks and incitements to violence,
as documented by the report, are unacceptable. Our
primary responsibility is to avoid a situation in which
there continue to be direct victims of the conflict. We
cannot allow for any more Mahmouds or Hallels. We
simply owe them that. We must also realize that we are
at risk of reaching the point of no return, at which we
will forever lose hope for a just and lasting solution in
the Middle East. I believe that no one wants to reach
that point, hence the need for urgent measures. The
utility of the Quartet report depends, to a great extent,
on its ability to serve as a tool to revitalize the peace
process. That is why we propose that we rebuild a viable
political horizon in the region.

To that end, I would like to highlight the following
next steps, namely, respect for international legal
frameworks, international initiatives in support of a
two-State solution and the role of the Security Council.

Respect for international legal frameworks,
including United Nations resolutions, is very important;
we have said so in previous debates but find it necessary
to reaffirm it today in the light ofthe Quartet report. The
construction of settlements in the occupied territories
is illegal under international law and contravenes
several Security Council resolutions. Israel must also
stop the demolition of houses, the seizures of land and
the designation of that land for exclusive Israeli use.
By way of example, the Quartet report indicates that
60 per cent of Area C is currently held for exclusive
use by Israel. The construction of settlements is not the
only threat to the two-State solution, but it is the most
difficult one to reverse.

As the report indicates - in one of the more positive
statements that I have read in the report - we need
to prevent a situation in which the two-State solution
is no longer Viable. Both parties to the conflict and
the international community have the duty to call for
compliance with existing international law and to
work towards a peaceful solution to the conflict in the
Middle East. That is why, in October oflast year, Spain
indicated that the international community should hold
an international conference in order to enable us to
revitalize the peace process from a broader perspective.
We fully support the joint communique issued on
3 June. At the Paris conference, a number of possible
guidelines that could contribute to preparations for
such an international conference were discussed,
including that of providing economic incentives for the
parties in the context ofa peace agreement, building the
capacities of the future Palestinian State and working
with both Palestinian and Israeli civil societies.

Our Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
indicated that Spain stands ready to host a meeting of
religious leaders in the Holy Land. Its purpose would
be to bring their leadership and influence to bear in
order to send a message of tolerance, dialogue and
non-incitement to violence between communities.
We are, of course, ready to be actively involved in
intra-Palestinian reconciliation and in the formation of
a democratic Government of national unity under the
auspices of the Quartet. The return of the Palestinian
Authority to Gaza is a key factor in overcoming the
impasse. Finally, I would like to note that we agree
with the Quartet report's reference to the importance
of the Arab Peace Initiative, which has the potential to
establish a regional security framework.

Looking towards the future, we cannot forget the
essential role that the Security Council could play at
the opportune time in laying the foundation for the
negotiation process. We want the Council's action to
be firmly rooted in the international community, hence
the need to advance along parallel tracks, in a coherent
manner, in three directions, namely, by lending our
support to the work of the Quartet, preparing the
international peace conference and implementing
the Arab Peace Initiative. The Security Council must
pay particular attention to the implementation of the
recommendations of the Quartet in the coming months.
It is only in that manner that we will be able to gradually
rebuild confidence on the ground and create conditions
for the parties to reach an agreement.

