Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express our gratitude to you,
Madam President, for convening this meeting. Let me
also thank His Excellency Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his presence and effective participation
during this morning's deliberations.

Morocco, a founding member of the Organization
of African Unity, has placed stability and development
on the African continent at the heart of its foreign
policy priorities, while adopting an approach of
cooperation and solidarity in addressing the economic,
social, political and security challenges that hamper
comprehensive development in Africa. Since acceding
to membership of the United Nations, Morocco has
also been committed to contributing to the achievement
of the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
both in the area of the maintenance of international
peace and security and in cooperating to achieve
sustainable development and ensure the advancement
of, and respect for, human rights.

In line with that long and ongoing commitment at
the continental and international levels, Morocco has
made serious contributions to every genuine effort
aimed at heightening cooperation between the United
Nations and the African continent, in full respect for
the jurisdiction and specificities of both partners. In
that context, Morocco has made a positive contribution
to international and regional efforts to resolve
numerous conflicts. Morocco has always contributed to
United Nations peacekeeping operations, especially in
Africa. Based on the same conviction, the Kingdom of
Morocco has supported democratic transformation in
many African States. And we have contributed to
consolidating stability in those countries through
effective cooperation in crucial areas related to
sustainable development. Given the interdependence
between economic development and achieving peace
and security, Morocco has supported development in
Africa by strengthening trade relations and economic
investment and efforts at creating promising projects.

No one doubts the crucial role of subregional
organizations and groupings in achieving continental
and regional aspirations, in particular in Africa. That is
the reason for our commitment to the greater Maghreb
project and our ongoing readiness to operationalize it
as soon as possible in order to contribute to the
stability and prosperity of the five States that comprise
it.

Based on our belief in the need to develop and
promote forums for cooperation and coordination
among African States, Morocco, in cooperation with
other brotherly African States, has established the
22-member Ministerial Conference on Fisheries
Cooperation among African States Bordering the
Atlantic Ocean. The goal of the Conference is to work
together to share expertise in various areas, including
human and sustainable development and combating
organized crime.

Achieving the shared objectives of the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular in the
area of international peace and security, must take into
consideration the following aspects.

First, there must be a clear understanding and
vision and respect for the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and the charters of regional
organizations.

Secondly, with regard to the primary
responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Charter of the United Nations calls on the Council to
encourage the peaceful resolution of local conflicts
through regional organizations, on the basis of requests
by the States concerned or through a referral by the
Council, in full respect with other provisions of the
Charter.

Thirdly, there should be joint assessments and
consultations between parties in order to avoid any
competition likely to hamper or delay the ending of a
conflict and the resolution of a dispute.

Fourthly, the United Nations and regional
organizations must pre-empt conflicts and disputes and
prevent them from escalating.

Fifthly, the root causes of conflict should be
addressed, in particular on the economic, political and
security levels. In addition, any trends towards
cessation, instability and terrorism must be combated.
The United Nations, including its entire membership
and all its agencies, should strengthen its support for
efforts to achieve comprehensive development, as well
as to contribute to encouraging reform, democratic
transformation and good governance.
5
Sixthly, in cases that concern more than one
regional organization, experience has demonstrated the
need for consultation among such organizations, as
well as with the United Nations. That would help to
avoid the duplication of effort and potential
competition, as well as to identify the most qualified
organization to address a given situation.

The African Maghreb, proud of its strong historic
relations with its brothers on the continent, is fully
prepared to support every United Nations effort to
strengthen the security and stability of African States,
in full respect for their sovereignty, independence,
national unity and territorial integrity. We are also
prepared to participate effectively in any effort to
combat terrorism, piracy and the scourge of drugs,
which threaten the safety and security of our brothers
in the Sahel and the Horn of Africa.

Finally, I would like to draw the attention of the
Council and the Secretariat to the Arabic text of the
draft resolution before the Council. It has many
shortcomings; including misspellings and parts that
appear to be truncated. I would like that to be
addressed.

