Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would

like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his statement and for

the assessment work that has been carried out by the

United Nations, in close cooperation with the African

Union and on the basis of the needs expressed by the
authorities of the States of region.

The assessment report's (see S/20l2/42)
presentation of the impact of the Libyan crisis on the
Sahel region leads to two observations: first, about the
seriousness of the large number of security and
humanitarian challenges in the region and, secondly,
about the need for the United Nations to adopt a more
integrated approach to help the States of the region to
overcome those challenges. Let me turn first to the
challenges for the region.

In both the humanitarian and security fronts, the
States of the Sahel region face recurring problems that
require addressing with greater coordination and
solutions focused on the underlying issues. Population
movements, which often include migrants returning to
their countries of origin following the crisis in Libya,
as well as the spread of weapons in the region are, as
has been pointed out, additional destabilizing factors in
an already fragile region.

While the problems of the Sahel clearly predate
the Libyan crisis, they have nevertheless not been the
object of sufficiently effective responses. Among the
underlying problems are recurring food crises, acts of
terrorism by Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and
Boko Haram, and trafficking in weapons, drugs and
even human beings - the common denominator being
that they all concern issues that cross borders and, to
varying degrees concern all the countries of the Sahel.
Quite often, States lack the resources to address
problems beyond their borders that contribute to
destabilization in their region. In that regard, it is
especially relevant that the Security Council address
the question of the Sahel in all its aspects, which is
something it has never done.

Given the cross-border threat of those threats, it
is crucial that the States of region carry out cooperation
in the areas of security and development, in particular
when it comes to border controls. Solutions must first
of all come from the States themselves. The latest
ministerial conference held in Nouakchott this week
shows that this process is under way. The international
community should act to help by supporting the
Governments of the region and providing assistance for
their initiatives. The matter of the crucial role of
coordination leads me to my second point, namely, the
role of the United Nations.

We are convinced that the United Nations has a
role to play in the Sahel. At this moment, no regional
organization in Africa brings together all the countries
concerned by the problems of the Sahel. Only the
United Nations, by virtue of its universality and
neutrality, includes all the States of the Sahel and
neighbouring States of the region. It is therefore
essential that the United Nations adopt a more
integrated approach internally to help the States of the
region in the areas of security and development. It
should do so by aligning its agencies, funds and
programmes to work in the same direction. Moreover,
we believe that such a strategy should not entail the
establishment of additional bureaucratic mechanisms.
Optimally, it should rely on, and strengthen, existing
structures. In that regard, we call on the Secretariat to
keep the Council informed of efforts made in that
regard.

I should also like to recall that in 2011 the
European Union devoted significant short- and long-
term budgetary resources to a strategy for the Sahel
that provided for many concrete partnership projects
focused on development, security and political dialogue.
The European Union is therefore committed. It has
appointed a coordinator and is currently placing every
tool at his disposal, while making national ownership
the guiding principle. In its approach, the United
Nations should take into account the European Union
initiative, so as to avoid pointless duplication. Only in
that way, will we be able to ensure that the efforts of
the United Nations are adapted to the realities on the
ground and the efforts of other partners in the
international community.

In conclusion, I should like to point out that
France has just circulated a draft statement to the press,
which we hope will later be adopted in order to
demonstrate the commitment of the Security Council
on this issue.

