Ms. Shalev (Israel): At the outset, I Wish to
express the condolences of the people and Government
of Israel to the people and Government of Haiti, as
well as to the United Nations community and to all
those who lost family, friends and colleagues in the
recent tragic earthquake. Israel is humbled to have
provided its assistance to the global relief effort, and
grieves for those who were lost and those who suffer in
that catastrophe.

We are gathered here for yet another debate on
the situation in the Middle East, as we are with regular
frequency. While the work of the Council remains
important, I wish to ask if we engage with equal
frequency on other pressing global matters. I wish to

ask if brief briefings - such as we have just heard
from the Secretariat, partial and, unfortunately,
unbalanced - serve our joint mission to advance on

the road to peace. I wish to ask if such meetings can
promote peace.

The Council should hear more about both sides of
the conflict, where both sides have rights but all sides
also have obligations. History shows that nothing
substitutes for negotiations between the parties. That
was the road to peace in our region - the road of
President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin, the road of
Prime Minister Rabin and King Hussein. Peace then
was the result of direct negotiations between the
parties, not of meetings of this Council, important as it
is.

The only way towards peace is that we, Israelis
and Palestinians, engage in serious and honest bilateral
negotiations to settle the issues that divide us. I
reiterate here a message that my Government has stated
again and again: Israel is prepared to immediately
commence direct peace negotiations.

To that end, Israel instituted an unprecedented
policy of restraint throughout the settlements of the
West Bank. That measure is the latest demonstration
that Israel is prepared to take difficult steps for peace.
We should ask the Palestinian Observer why the
Authority that he represents refrains from accepting
our outstretched hand to negotiate an historic peace.

In the past year, given the improving security
situation across the West Bank, Israel helped facilitate
considerable economic progress and growth. In that
unique environment, Israel calls upon the Palestinian
Authority leadership to recognize the possibility of
peace and to return to the negotiating table. In that
respect, Israel salutes the relentless efforts of the
United States Administration and of Special Envoy
Senator George Mitchell to help facilitate the
relaunching of peace negotiations.

In a region where threats are many, the
international community should confront the real
challenges to peace and security, namely, the threat of
extremism, the danger of nuclear proliferation and the
plague of weapons smuggling and terrorism.

In the Gaza Strip, the terrorist Hamas regime
continues to hold hostage Staff Sergeant Gilad Shalit,
in contravention of his most basic rights. Hamas fails
to acknowledge previous agreements. It fails to reject
violence and it fails to recognize Israel.

Less than a week ago, Hamas leader Khaled
Mashal proudly announced that Hamas "will never
recognize the Zionist entity". Hamas continues to
smuggle large quantities of weapons into Gaza. Earlier
this month 20 mortars and rockets were fired from
Gaza towards Israel, including a Katyusha rocket that
landed south of Ashkelon, a city with a population of
over 100,000 Israeli citizens.

Where are the concerned voices for peace in the
face of such hatred, such smuggling and such attacks?
Unfortunately, this silence is all too familiar when
Israeli civilians are under terrorist attack. So let me
state here clearly, as I have stated in numerous letters
of complaint to the Secretary-General and to this
Council, that the firing of any weapons from Gaza at
Israeli territory will be met with a strong and
immediate response.

In Lebanon, on 26 December 2009, near
Al-Khiyam, south of the Litani River and only one
kilometre from the Israeli-Lebanese border, the world
witnessed the discovery of nearly 300 kilograms of
sophisticated explosives, planted in close proximity to
civilian infrastructure. That event, along with the
explosions in Tayr Filsi and Khirbat Salim in 2009,
highlights the dangerous pattern; Hizbullah remains
active in southern Lebanon. Such manifest violations
of resolutions 1701 (2006) merit serious attention and
must be addressed in future reports of this Council.

In the face of those challenges, I extend Israel's
gratitude to the positive role played by the United

Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, in particular its
outgoing Commander, General Graziano. I wish the
new Commander, General Asarta, much success.

Terrorism in our region is fuelled by the flow of
illegal arms. Such weapon smuggling - or should I
say transfer - reflects a menacing pattern by two
particular Member States that use terrorist proxies to
sow violence and endless bloodshed. The continued
supplying of arms to Hizbullah across the Syrian-
Lebanese border is a gross violation of the arms
embargo, as well as of other Security Council
resolutions. Israel calls upon the Security Council and
the international community to remain actively seized
of those matters in United Nations debates, reports and
documents, for the Governments that fuel terrorism in
our region represent not merely an Israeli problem, not
merely a Middle Eastern problem. They represent a
global problem.

In the face of such global threats, the
international community has the responsibility to
support those who act responsibly and to isolate those
who do not. Governments and other forces must act
boldly and seize the window of opportunity before us.
In doing so, we will uphold values that lead to peace,
justice and reconciliation.

I wish to conclude on a separate, most solemn
note. Today marks the sixty-fifth anniversary of the
liberation of the Auschwitz-Birkenau death camps.
Today, we remember and honour those who struggled,
those who perished and those who survived the
unmatched evil of the Holocaust. As the international
community reflects on the lessons of the attempt to
destroy an entire nation, we must pass the torch of
remembrance to generations to come. That is not only
our responsibility to the past. It is our responsibility to
the future.

