Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish to express our appreciation to you, Mr. Minister of
State, for the timely convening of this meeting and for
the very important briefings delivered by Mr. Jeremiah
Mamabolo and Ms. Ursula Mueller.

As a number of speakers before me have noted, we
cannot fail to refer to recent events such as the overthrow
of President Omer Al-Bashir and the ongoing protests
in much of the country. The message of the Sudanese
people is clear: they are demanding profound change
and the democratization of the country. Peru supports
the legitimate aspirations of the Sudanese people for a
civil administration that would put in place a peaceful,
trustworthy and inclusive transition process, with all
represented parties, that would make it possible to
undertake the necessary constitutional reforms and to
set out once again on the path to democracy through
the holding of free and fair elections in a reasonable
time frame.

In this context, the support of the United Nations,
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development is important so as to ensure a peaceful

transition, taking account in particular of the serious
humanitarian and social situation in the country,
particularly in Darfur.

We deplore the fact that the gains made in
December in the Darfur peace process could be
affected by the political crisis. We refer here to the
recent outbreaks of violence in refugee camps and to
the decision of the Justice and Equality Movement and
the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi to reverse
their agreement to renew talks with the Sudanese
Government in January.

Also alarming is the decision of the opposition
Sudan Call alliance to withdraw from the agreement
on the road map to put an end to the conflict in the
Sudan in the context of the African Union High-
Level Implementation Panel, signed in 2016 with
the Government.

Given this complex political juncture, we deem it
vital to revert to the agreements reached and put an end
to the violence. We call on all parties to cease hostilities
in Darfur definitively, so that it becomes possible to
resolve pending substantive issues through dialogue.
We commend the efforts of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and
its cooperation with the national and local authorities,
the country team and other related groups to facilitate
the mediation and reach sustainable solutions to the
driving forces of the conflict, including access to land
and resources.

We would also express our deep concern at the
grave situation of human rights in Darfur and regret
that in many cases, violations of fundamental rights
affecting internally displaced persons, especially
women and girls, have been associated with the
Sudanese Armed Forces.

In this context, it is of the greatest importance that
UNAMID be able to effectively implement its mandate
throughout Darfur, especially in the Jebel Marra area.
We hope that the Sudanese Government will be able
to guarantee the mission and humanitarian personnel
unfettered access to the zone.

While the process of the reconfiguration of
UNAMID is under way, as planned, the current context
presents a number of challenges for the mission's exit
and its transition towards peacebuilding. To that end,
we deem it necessary that UNAMID's withdrawal take
place in an atmosphere of caution, taking into account the
situation on the ground. The mobilization of resources
will be key in order to facilitate a peacebuilding process
that is satisfactory in the long run.

Finally, we wish to reiterate our support to the
African Union, the United Nations team, agencies of the
United Nations system and UNAMID for their efforts
to tackle the tremendous challenges facing Darfur on a
daily basis.

