Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful to your delegation, Mr. President, for
convening this debate. I also wish to express my
gratitude for the briefings by Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Alain
Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Mr. Ivan Simonovie, Assistant
Secretary-General of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights.

The variety and complexity of current conflicts,
the lack of respect for the norms of international
humanitarian law and the use of increasingly
sophisticated weaponry, which have indiscriminate
effects on civilian populations, are factors that have
increased the challenges for the Security Council. At
the same time, they provide the basis on which to
determine the course that the international community
should follow in addressing this issue of crucial
importance.

On the basis of the five challenges that the
Secretary-General identified in his latest report
(S/2010/579) in order to ensure more effective
protection of civilians in armed conflict, we wish to
underscore some factors that we believe significant.

First, in order to promote the implementation of
international humanitarian law, it is of great
importance that States that have not yet done so adhere
to the international instruments on international
humanitarian law and recognize the customary law
applicable in such situations. It is essential that we
adopt measures to incorporate the content of such
treaties into national legislation and practices.
It is of particular concern that such indiscriminate
weapons as cluster munitions are being used in

ongoing armed conflicts, despite being prohibited
under an international treaty, and that weapons and
other explosive devices are regularly used in areas of
high civilian concentration. Such uses contravene the
prohibition under international humanitarian law of the
use of methods and means of combat that cause
needless harm and/or unnecessary suffering, as well as
the principles of distinction and proportionality, which
must be observed at all times.

To that, we would add that the availability of
small arms and light weapons as a result of illicit
trafficking has direct negative repercussions for the
civilian population. We must make progress on the
effective implementation of Security Council sanctions
regimes, in particular arms embargoes and, in a broader
sense, meet international obligations pursuant to the
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.

Secondly, we must ensure that obligations falling
to non-State armed groups are met. All parties to a
conflict, whether State bodies, including State
coalitions, armed groups or any other actor, whatever
their nature, are obliged to respect the norms and
principles of international humanitarian law, including
those recognized under customary law. It is therefore
important not only to enact national legislation on the
issue, but also to take broad measures to implement
international law at all levels in order to help prevent
and avoid non-compliance by such actors.

Thirdly, we need to improve the protection of
civilians by peacekeeping missions and other relevant
United Nations missions. We recognize the progress
made within the Organization to provide specific
mandates in that regard, and we recall the importance
of cooperation with other actors involved in such
efforts, such as the International Committee of the Red
Cross and national Red Cross societies. Measures such
as those set out in resolution 1882 (2009) for the
protection of children in armed conflicts, or in the
provisions of resolution 1894 (2009) - which focuses
in an innovative way on ensuring that the mandates of
peacekeeping operations include civilian protection
strategies and action plans that guarantee coordination
between United Nations missions and humanitarian
organizations - represent significant progress.
However, we continue to regret the various attacks
taking place against civilian populations in different
regions.

Fourthly, it is particularly important to improve
access for humanitarian assistance. The instruments of
international humanitarian law are very clear on the
obligation of States and parties to a conflict to allow
safe, timely and unhindered access for humanitarian
aid. It is regrettable that this obligation is repeatedly
ignored in ongoing armed conflicts.

Lastly, accountability must be improved. States
have the primary responsibility to bring to justice the
alleged perpetrators of violations of international
humanitarian law, including war crimes. We believe
that the international instruments on international
humanitarian law - in particular the four Geneva
Conventions, their Additional Protocols and customary
international law - provide a solid basis of principles
and norms for the protection of all those not
participating in hostilities or who have ceased to take
part in them. It is crucial that they be respected by all
parties to a conflict, regardless of their nature or the
kind of conflict in question.

The International Criminal Court is an
indispensable tool for preventing impunity in that it is
empowered to try alleged perpetrators of such
violations if a State is unable or openly unwilling to do
so. Therefore, we urge the States that have not yet done
so to ratify the Rome Statute and to cooperate fully
with the Court. The Council's power under the Statute
to refer situations to the Court, as happened with the
situations in Darfur and more recently in Libya, is key
to the efforts under way to prevent future violations of
international humanitarian law. It is crucial that the
Council closely follow up such referrals and urge the
relevant States to fully cooperate with the Court in
order to successfully implement those mandates.

We are following closely and with concern the
situation affecting broad sectors of civilians in North
Africa. In that regard, we recall that all parties to the
hostilities, whether State bodies, armed groups or any
other actor, whatever their nature, are obliged to
respect the norms and principles of international
humanitarian law, including those recognized under
customary international law.
We acknowledge that the resolutions recently
adopted by the Council on Libya and Cote d'Ivoire
were aimed primarily at protecting the civilian
population and helping to ensure humanitarian

assistance. The legitimacy of the Security Council's
actions rests with the fundamental objective of
ensuring the protection of civilians in conflict,
regardless of the region or particular country.

In June 2010, when my delegation held the
presidency of the Security Council, we held a debate
on strengthening the rule of law, in which, through the
adoption of a presidential statement (S/PRST/ZOlO/ 11),
we acknowledged that respect for international
humanitarian law was an essential element in situations
of conflict, and reaffirmed that the protection of the
civilian population in armed conflicts was essential to
any comprehensive strategy for conflict resolution.

Certainly, the Council must take specific,
effective and resolute actions to address such
situations, as required by those who suffer the trials of
armed conflict and as demanded by States such as
Mexico that are convinced of the leading role that the
Security Council must play in that regard.

