Mr. Amorim (Brazil): First of all, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. Under your able and wise guidance the work of
the Security Council has been conducted in a highly
effective way. I would also take this opportunity to
express my appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador
Bill Richardson.

With regard to recent developments in Angola, we
would like to pay tribute to the key role played by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Maitre
Blondin Beye, and by the troika of observer States.

Regrettably, in the last couple of months, as stated
by the Secretary-General in his report (S/1997/807), there
has been no significant progress in the peace process in
Angola. The implementation of the plan extending the
State administration throughout the country has been
subject to unjustifiable delays. In spite of steps taken
towards the establishment of Radio Despertar, a new and
legal FM. station, Radio Vorgan continues to broadcast.
The process of demilitarization, registration and
disarmament of the so-called residual UNITA personnel
has not shown a meaningful advance.

We urge UNITA to relinquish all personnel and
equipment in its possession to the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) as soon as
possible, in fulfilment of its commitments under the
Lusaka Protocol. All parties involved should exercise
restraint for this process to be undertaken peacefully.

Brazil understands that sanctions must be regarded
as an instrument of last resort. We have insisted that
sanctions should not be seen as an end in themselves.
They must be reserved for situations of extreme gravity,
especially because they can produce negative effects on
innocent populations and neighbouring countries.

In the case of Angola, however, we are convinced
that the Security Council is on the correct path in
adopting a draft resolution that triggers sanctions
specifically targeted against the reluctant party, UNITA.
The situation has reached a point at which the message
that the international community will no longer tolerate
failure to abide by agreed commitments must get through.

 

The coming month will bring the third anniversary of
the Lusaka Protocol. Let us hope that the measures taken
today will have the effect of demonstrating that the only
viable options in Angola are peace and reconciliation.

