I would like to begin by thanking the South African presidency for organizing this open debate. I also commend President Abdulqawi Yusuf of the International Court of Justice for his in-depth briefing (annex 1). Japan associates itself with the statement submitted by Austria (annex 17) on behalf of the countries that attach great importance to the rule of law. Allow me to add a few points in my national capacity. Japan deems Security Council discussions on the rule of law to be of the utmost importance. Therefore, Japan welcomes this open debate on strengthening cooperation between the Council and the International Court of Justice and expects the discussions on the topic to continue in the Council. Japan holds in high regard the work of the International Court of Justice, as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations. The international community today enjoys the benefit of numerous peaceful means of dispute settlement other than the Court, but the Court undoubtedly plays a special and central role among them. It has delivered many important judgments and advisory opinions since its first meeting in 1946, taking on a diverse range of cases requiring thorough legal examination. In recent years, the Court has seen increasing demand for legal solutions and opinions on complex questions. We expect that the legal wisdom of the Court, with its highly qualified judges and their dedication, will continue to attract the respect and support of all Member States. Faced with the unprecedented challenge of the coronavirus disease pandemic, the International Court of Justice has made concerted efforts to review its procedures and working methods in order to continue discharging its judicial functions. Japan commends the Court for its unwavering commitment to its work, including on issues related to peace and security and the peaceful settlement of disputes; its flexibility in deciding to hold hearings and readings of judgments by video link; and the adoption of relevant amendments to the Rules of Court. The International Court of Justice, as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations, needs to continue rendering judgments and advisory opinions of the highest quality. At the same time, the Security Council should duly respect the role and function of the Court in its consideration of the maintenance of international peace and security. The Member States of the United Nations should also respect and comply with the decisions of the Court. Japan became a State party to the Statute of the Court in 1954, two years before it joined the United Nations. Japan has accepted the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court since 1958, in the firm belief that disputes should be settled by law. Japan is confident that conviction is shared by a large majority of Member States. However, to date only 74 States have made the "optional clause" declaration under Article 36, paragraph 2, of the Statute. Japan fully supports General Assembly resolution 74/191, which, in its seventh preambular paragraph, calls on "States that have not yet done so to consider accepting the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice in accordance with its Statute". We encourage all States Members of the United Nations to do so. In conclusion, Japan reiterates its unwavering support for the essential role the International Court of Justice plays in maintaining stable, rules-based international relations by applying international law in its respected judgments and advisory opinions.
