Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his valuable briefings. I join other members in expressing our deepest condolences to the Government and the people of Kuwait on the passing away of His Highness Sheikh Al-Sabah, late Amir of the State of Kuwait. Viet Nam joins the Secretary-General, his Special Coordinator and many other countries in expressing its serious concern over the grave, mounting hardship that the Palestinian Authority and people have had to suffer in recent months. The spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic in Palestine continues to be a major concern, as the number of confirmed cases and deaths almost doubled in the past month. The impact of the pandemic and the restriction measures on Palestine's economy is devastating. The socioeconomic conditions in the Gaza Strip and the occupied Palestinian territory have gone from bad to worse. In addition to the economic constraints, foreign aid to Palestine has dropped sharply since early 2020. Against that backdrop, we call on international donors to continue their assistance to the Palestinians to help them overcome the ongoing crisis. We also urge all parties to strengthen their cooperation and to ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance in accordance with their respective obligations. It is therefore also important to maintain and increase assistance to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East so that essential agency can fulfil its important task of helping the Palestinian people. In the face of such multifaceted challenges - the hostilities continue and civilians, including children, are being killed - the long-standing issue of the continued expansion of Israeli settlements in the West Bank remain unresolved. We also note with concern the increased number of demolitions of Palestinian homes in the West Bank, which have led to the displacement of more and more people. As resolution 2334 (2016) clearly affirms, the establishment by Israel of settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory has no legal validity and constitutes a violation under international law and a major obstacle to the achievement of the two-State solution and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the region. We call on all parties to stop the hostilities so that the tension and violence do not escalate into a large-scale conflict. We commend the Secretary- General and his Special Coordinator and the countries of the region on their efforts to reduce tensions and restore calm. We also welcome the recent steps by the relevant Palestinian parties to prepare for elections in the months ahead, which will hopefully help them address common challenges and meet the expectations of the Palestinian people. However, we remain concerned that the situation is fragile, since the deep-seated roots of the conflict have not been eradicated. We continue to urge all parties to refrain from any unilateral action that could lead to recurrent violence. At the same time, we welcome all initiatives and measures in the pursuit of a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the Palestine question that would contribute to promoting dialogue, cooperation and stability in the Middle East. We reaffirm our strong support for the Secretary- General and his Special Coordinator. Given the grave situation in which the Palestinians find themselves, it is high time that the international community, the countries of the region, the United Nations and other relevant partners redouble their efforts to restart international negotiations as well as those among the parties directly concerned in order to bring about concrete steps toward de-escalation and the resolution of all outstanding issues. To conclude, we would like to reiterate Viet Nam's unwavering support for the legitimate struggle of the Palestinian people and their inalienable rights. We strongly support the two-State solution, including the establishment of a State of Palestine that peacefully coexists alongside the State of Israel,with East Jerusalem as its capital, and with secure and internationally recognized borders on the basis of the pre-1967 lines and in accordance with international law, the United Nations Charter and the relevant United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016).
