Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Special
Representative Jan Kubis for his leadership of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and all United Nations personnel in Afghanistan for
their dedication. I also thank Afghanistan's Permanent
Representative, Ambassador Zahir Tanin, for his
persuasive engagement in New York.

International and Afghan forces have made
significant progress in improving security throughout
Afghanistan over the past decade. We have reduced
Al-Qaida's capacity to prepare and launch terrorist
attacks. And we have reduced the Taliban's control of
territory, which provided sanctuary to Al-Qaida and
affiliated terrorist groups.

Progress on the security front has created conditions
in which basic services such as health and education
are being delivered, and for sustainable economic and
social development over the longer term. That was the
first fighting season with the Afghan National Security
Forces (ANSF) in the lead for security across the country.
The ANSF now conducts 95 per cent of conventional
operations and 100 per cent of the planning.

In Uruzgan, where Australia's military and
reconstruction efforts have been focused, the ANSF
have now assumed responsibility for security but
Australia will continue to support the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in 2014 through
the provision of trainers and advisers in Kabul and
Kandahar and embeds to ISAF headquarters.

Post-2014, Australia remains committed to the
NATO-led training, advice and assistance mission.
But a key consideration for Australia will be the
legal arrangements. An agreed bilateral security
agreement between Afghanistan and the United States
is a precondition for an Australian commitment post-
2014. We welcome the loya jirga's endorsement of that
agreement and urge its prompt signing.

The international community will view credible,
inclusive and transparent elections in 2014 as a decisive
milestone. It is a core commitment under the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework.

We acknowledge the important support role that the
United Nations is playing in preparing for elections and
in encouraging an electoral process that includes all
sectors of the population and maximizes participation,
especially by women. Australia itselfis helping to build
more effective electoral institutions and increased voter
participation through civic awareness.

Further progress by the Afghan Government
against the reform priorities jointly identified and
agreed at the Tokyo conference is vital to Afghanistan's
goal of self-reliance, as well as the international
community's ability to sustain unprecedented levels of
support. The United Nations itself has played a critical
role in supporting Afghanistan's development and will
continue to do so following security transition.

On human rights, Afghanistan must not lose the
gains of the past 12 years. In particular, the law on
the elimination of violence against women must be
implemented fully, and we encourage Afghanistan
to finalize and implement a national action plan on
women, peace and security. We also urge the continued
protection of all persons, including children, media
workers and detainees. And we condemn attacks
against humanitarian and development workers, which
have become more frequent.

Australia supports an Afghan-led peace and
reconciliation process. We welcome the commitment
of Afghanistan and Pakistan to work together on the
peace process. As Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), we are promoting
the role of the Taliban sanctions regime in facilitating
that process.

I should note that, as the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime's Afghanistan Opium Survey
2013 highlights, Afghanistan's narcotics industry is a
major threat to stability, helps fund the insurgency and
undermines governance. As we know, there is no quick
fix solution. It requires a comprehensive approach that
includes effective security measures, law enforcement
and the creation of viable alternative livelihoods. It
needs to be Afghan-led and fully supported by local
authorities and communities.

The Security Council's continued support
for Afghanistan is essential. As Security Council
coordinator and the pen holder on Afghanistan,
Australia is now focused on securing a strong mandate
for UNAMA in March next year. We very carefully
note the Secretary-General's recommendations on
UNAMA's future role. We will work with partners to
ensure that a renewed mandate has the backing of the
Afghan Government and is appropriately resourced to
ensure UNAMA is able to fulfil its role.

In conclusion, as the Secretary-General notes,
Afghanistan is entering its final year of political and
security transition in an environment of uncertainty. But
the international community is importnatly committed
to assisting the Afghan Government to ensure the hard-
won gains of the past decade for the women, men and
children of Afghanistan are not reversed. Afghanistan
must seize the opportunity before it, and we have the
hope and optimism it will and is doing so, to consolidate
the foundations for a stable, secure and prosperous
nation.

