Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Today we are discussing a protracted and complex
problem - a situation whose continuation represents a
direct threat to international peace and security.
Afghanistan has fallen victim to a destructive civil war

 

and to intervention in support of the various Afghan
factions by foreign Powers, which are providing military
and other supplies.

The effects of the crisis in Afghanistan and of foreign
intervention are not confined to the local arena. They have
spilled over Afghanistan's borders, turning it into a
stronghold for training and exporting extremists. This
jeopardizes Afghanistan's relations with many countries of
the region and has unduly exacerbated the domestic
situation. In this respect, we recall that Egypt has suffered
from terrorist activities perpetrated by foreign nationals
trained in Afghanistan, the most recent of which was the
bombing of the Egyptian embassy in Pakistan in November
last year.

A sound analysis of the current situation in
Afghanistan would confirm that the basic problem is not
one of factionalism or ethnicity. It is a problem of the
pursuit of power by various groups, supported from abroad
by those who seek to achieve financial and military
objectives completely unrelated to the interests of the
Afghani people.

Only the people of Afghanistan can achieve national
reconciliation among its factions. They are more than
capable of establishing a Government that would enjoy full
popular support in conditions of peace and stability.

Following the signing of the Geneva Accords in 1988,
it was widely expected that the foreign parties would halt
military assistance to the various Afghan factions and that
the United Nations would focus its efforts on resolving the
root causes of the civil war and on promoting national
reconciliation. However, unfortunately, despite all the
efforts made, past and current debates on the Afghan
problem in the General Assembly and the numerous
resolutions adopted on this matter, military and financial
assistance to the warring factions in Afghanistan continue
and the situation continues to deteriorate.

Recent developments threaten increased military
confrontation, which would claim more casualties. In this
context, I emphasize Egypt's total rejection of any attempt
to undermine the sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and
political independence of Afghanistan. I also aver that the
recent developments require the Security Council
immediately to initiate a process of national reconciliation
through direct meetings among the various Afghani parties,
to be arranged by the Secretary-General and the Head of
the United Nations Special Mission in Afghanistan,
Mr. Holl, who has made and continues to make efforts to

 

halt the deterioration of the situation. I would also
mention the importance of the idea of convening an
international conference that would increase the chances
for achieving a peaceful settlement.

Political efforts must be accompanied by a ceasefire
and an end to the flow of arms to the warring factions.
There are many precedents in the Council's work, set in
similar circumstances. We hope the Council will adopt a
position allowing for suitable measures to be taken in the
near future in order to arrive at the desired result.

While we draft measures to be undertaken by the
United Nations in Afghanistan and, in particular, by the
Secretary-General and the Head of the Special Mission -
to whom I pay a tribute for his important role - Egypt
believes that it is very important to revise the role of the
friends of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan, whose
role has shrunk because their members were disappointed
and pessimistic about an effective role for the United
nations in resolving the problem. I believe that we must
consider reforming that group to make it compatible with
the important role it can play at this stage.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm the importance of
national reconciliation in Afghanistan, the formation of a
national coalition Government and the holding of national
elections to preserve Afghanistan's sovereignty and
national unity under a unified presidency that enjoys the
full support of the Afghani people.

