Mr. Ngoubeyou (spoke in French): Humanity,
awakened after the tragic events of 11 September 2001,
understands more clearly the cataclysm to which blind
hatred, gratuitous violence and intolerance could lead
the world.

On 11 September 2002, the Council held a
solemn meeting, presided over by the President of the
Republic of Bulgaria, at which we paid, together and
with the emotion proper to the occasion, tribute to the
memory of the victims of the heinous terrorist attacks
of 11 September 2001. I wish once again to express to
the bereaved families the full solidarity of the people of
Cameroon.

Our decision to meet today at the ministerial level
is clear evidence of our refusal to accept the situation
and our resolve to tackle and to eliminate the tentacles
of terrorism.

I wish to thank and congratulate the French
presidency for this very wise initiative. This meeting
should enable us to develop the political momentum
needed for the world coalition and to reaffirm the
crucial role the United Nations must play in providing
the legal and institutional framework in which the
campaign against terrorist must be articulated. I
would like to welcome the presence of Secretary-
General Kofi Annan and thank him for his excellent
statement, his pointed and profound remarks and
pertinent analysis and suggestions in the area of
combating terrorism.

The United Nations was created to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war in its
various forms - and terrorism is one of them. There
can be no excuse or justification for terrorism. Of
course, much injustice exists. Real frustrations become
ingrained and trouble our consciences. Poverty, hunger
and insecurity grip us and slowly stifle and kill us. All
the inequalities that ensue from this must be addressed
thoroughly and immediately. The family of the United
Nations is endeavouring to do so, and we welcome its
efforts.

Nothing can excuse the heinous thrust of
terrorism. Terrorism, in whatever form, is unacceptable
and must be firmly condemned. It inflicts untold
suffering on humanity and seriously infringes on the
dignity of the individual human being, which is the
very foundation of the civilized world.

This is why Cameroon, through its President, His
Excellency Mr. Paul Biya, so strongly condemned the
events of 11 September and is resolved to give its total
support to the international coalition. A steadfast and
determined fighter against terrorism, the head of State
of Cameroon addressed the nation and the diplomatic
corps at the New Year celebrations on a single issue:
the campaign against terrorism. One year ago,
condemning terrorism, President Biya said:

"We have an imperative duty to combat
international terrorism in all its forms. The fear,
hatred and intolerance that it fosters are both a
major concern and a serious threat to
international peace and security."

On 3 January 2003, before the diplomatic corps,
President Biya strongly reaffirmed:

"There is especially a need to attack evil at its
roots. Faced with fanaticism that knows no logic
or morality, there is no other remedy than
repression. On the other hand, we know that
poverty and injustice are often breeding grounds
for terrorism. Both afflict the majority of the
world's people."

My country is party to the vast majority of the
existing international conventions to combat terrorism,
and it fully adheres to the contractual measures taken
by the United Nations, including the relevant Security
Council resolutions, particularly 1373 (2001).
Cameroon also confirms its adherence to and renews its
full support for United Nations action through the
Monitoring Group of the Sanctions Committee
established under Security Council resolution 1267
(1999).

The report submitted by my country to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee confirms that Cameroon
has a general legal framework conducive to the
effective implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
Measures have been taken at all levels of State to
guarantee the application of this historic resolution.
The Cameroon criminal code punishes both violations
concerning terrorism and acts directed against the
security of civil aviation. An anti-terrorist strategy has
been elaborated. It is now being implemented and
coordinated by a focal point at the presidential level
designated by the head of State.

The frequency, scope and magnitude of terrorist
acts convince us of just how important and necessary it
is to develop unswerving preventive and punitive
policies to meet this scourge. Cameroon is firmly
committed to this end.

Our common security can be best guaranteed only
if we struggle against terrorism together. Therefore,
coherent, concerted and coordinated international
action is essential. The United Nations, thanks to its
universal nature, is the optimal framework for such a
crusade.

Cameroon welcomes here the largely positive
results of the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001). I would like to pay a well-
deserved tribute to its chairman, Sir Jeremy
Greenstock, and all the members of the bureau. I have
no doubt that Spain, which will soon assume the
Committee chair, will continue the work with the same
efficiency and determination.

The recent attacks in Moscow, Mombasa and Bali
can only keep us vigilant. They have just reminded us
that to be effective our efforts should be pursued
consistently and tirelessly. This is why Cameroon
continues to support the idea of holding a high-level
conference under the auspices of the United Nations to
determine the common response of the international
community to terrorism in all its forms and in all its
manifestations. In this campaign, cooperation among
States must play a fundamental role. Here, Cameroon
believes that technical assistance is an area in which
there is a need for greater emphasis and greater means.
Specifically, Cameroon believes that international,
regional and subregional organizations with proven
expertise can play a crucial role in strengthening
national capacities to combat terrorism.

Terrorists of all stripes take full advantage of the
disparities in logistic and technological resources that
separate our respective States to escape being tracked
down. They also exploit the gaps in existing national
and international legislation. This is why it is vitally
important to strengthen legal norms against terrorism
by completing the urgent work on a comprehensive
convention on terrorism and a convention on the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism. This is all the
more necessary given that the current legal provisions
remain sectoral. The risk of one day seeing terrorists
using weapons of mass destruction haunts us daily. The
United Nations must promote the global ratification
and application of the 12 international conventions to
combat terrorism.

I would like to reiterate that our campaign against
terrorism must be comprehensive. If we are to succeed
we must calm the international context and, as I have
already said, remove injustices that fuel intolerance.
The attacks of 11 September, in striking more than 90
nations, have not only crystallized horror and fear but
have also strengthened solidarity between nations.
Henceforth, the campaign against terrorism should
brook no complicity on the part of any State.

At the historic Millennium Summit, we all made
commitments to free humanity from fear - from all
kinds of fear. Let us stay the course and remain united
and determined in this lofty and legitimate struggle. As
the Nobel laureate Elie Wiesel rightly said,

"We are all in a train that could head towards a
precipice. No one can get off, but all can
contribute to stopping it."

