Mr. Nqakula: Good morning to all members of
the Council. The first thing I would like to do is to
introduce the team that is accompanying me,
represented as it is by my Deputy, the Honourable
Kingsley Mamabolo, who is the South African Special
Envoy to the Great Lakes Region. I also have with me
Mr. Adonia Ayebare, who is a representative of Uganda
in this Chamber and also a member of our Regional
Technical Committee and the facilitation team.

I want to thank you, Mr. President, and the other
members of the Security Council for the rare
opportunity that you have given us to address the
Council on the matter before us: the search for durable
peace in Burundi.
The first issue that I would like to address is that
of the Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement, which was
signed between the Government of Burundi, headed by
President Pierre Nkurunziza, and the Parti pour la
liberation du peuple hutu (PALIPEHUTU)-Forces
nationales de liberation (FNL), the last rebel movement
to remain outside the democratization processes within
Burundi, led by Chairman Agathon Rwasa. The
Agreement was signed on 7 September last year.

Within 72 hours of the signing of the
Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement, we had hoped to
see the finalization of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process, but that process could not be
finalized. Some problems had apparently emerged.

At this point, there are some PALIPEHUTU-FNL
combatants who are ready to submit to the process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. We
represent the regional initiative of the African Union
and serve as the initiative's facilitators, but we need
help in order to start and complete that process.

I have spoken about problems that arose within
the context of the implementation of the Ceasefire
Agreement. It is now my intention to indicate what
those problems have been.

First, the greatest problem was that the Ceasefire
Agreement did not dispel the suspicions and mistrust
that had characterized the earlier negotiation process.
The Government of Burundi did not believe that the
PALIPEHUTU-FNL would honour the Agreement. But,
for their part, the PALIPEHUTU-FNL were also deeply
suspicious of the Government and felt that it would not
deliver on its side of the Agreement.

However, notwithstanding those suspicions, we
put in place our own preparations for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process. We also
provided the PALIPEHUTU-FNL with funds so that
they could go and deal with their combatants in order
to fully explain the ramifications of the Comprehensive
Ceasefire Agreement.

In the middle of September, we took some of the
leaders of the FNL into Burundi, so that they could
assess the lay of the land, so to speak, with respect to the
politics of the country and could also assess the security
situation within the country. Once they were satisfied
that conditions would indeed be conducive to their
return to the country, we took them back to Tanzania.
07-61659
We established the Joint Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism (JVMM) in October that year,
although the PALIPEHUTU-FNL boycotted the launch
of that structure. Although the FNL subsequently
joined the Joint Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism, they were erratic in their attendance of
meetings. They later withdrew from the JVMM.

The situation in Burundi itself also militated
against the finalization of the facilitation programme.
The political landscape had been poisoned by a number
of very bad judgement calls on the part of the
Government and the leadership of the ruling Conseil
national pour la defense de la democratic (CNDD)-
Forces pour la defense de la democratie (FDD).
President Nkurunziza was also engaged in a standoff
with the political opposition. Further compounding the
problem were disagreements within the ruling party
itself. The upshot of that was the detention of
Mr. Hussein Radjabu, former President of the ruling

party.

Members of the Security Council will be aware
that some changes have recently occurred. And,
although we are not going to claim a monopoly on the
decisions finally made, we did provide input with
respect to those changes. We were thus involved in a
number of engagements with the President of Burundi,
attempting to argue for a new approach to the political
situation inside the country, which was becoming
heated. To that extent, we advised him that it would be
better for him to engage with the political opposition
so as to mediate the stalemate that had occurred.
Therefore, we are happy that, in the end, he was indeed
able to deal with that situation and was commended by
the leaders of both the Front pour la democratie au
Burundi (FRODEBU) and the Union pour le progres
national (UPRONA).

We also discussed with him the possible release
of Mr. Hussein Radjabu. We believe that he is having a
real look at that particular situation. Our argument was
that it is only when his own party is united that he will
be in a position to give proper political direction to
developments inside Burundi, both with respect to the
political climate in the country and as a contribution
towards the finalization of the agreements made
between his Government and the PALIPEHUTU-FNL.

We also influenced him to agree to a meeting,
which to us was very important, to try to remove
whatever obstacles still existed with regard to the
07-61659

problems that arose as a consequence of the mistrust
between the two sides involved in the conflict: to
actually attend a meeting where he would meet with
the Chairperson of the PALIPEHUTU-FNL on a one-
to-one basis. That meeting took place on 17 June 2007
under the aegis and direction of President Kikwete of
Tanzania. That meeting looked at certain matters, and
certain decisions were arrived at as a consequence of
the discussions that took place between the two. Those
decisions included the following.

First, both President Nkurunziza and Mr. Rwasa
recommitted themselves to the implementation of the
Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement. Secondly, both
agreed that there was a need to reactivate immediately
the Joint Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
(JVMM), which is the only vehicle available for the
implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement.

They also agreed to the expeditious
implementation of the release of political prisoners and
prisoners of war, using a system that they hammered
out, which included the following elements. First, the
FNL would immediately provide a list of its prisoners
and a joint commission would be established, together
with Burundi's Ministry of Justice, to screen the FNL
list, after which the prisoners would be released.

They also agreed that there should be direct
communications between the two leaders, so that they
could unblock whatever problems might arise in the
process of implementation of the decisions.

The last point of agreement was that the
leadership of PALIPEHUTU-FNL needed to go back
into Burundi, so that they could be part and parcel of
the decisions that would be taken, as well as of the
implementation of those decisions, thus giving proper
guidance of the finalization of the programme of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR).

But of course, a split occurred in the
PELIPEHUTU-FNL. That split saw a number of
combatants abandoning their positions and attempting
to make themselves available to the facilitation for
inclusion into the programme of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. They did that in
August 2007. But the move they took was not accepted
by those who remained in their positions at FNL bases
in a number of areas. Those areas include Rukoro and
the Kibira forest, as well as bases in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
3

Because there was unhappiness that some people
were abandoning their positions, some FNL elements
chased them out. On 6 September, 21 of those people
were killed in Buterere. On 1 November, nine were
beheaded in Rugazi. On 10 November, three leaders of
those groups were also killed in central Bujumbura. We
are of course aware of the fact that others have been
killed right inside PALIPEHUTU-FNL camps, having
indicated that they wanted to abandon their positions,
or having been suspected of wanting to do so.

As the facilitation, we therefore needed to
consider what to do in the circumstances, and we
therefore approached the leadership of the regional
initiative for guidance. What they said to us was that
we should not forget the stipulations of the
Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement. Among other
things, the Agreement states: that the African Union
shall establish a special task force for the protection of
the leadership and combatants of the PALIPEHUTU-
FNL, including their movement towards the assembly
areas; that the JVMM. shall, in conjunction with the
United Nations, address the issue of command
structures and modalities for inner and outer perimeter
security of the assembly areas; and that the JVMM. and
joint liaison teams shall assist in the processes of
registration and verification of the combatants in the
assembly areas. They also said to us that the desired
process for that was for us - after all that had been
finalized - to go to the bases of the PALIPEHUTU-
FNL and lead those combatants into the assembly
areas, thereby providing them with protection so that
they would not be attacked as they moved towards the
assembly areas.

But the leadership said that nonetheless there
were now people who wanted to become part of the
process and that it was our responsibility to create
those assembly areas and to put them into the assembly
areas - thereby to start the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. Of course, what we
are talking about here is 2,700 of those combatants,
who have made themselves available for this process.
In our interactions with them, they have indicated that
about 800 members of the PALIPEHUTU-FNL, who
did not abandon their positions, remain outside those
areas. The way we read the situation, therefore, is that
the great majority of FNL combatants have indeed
abandoned their positions and are asking to be put into
the process that must eventually lead to their
reintegration into the political, social and economic life
of Burundi.

After we saw some of those people in the
assembly area at Randa, we addressed the international
community to explain what had happened. Of course, it
has become clear to us that the international
community was reluctant to be part of this process. We
were not told why the international community was
reluctant. But we picked up from discussions at various
levels that one of the matters they were raising was that
we cannot be certain that the people who are professing
themselves to be members of the PELIPEHUTU-FNL
are indeed members. However, I want to explain to the
members of the Council what our own attitude has
been with respect to that.

If you have a figure of 2,700 people, some of
whom are armed, who would be roaming the
countryside in Burundi, you would potentially be faced
with a problem in which those people would seek
sustenance through food supplies, and therefore go to
the villages to get that food. We can speculate that they
will not be getting that food in any civil manner. In
some instances they would, therefore, be forcing and
even harassing and intimidating the villagers to give
them food. We are aware, as has been indicated by the
figures I gave, of subsequent attacks on those people
by the remaining PALIPEHUTU-FNL. Those attacks,
therefore, would continue to occur, and a situation
might arise in which those dissidents would be fighting
with the remaining PALIPEHUTU-FNL.

Within that context, which also would at some
point obviously involve the general population, a
situation would arise where the army of Burundi would
also have to intervene. In other words, if we had not
intervened as we did, we would have allowed a
situation which would catapult the country into an orgy
of violence and undermine efforts to reach a durable
peace in Burundi. For our part and in our humble logic,
we thought that it was necessary for us to take in those
people, protect them against attack and of course
ensure that they themselves did not go into Burundi to
commit atrocities. That was our simple logic with
respect to the matter because we did not know of any
alternative for that situation.

Of course, we as Africans are still grappling with
one of the blemishes on our conscience. When we
allowed the situation to develop in Rwanda; when we
07-61659
did not, as Africans, make an early entry into that
situation, it finally culminated in the atrocities that
occurred in Rwanda. Therefore, we are not going to
allow any possibility of an outbreak of violence in
Burundi. And we thought, in our humble logic, that it
was better for us to take in those people into the
assembly areas in order to protect them and to prevent
them from participating in any atrocities. We did this
based on instructions received from the leadership of
the regional initiative; but it was our responsibility to
do this.

We have heard that the reason the international
community did not want to be part of this was because
of the absence of the leadership of the PALIPEHUTU-
FNL in those processes. Of course, we have been
interacting with the PALIPEHUTU-FNL all the time,
including by organizing a meeting that should have
taken place last Sunday, but had to be postponed until
Friday. This will be a two-day interaction between
some leaders from the Government and the leaders of
the PALIPEHUTU-FNL. The meeting is to occur in
Tanzania on Friday and Saturday and will be a
continuation of our efforts to keep the leadership of the
PALIPEHUTU-FNL in the loop, and to continue to ask
them to participate in the process that in the end must
result in the finalization of the programme of
reintegration of members of the PALIPEHUTU-FNL.

There will also be a meeting between Mr. Rwasa
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Tanzania. I will
meet, as Facilitator, with Mr. Rwasa thereafter. We
believe that if we are assisted by the international
community, there are a number of things that we can
do together to get the process finalized. At this time we
are acting to finalize this programme on a deadline set
by the African Union for 31 December. We are working
very hard to meet that deadline.

Secondly, we as South Africans are the only ones
at the moment providing food supplies to those
PALIPEHUTU-FNL who have come out. We want the
international community to help us to sort out the issue
of the registration and reintegration of people who
have already made themselves available.

When we addressed the international community
after leaving Rwanda regarding those people that we
had put into the assembly areas, we suggested that they
go to Rwanda to observe the people who are there,
interact with them and ask them questions in order to
determine whether they are indeed PALIPEHUTU-FNL

members or not. In a subsequent engagement with the
media, they said that they had checked with the
leadership of the PALIPEHUTU-FNL, and that the
leadership, based both in Tanzania and in Kenya, had
denied that the people who had come forward were
their members. In my other life I was a journalist, and I
asked them if they had asked the pertinent question -
which is pertinent indeed: whether the PALIPEHUTU-
FNL had actually seen those people and, therefore,
would be able to say that they were not former
PALIPEHUTU-FNL. That is the first point.

The second point is that the PALIPEHUTU-FNL
leadership had issued a number of press statements
attacking the facilitation process, insinuating that we
had engineered a split in the FNL. That split had, of
course, manifested itself in the departure of some of
the combatants from their positions. In a way therefore,
the PALIPEHUTU-FNL were admitting to the fact that
a split existed and that it had resulted from some of
those combatants leaving their positions.

Our third humble argument maintains that if the
PALIPEHUTU-FNL are indeed convinced that it is true
that those combatants are not their members, they
would have invited the international community to
meet their members wherever they are, and ask them if
there have been any people who have left. They would
have done that, but they are not doing so because they
themselves know the answer and we know it too,
because we are active on the ground. We have received
information and we have checked that information. We
are certain that the great majority, if not 100 per cent,
of the people at the assembly areas are members of the
PALIPEHUTU-FNL.

We have assembled a team of people that we have
defined as the Political Directorate to oversee the
political fulfilment of the stipulations of the ceasefire
agreement and to advise the facilitation on other
political steps that need to be taken for the finalization
of this process. If the international community helps
us, then indeed there is a lot that we will be able to
achieve for ourselves.

The Political Directorate is convened by
Ambassador Mamabolo, whom I introduced earlier;
serving on it also are the two ambassadors from South
Africa and Burundi, respectively, the Executive
Representative of the United Nations Secretary-
General, Mr. Mahmoud, and the representative of the
African Union, Mr. Ba. When the leadership of the
PALIPEHUTU-FNL is back on the ground in Burundi,
they will also be able to field their own political
representatives to the Directorate. Of course, the
Government will also be invited to send representatives
to the Political Directorate. We believe that the
Political Directorate will be able to resolve some of the
political problems that have arisen with respect to
matters relevant to the search for peace in Burundi.

Finally, I want to return to my plea, and that plea
represents the wishes of the African Union, those of the
Regional Initiative and of course those of the three
countries that are leading that initiative, Uganda,
Tanzania and South Africa, as the facilitation countries.
What we are pleading for is assistance from the
international community and for assistance from the
United Nations and its various structures. We want
them to assist us, first, to oversee the process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of the
2,700 people who have already made themselves
available for that process; and secondly, to help us to
continue to put pressure on the leadership of the
PALIPEHUTU-FNL to take up their positions with
respect to the implementation of the ceasefire
agreement in all its dimensions, so that in the end, the
facilitation programme is successfully completed.

One of the things we saw when we went to the
camp in Randa to interact with the PALIPEHUTU-FNL
people there was a lot of child soldiers. That is why we
invited the international community to, among other
things, go to that camp to see. Surely it must be our
responsibility to take all of those children away from
those conditions, so that, in keeping with the protocols
of the United Nations, they can be raised outside of
conflict. I still want to appeal to the members of the
international community to take up the invitation that I
extended to them to go into these camps we are now
running, so that they can see for themselves who is
there - in the first instance, to establish who all those
people are, and, secondly, to look at the children who
were forced to take up arms.

Once more, I would like to reiterate our
appreciation for having been given this space to share
the experiences that we have had in trying to assist the
people of Burundi to overcome the difficulties they are
facing so that they can all participate in the rebuilding
of their country.

