Mr. Moragas Senchez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to align myself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

I am grateful for the briefings by Ms. Viotti, Judge
Owada and Judge Meron. I congratulate President Duda
and Poland on the choice of the topic for today's debate.

Upholding and affirming international law in
the context of maintaining international peace and
security represent a powerful reminder of a key guiding
principle in the establishment of the United Nations, in
which my country strongly believes. Taking decisions
in order to maintain international peace and security
is the best and most natural opportunity to underscore
among Member States the importance of respecting the
obligations arising from international law.

Spain firmly believes that it is possible to uphold
and reaffirm international law while the Security
Council fulfils its mandate to deal with and resolve
situations that threaten international peace and
security. In overcoming the greatest challenges to
peace and security, Governments achieve a higher
political legitimacy and, ifI may say, become stronger
when their actions are conducted in full respect for the
rule of law at both the national and international levels.
I would now like to underscore three specific aspects
where Spain believes the Security Council should
expand its activity.

With regard to the fight against impunity for
the most serious acts that are basic violations of
international humanitarian law, in the area of human
rights, Spain believes that it is essential to improve the
Security Council's cooperation in referring situations
for consideration by the International Criminal Court.
The Council should put its political resources into
following up on the work of the Court, particularly
the Office of the Prosecutor. After deciding to refer
a situation to the Court, the Council should uphold
that decision through close, ongoing and long-term
cooperation with it. In short, in our opinion, the Council
has more than enough tools and an untapped potential
for expanding its cooperation with the Court.

Regarding the need to promote a culture of respect
for international law as a pattern for State behaviour,
we wonder whether it would not be appropriate when
considering the membership of the Security Council to
have in place incentives that would take account of a
State's specific capacity to contribute to the Council's
objective of upholding respect for international law
while ensuring the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Finally, I would like to underscore the increasing
work of the Security Council in adopting resolutions
that include important legal norms of international
humanitarian law, reaffirming their content and
encouraging Member States to seek formulas that
would improve compliance with the law and promote
respect for it. Examples include resolution 2286 (2016),
on accessing and protecting health-care facilities
in situations of armed conflict, and resolution 2331
(2016), on human trafficking in armed conflict. In
our opinion, those resolutions, which reflect existing
international law and contribute to its observance, put
the Council on a path that enables it to use its political
resources to strengthen international law. That also
fully complements one of the functions of the General
Assembly - promoting the progressive development of
international law and its codification.

To sum up, my country attaches great importance
to ensuring that the Council, as a principal organ of
the United Nations, can increase its role in promoting
respect for international law as a basic guiding principle
of its decisions. We are certain that will lead to greater
legitimacy and strengthen both the Council itself and
the entire Organization.

