Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening ofthis meeting and the detailed
briefing we heard from the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif.
We also welcome the presence of Mr. Tiebile Drame',
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali, in the Security Council.

We regret the loss of human life that occurred on
Sunday in Sobame-Da, in central Mali, as a result of
inter-ethnic violence. We wish to convey our sincere
condolences to all those affected. This is yet another
demonstration of a conflict scenario compounded
by the actions of terrorist groups, clashes between
armed groups, intercommunal violence and attacks
targeting United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) personnel.

We believe that the full implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali should
remain a top priority for the Government and the people
of Mali. It is crucial that all stakeholders work together
to stabilize the country with a view to expanding the
vital presence of the State throughout the nation. We
therefore welcome the recent political progress seen in
Mali, which has paved the way for the establishment
of an inclusive Government. This should serve as an
incentive to tackle the difficult security situation and
the persistent humanitarian crisis, particularly in the
centre and north of the country. In that context, I would
like to address three key areas on the matter.

First, with regard to the political process, it is
critical to work without delay on the political and
institutional reforms required to improve governance,
security and socioeconomic development, as provided
for in resolution 2423 (2018). We believe that reforms
pertaining to decentralization, future elections and
constitutional review are crucial in this context,
as is increasing the participation of women in the
peace process.

Secondly, in the security field, we highlight
the efforts of the Malian Government to implement
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme for ex-combatants, as well as the long-
overdue security sector reform, aimed at enabling the
deployment of new forces.

We consider it necessary to pay special attention
to the actions of violent extremist groups, who take
advantage of the limited presence of the State to expand
their influence and establish their own administration
and relations with the communities. We also recognize
the role of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel in strengthening the regional response to
terrorism and transnational organized crime. In that
regard, and as we stated this morning (see S/PV.8546),
there is a pressing need to establish measures aimed at
local-level conflict prevention and resolution, as well
as the protection of civilians, through dialogue and the
strengthening of police functions.

My third point concerns development. In a country
where more than 1 million people are in need of
humanitarian assistance, achieving long-term stability
prosperity will be possible only if steps are taken to
address the root causes of the conflict, focusing also
on promoting development and respect for human
rights. We underscore the need to provide humanitarian
assistance, in line with the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel and its support plan, as a
comprehensive framework for promoting coherent
and integrated international support, in line with
national priorities.

Furthermore, taking the current political and
security context in Mali into account, we agree that
the role of MINUSMA needs to be strengthened,
in coordination with other international actors and
the United Nations country team, in order to protect
civilians and fulfil the implementation of the peace
agreement and the necessary political reforms.

Peru recognizes the work of MINUSMA and
Special Representative Mahamat Saleh Annadif in a
particularly adverse environment and very challenging
operational conditions. The presence of MINUSMA on
the ground constitutes a fundamental contribution to
stability in Mali. We agree with the Secretary-General
that it would be pertinent to renew the Mission's
mandate for another year so that it can continue to
support this country along the shared path towards
peace and reconciliation.

