Mr. Kodama (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to express my appreciation to the Chairs of the
Council's three counter-terrorism-related Committees
for their respective briefings on developments during
the past six months.

The recently uncovered cargo plane bomb plot
and last year's attempted bombing of a United States
commercial aircraft remind us yet again that terrorism
continues to be a global and imminent threat and that
deep-seated problems surrounding terrorism, such as
radicalization and terrorist safe havens, need to be
addressed in an appropriate manner.
To eradicate terrorism, a multifaceted approach
by all stakeholders is vital. These three committees
play a significant role in that regard and should
continue their efforts to develop further effective and
efficient measures.

As we are all aware, the threat of terrorism posed
by Al-Qaida and the Taliban continues unabated. The
sanctions imposed on individuals and entities
associated with Al-Qaida and the Taliban under
resolution 1267 (1999) and its successor resolutions -
travel bans, freezing of assets and arms embargoes -
continue to play a crucial role in countering terrorism.
In order for the 1267 sanctions regime to be fully
effective and legitimate, our continued efforts to ensure
the credibility of the Consolidated List are
indispensable.

In that context, we regard the improvement of the
1267 regime, pursuant to resolution 1907 (2009), as
instrumental in enhancing due process and raising the
List's transparency and efficiency. We also welcome
the recent successful review of the Consolidated List
pursuant to paragraph 25 of resolution 1822 (2008),
and the commencement of work by Ms. Kimberly
Prost, who was appointed Ombudsperson on 3 June.
We are grateful to the Chair of the 1267 Committee,
Ambassador Mayr-Harting, and to the Austrian
Mission and the Monitoring Team for their devoted
work on reviewing the Consolidated List. We continue
to support their efforts to improve the sanctions regime
without compromising its effectiveness and efficiency
as a counter-terrorism measure.

I welcome the excellent work done by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) under the
leadership of the Chair, Ambassador Apakan of Turkey,
and by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) to encourage Member States to
fully implement resolution 1373 (2001). We recognize
that in recent CTC meetings we have had fruitful
discussions on substantive and regional issues. It is our
hope that we will have further discussions on thematic
issues and that those will facilitate the formulation of
best practices and effective recommendations in the
field of counter-terrorism.
Japan supports the stocktaking exercise for the
review of the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) by all Member States. The exercise contributes
to identifying the challenges that Member States face
in that area and the technical assistance they require. In
that regard, we would stress that all Member States
should cooperate fully with CTC and CTED and make
a determined effort to submit their Preliminary
Implementation Assessments on time.

We would also like to highlight the importance of
the country visits that have been conducted by CTC
and CTED. Country visits, through direct contact with
the relevant authorities, provide a means to ascertain
the counter-terrorism situation in a given country and
to identify the concrete technical assistance needed for
capacity-building. To further enhance the efficiency
and effectiveness of CTED operations, we hope to see
more strategic execution of its country visits, through,
for example, prioritizing certain regions and areas.

We note that the Council will discuss the draft
resolution to extend CTED's mandate next month.
Japan attaches great importance to the role of CTED in
determining essential technical assistance needs among
Member States in the field of counter-terrorism. With
that in mind, Japan will participate in the discussion of
the draft resolution in a constructive manner.

Japan appreciates the enhanced work of the 1540
Committee throughout this year. We believe that the
Committee's work has become more effective and
better coordinated under the leadership of its Chair,
Ambassador Heller of Mexico, particularly from the
perspective of expanding the scope of its cooperation
with regional and international organizations. Japan is
delighted to have been able to support the Chair's
efforts through our role as coordinator of the Working
Group on Monitoring and National Implementation. It
is our strong desire that the 1540 Committee will
deepen its cooperation with other relevant bodies,
above all, with the 1267 and 1373 Committees, in
order to ensure that Member States will fully meet their
obligations stipulated under resolution 1540 (2004).

The mandate of the 1540 Committee will expire
next April. Given the important role the Committee
plays in the area of non-proliferation, Japan hopes that
in the discussion of the renewal of its mandate, all the
experience gained and lessons learned from its past
activities will be taken fully into account. One of the
key features of the Committee's work is its cooperation
with Member States to ensure full implementation of the
resolution. Needless to say, Japan will continue to offer
its assistance in promoting the objectives of resolution
1540 (2004), in close cooperation with the 1540
Committee and in other international forums, including
the Group of Eight. Through such assistance, joint
efforts of likeminded countries and close coordination
among the relevant organizations, the work of the 1540
Committee will move on from the stage of awareness-
raising to that of strengthening Member States' capacity
to advance the goals of non-proliferation.

Lastly, we appreciate the close cooperation
between the three subsidiary Committees, aimed at
maximizing the functions mandated by their respective
Security Council resolutions. We also commend the
contribution their work makes within the framework of
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.
Cooperation, coordination and coherence in that area
should make the most of the Committees" limited
capacities and resources by avoiding duplication and
overlap.

