Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): With regard to border control, I just spoke
about that when I was talking about Mr. Sadjik's
comments. Ukraine is delaying everything with regard
to control of the borders. It is very clearly written
in the agreement. The representative of Ukraine
has probably read it. Let me read it. It says that the
restoration of full control of the borders by Ukraine
should begin on the first day after local elections and
be completed with a comprehensive political settlement
with the implementation of article 11, which states
that consultations should take place and an agreement
made with the various representatives of the districts
in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions. Ukraine has not
consulted with representatives of the Luhansk and
Donetsk regions. Ukraine is not implementing article
11, which talks about constitutional reform and about
consultations with the representatives of Donetsk
and Luhansk. This should, furthermore, be done in
accordance with the note in the document, which
contains eight paragraphs on what the special status of
these areas of Ukraine should be.

Once again, I apologize for another comment.
I'd like to see the draft statement adopted, which, as
I understand it, could be acceptable to the Ukrainian
delegation, but then the representative of Ukraine
began talking about who started the killing, pointing
a finger at Russia. Those responsible were those who
sought to overthrow the regime. Around 16 February,
they started to shoot policemen, and they were the same
persons as those who were throwing Molotov cocktails
for several weeks before. They were the ones who began
the killing. The Kyiv authorities are not investigating
those situations because they want to hide the real truth
behind the coup d'etat. Snipers were firing against their
own people and against demonstrators, which created
the conditions for the political coup d'etat.

With regard to a final point about the earlier Minsk
agreement, many documents have existed: first, there
was the agreement of 21 February 2014, which would
have enabled us to avoid the entire crisis. Subsequently,
a very good statement was issued with the participation
of the United States of America, a four-party statement,
on 17 April 2014, and it included an inclusive political
dialogue, but all of that was subsequently violated.
The 30 September 2014 agreement was not signed.
Therefore, we came up with a package of measures.
That must be respected. We hope that the appeal that
was made by Mr. Apakan and Mr. Sadjik with regard
to the need to respect the package of measures will be
listened to. Let us not find ourselves having to deal with
some new military adventures, because the situation
along the line of contact gives cause for concern. It can
be seen that some form of military adventurism might
be under way. We must avoid such a situation.

