Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is deeply concerned by the use of chemical weapons
in Syria and firmly opposes the use of chemical
weapons by any country, group or individual. China
is aware that the Syrian Government has written
to the Director General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) requesting
that the organization send an investigative mission to
Khan Shaykhun and the Shayrat airbase to carry out an
investigation. China supports the OPCW and the United
Nations conducting a comprehensive, objective and an
impartial investigation into the relevant cases so as to
arrive at a conclusion on the basis of solid evidence
that can stand the test of time and be substantiated by
facts, thereby bringing the perpetrators of the attack
and other responsible parties to justice.

Preserving unity within the Security Council is of
critical importance to any solution within the context of
the Syrian question. It has been our long-standing hope
that the Security Council would speak as one voice
on the chemical weapons issue in Syria. We had been
working tirelessly for a draft resolution that would have
enjoyed the support of all Council members. China
highly commends the elected members of the Council
for their hard work in trying to reach consensus among
Council members. We deeply regret the failure to reach
such a consensus on the draft resolution. The attempt
to push through a draft resolution in which serious
division still remained among Council members was
destined to undermine Council unity and impair efforts
to seeking a political solution.

The draft resolution on which we voted contains
language that condemns the use of chemical weapons
that took place within Syria and calls for an investigation
into the relevant instances, which is language that
China supports. Nevertheless, some other elements
of the text may well have been amended to secure
consensus. As such, China abstained in the voting on
the draft resolution.

The protracted conflict in Syria has caused massive
civilian casualties. A political solution continues to
be the only way forward to rid the Syrian people of
their suffering. Military means simply do not work
but only exacerbate the suffering of the Syrian people.
China calls on the relevant parties to stay the course
towards a political settlement and uphold the Syrian-
owned and Syrian-led principle, support the role of the
United Nations as the main channel of mediation, and
get behind the efforts undertaken by Special Envoy
De Mistura. We must step up all four parallel tracks,
namely preserving the ceasefire, seeking a political
solution, coordinating counter-terrorism activities and
providing humanitarian assistance so as to facilitate the
search by all parties for a solution that is acceptable to
all through the Geneva talks.

China hopes that the international community will
work in concert to play a constructive role in securing
a comprehensive, impartial and appropriate solution to
the Syrian issue without delay.

