Mr. Marzooq (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to congratulate the Republic of
Uruguay on its assumption of the presidency of the
Council this month. We thank the Mission of Uruguay
for all the efforts it exerted and that of the United
States of America for their efforts during that country's
presidency of the Council last month.

I welcome the briefing of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), Mr. Jan
Kubis, and the efforts of his team, and we assure him of
our full support.

Iraq is ushering in a new stage in its just war
against the terrorist gangs of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL). This requires providing Iraq
with all the support and cooperation necessary to meet
the challenges ofthe post-ISIL stage. This is important,
as we suffer from financial constraints owing to lower
oil prices. Hence my Government has developed a
comprehensive vision based on its priorities, including
the economic, social and security dimensions, that
serves the interests of Iraqi citizens. I would like to sum
this vision up in the following points.

First, the focus must be on restoring security,
stability and basic services, and enabling internally
displaced persons to return to their homes and take
part in the process of post-Da'esh rehabilitation and
reconstruction. This is in addition to providing care to
the families of the wounded and those who have made
the ultimate sacrifice, and the rehabilitation of society
to end the culture of hatred and violence and erase
all reminders of the presence of ISIL. Every national
effort must be made to achieve these humanitarian and
national goals.

Second, it is important to ensure a commitment to
respectforothers andcoexistencewiththose fromdifferent
religious, sectarian and ideological backgrounds. This
requires respect for the sanctity of houses of worship as
a basis for intercommunal reconciliation.

Third, we cannot allow the return of the negative
trends that prevailed in Iraq at the pre-ISIL stage. That
stage was marked by strong sectarian tension and was
not in the best interests of my country, and it allowed
Da'esh to take control of cities and governorates in my
country. Hence we must commit to this course, which
enhances citizenship, unity and cooperation. We should
never allow Da'esh or any other terrorist criminal groups
to return. We must monitor liberated cities and prevent
new terrorist cells from surfacing in those areas.

Fourth, it is important to establish relations of
good-neighbourliness with regional and neighbouring
countries. We must make independent decisions as
Iraqis, and our positions should not be held hostage to
the interests of others.

Fifth, the right to carry arms must be exclusive to
the State, and all other such instances must end. There
must also be respect for thejudiciary and the rule oflaw
across the board.

Sixth, we must continue to fight corruption, as it is
the greatest incubator of terrorism and crime.

Seventh, State institutions should not be forums
for political intervention. There must also be power-
sharing to ensure justice and equal opportunity, with
reliance on effective, specialized personnel who are
able to work independently and with professionalism.

The Government of Iraq commends the various
Iraqi forces - the Iraqi Army, the local police, the
Popular Mobilization Forces, the Peshmerga and the
tribal forces - for the major sacrifices they have made
as they have worked together with the assistance of the
international coalition. Thanks to them, we were able
to emerge victorious and liberate Mosul. We liberated
the portions of the city on the left bank of the Tigris.
The operations to recover the portions of the city on
the right bank of the Tigris, 90 per cent of which has
already been recovered, are ongoing, as planned. We
have made the protection of civilians our priority, while
terrorists have been using them as human shields.

The various authorities in the liberated areas are
working towards a return to normal life by de-mining
those areas and otherwise preparing for the return of
IDPs. We have started to provide basic services so that
residents can resume their normal lives.

We call upon the international community to
participate in the efforts aimed at rebuilding and
rehabilitation in the cities that were severely damaged.
My Government understands the nexus between
sustainable development, peace and security, and we
are working, with the assistance of the United Nations,
particularly with the United Nations Development
Programme, which organized a conference paid for by
the European Union (EU), to draft a five-year national
development plan for 2018-2022.

Those efforts are aimed at achieving the 2030
Sustainable Development Goals. The plan includes new
concepts that enhance administrative decentralization,
the promotion of the private sector, a focus on human
capital and economic empowerment, as well as
investment in education, health care and basic services.
It also includes such elements as the empowerment of
youth, women and vulnerable groups, the creation of
job opportunities for the poorest, and supporting small-
and medium-sized enterprises.

The people and the Government of Iraq appreciate
the efforts of all of the countries that have participated
in the international coalition, particularly the EU and
the United States of America. We also thank other
countries that did not participate in the coalition but
which have actively participated in the war against
the terrorist Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant by
supporting us with logistical and military elements
while maintaining full respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq.

On 25 April 2017, in a clear and flagrant violation
of our sovereignty, good neighbourliness, the rules of
international humanitarian law and the Charter of the
United Nations, Turkish forces illegally entered Iraqi
airspace and territory by bombarding the Mount Sinjar
region of northern Iraq with more than 20 bombs,
which led to the killing and wounding of members of
the Peshmerga Iraqi forces. I would like to take this
opportunity to request that the Council shoulder its legal
and ethical responsibilities to prevent the recurrence of
such violations, an action that would contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The Council must demand that Turkey withdraw
its forces from Iraqi territory and respect good
neighbourliness in order to ensure international and
regional peace and security. Such violations could lead
to a complex regional situation, fuel tensions and cause
instability. Similarly, Iraq urges other States to develop
strict legal norms to combat foreign terrorist fighters,
including criminalizing various acts by those terrorists
in other States. Actions to be criminalized should
include any intent to receive training by terrorist groups
or travel abroad for terrorist purposes. Also important
would be strict vetting and other immigration measures
and the exchange of intelligence with countries of
destination so as to curb the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters, in implementation of relevant Security
Council resolutions.

Iraq is studying the various options in the global
campaign to bring Da'esh to justice. With our partners,
we are looking into options for gathering and preserving
evidence of crimes committed by the terrorist ISIL
gangs. That will be done without prejudice to the
jurisdiction and independence of our judiciary.

With respect to the IDP crisis in Iraq, friendly
and brotherly States have contributed to rehabilitation
and reconstruction efforts in areas liberated from ISIL
gangs. That is a factor that contributes to reducing the
suffering of IDPs following the war against terror. In
that context, I would like to express our appreciation
for the assistance offered by the Japanese Government
in funding the activities of the United Nations Office
for Project Services in the Middle East. A project will
be launched under the slogan "Improving the Impact
and Effectiveness of Community Police in the Newly
Liberated Areas in Iraq" in partnership with the Iraqi
Government and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in Iraq.

My country also values the efforts of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the
specialized agencies of the United Nations, as they work
to provide support for IDPs. We urge other States to
support the relevant programmes in Iraq as we undertake
critical work in the humanitarian and relief areas for
IDPs and in favour of community reconciliation.

The Government of Iraq is working continuously
to enhance its relationship with brotherly States in
the Arab world, in particular the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, Kuwait, Jordan, Turkey and Iran, in addition to
its ongoing relationship with the Syrian Government.
Iraq looks forward to seeing unity in the Security
Council with respect to a comprehensive solution to the
conflict in Syria, in particular one that would meet the
interests of all parties in that country and lead to ending
the regional support for terrorist groups in Syria and
completely defeat them.

The Government of Iraq is committed to making
exceptional efforts in the area of the missing Kuwaiti
national archives. The Iraqi Ministry of Defence
continues to work on documenting and verifying
witness accounts and conducting visits to alleged sites
where Kuwaiti persons and prisoners went missing. We
have resumed digging in section B ofthe Al-Khamisiyah
site. As for Karbala, the Ministry of Defence has dug
102 holes without achieving tangible results. There are
no new findings on the Al-Jahra and Radwaniyah sites.
Excavation continues at the naval base sites in Kuwait,
with the assistance of witnesses. The Ministries for
Foreign Affairs and Defence continue their outreach
work through television and other media outlets with
a view to gathering accounts by new witnesses and
documenting information in order to reach tangible
and substantial information that could lead to finding
out the locations of the missing Kuwaiti prisoners
and persons.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
appreciation for the work of the Special Representative,
Mr. Jan Kubis, and his team, as they continue to advise
the Iraqi Government. We thank them for the efforts of
UNAMI aimed at establishing a united, stable Iraq that
is free from the scourge of terrorism.

The meeting rose at 4. 50p.m.
