Mr. Krishna (Nepal): Nepal congratulates the
Ethiopian presidency of the Council on convening this
important open debate. We also thank the Secretary-
General and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for their valuable briefings.

Peacekeeping is the United Nations flagship
activity in the maintenance of international peace
and security. Today's peacekeeping operations are not
limited to monitoring ceasefires, but have evolved into
multidimensional operations. However, peacekeeping
cannot do what negotiated political settlements can
do. Also, there can be no development without peace
and no lasting peace without sustainable development.
Peacekeeping efforts should build the domestic
capacities of countries emerging from conflict and
ensure their own impartiality and credibility.

Nepal has been considered a consistent and reliable
partner of United Nations peacekeeping for nearly
60 years now. Over 130,000 Nepalese peacekeepers
have served to date, and 73 have made the ultimate
sacrifice. Currently the sixth-largest troop and police
contributor, and having served in some of the most
difficult missions, Nepal wishes to make the following
points on the reform of United Nations peacekeeping.

United Nations peace operations have successfully
adapted to evolving situations, and that should
continue. Reform should be a continuous process, not
a one-time event. Reform depends on the political
will, commitment, support and solidarity of all
the stakeholders. Selective implementation of the
recommendations contained in major reports cannot
produce the results that we all want.

Nepal welcomes the Secretary-General's call for a
surge in peace diplomacy. It should be used to speed
up reform in the Council's working methods, including
by supporting the capacity-building of national
Governments in sustaining peace.

Prevention and sustaining peace should reinforced
with resources for the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals and coordination with
the Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries, who need to be there
right from the planning phase.

Peacekeeping missions should protect civilians and
ensure the safety and security of the peacekeepers to
help keep their morale high so that they may deliver
even in adverse situations.

I wish to conclude by assuring the Assembly of
Nepal's commitment to supporting reforms in peace
operations. Let us all move beyond non-implementation
of the report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and work together to
make United Nations peacekeeping successful.

