Mr. Kasse (Mali) (spoke in French): I, too, thank
the Secretary-General for his interim report on the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) and Mr. Annabi for his presentation
of the report and for the very useful additional
information he supplied.

I also wish to welcome among us today Mr.
Gusmao and Mr. Ramos-Horta and to thank them for
their important statements and for their efforts for the
independence of East Timor.

In the report under consideration, we have taken
due note of the progress achieved in certain areas,
including in the involvement of the public in the
drafting of a constitution. We also agree with certain
ideas and concerns put forward by previous speakers.
In this connection, I wish to make a few comments.

First, although we agree that we must continue
the process of preparing for elections, we believe that
there is a great deal yet to be done in order to organize
fair and inclusive elections on the date specified in the
timetable. This is for at least two reasons that are
linked, inter alia, to the issues of security and the
return of refugees. The question of security is essential
to the holding of elections and has been re-emphasized
by many of us this morning. Paragraph 21 of the report
stresses this issue and we agree with the assessment
made in paragraph 24 of the need to maintain the
military component essentially in its present form until
the East Timorese Government has established itself.

We are grateful to Indonesia for its contribution
to the relative stability in the border area, as mentioned
in another paragraph of the report. We also feel that the
return of refugees must be accelerated, with all
necessary support for their broad participation in the
elections in the best possible circumstances. We
believe that, once again, we must encourage
cooperation between the Indonesian Government and
UNTAET in this area.

Secondly, we should continue to work towards
the strengthening of the capacities of emerging
institutions in East Timor, involving the entire United
Nations system and the international community. In
this regard, we welcome the work done by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Vieira de
Mello, and the creation at United Nations Headquarters
of an integrated mission task force to support and
complete the activities of the working group on post-
UNTAET planning. We hope that the donor conference
to be held next June in Canberra will allow for progress
to be made in the working group.

Thirdly, we continue to believe that we must
encourage investment in East Timor in order to address
the serious economic issues that are often linked to
violence perpetrated by those left idle. Similarly, we
encourage the ongoing exploitation of mineral
resources under way in East Timor and urge those East
Timorese living abroad who are able to do so to invest
in their country.

In conclusion, my delegation takes this
opportunity to pay tribute once again to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and to the
personnel of UNTAET for their efforts to lead East
Timor to independence, in accordance with the
aspirations of its people. My delegation remains
convinced that an independent East Timor, established
in democratic pluralism based on the national pact
referred to by Mr. Ramos-Horta, should be assisted by
the United Nations and the entire international
community.

