Mr. Clodumar (Nauru): Mr. President, allow me
first to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of January and
for your initiative in convening this important meeting,
especially by allowing non-Council members to
participate. I also wish to congratulate the new Council
members who assumed their seats in the Council at the
beginning of this month.

It is my honour and privilege to address the
Security Council, for the first time since Nauru became
a United Nations Member in 1999, on behalf of the
members of the Pacific Islands Forum Group of
countries that maintain permanent missions in New
York - namely, Australia, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Fiji, the Marshall Islands, New Zealand,
Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga,
Tuvalu, Vanuatu and my own country, Nauru.

The Pacific Islands Forum member States and the
Forum secretariat are individually and collectively
resolved to do all we can to combat the scourge of
terrorism. We have welcomed and we fully support
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). It is a
trailblazing step that reflects the universal revulsion at
the attacks of 11 September. We commend the speed
and vigour with which the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, under the chairmanship of Ambassador
Greenstock, has gone about its work. In particular, we
appreciate the understanding that the Committee has
shown regarding technical and other assistance, which
some countries will need to fulfil their obligations
under resolution 1373 (2001). We welcome the
Counter-Terrorism Committee's forward-looking
programme of work and priorities, which reflects
awareness that the fight against terrorism will be long
and that it will require the persistence and cooperation
of all Member States.

The steps that individual Pacific Islands Forum
countries are taking to meet their obligations under
resolution 1373 (2001) are set out in their reports to the
Committee on Counter-Terrorism. In addition,
however, the secretariat of the Forum has submitted a
report to the Committee, highlighting regional aspects
of our response to terrorism. Among other steps, we are
seeking to strengthen the way in which we deal with
money-laundering and seek to suppress the financing
of terrorism. We are working to meet the challenge of
illegal migrant smuggling. Our law enforcement,
customs and immigration agencies are looking at ways
to strengthen cooperation and intelligence-sharing.
Pacific Islands Forum members are examining model
legislation on extradition, mutual assistance in criminal
matters, the forfeiture of the proceeds of crime, the
1988 United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic
in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, and
other measures to counter money-laundering. We are
working more closely than ever with international
organizations to fight terrorism and transnational
crime.

No region is immune from the threat of terrorism,
and no region can neglect its responsibility to
contribute to the global fight against terrorism. Our
efforts in the Pacific, at the national, regional and
international levels, are part of the overall response to
our common threat. We in the Pacific are committed to
shouldering our responsibilities. As the Security
Council takes our joint endeavour forward, in
particular through the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, it can be assured of our fullest support.

