Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): First of all, I wish to
thank the representative of Mali for exchanging
speaking slots with me, in view of some pressing work
which is awaiting my attention. Normally that
representative should have spoken before me, in view
of the fact that Mali belongs to the region of western
Africa. I appreciate it very much.

Allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this public meeting on the situation in Sierra
Leone. I wish also to thank Ambassador Adeniji,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Sierra Leone, for the excellent work he is doing and
also for his very detailed briefing to us this morning.

My delegation is pleased to note that significant
progress is being made in Sierra Leone towards the
restoration of peace in the country. Recent
developments in the peace process have enhanced the
prospects for peace and stability in the not-too-distant
future. The international community should, however,
remain vigilant in order to avoid any sidetracking of
the process by the main protagonists in the conflict,
namely the Revolutionary United Front (RUF).

My delegation notes with satisfaction that the
Abuja meeting has produced positive results,
particularly with regard to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme. The
disarmament of nearly 6,000 combatants and the
release of over 1,000 child combatants, as well as the
resumption of confidence-building measures by the
Sierra Leone Government and the RUF, are positive
steps that help to move forward the peace strategy for
Sierra Leone.

The ongoing commitment of the RUF to the
peace process remains crucial. The RUF should be
encouraged to continue to show a firm commitment
until the peace process is completed. The enhanced
disarmament process that followed the Abuja meeting
on 2 May has caused the overall security situation
within Sierra Leone to remain relatively calm. The
agreement reached by the Civil Defence Force (CDF)
and the RUF is a welcome arrangement in their efforts
to bring the fighting between the two parties to an end.

It is encouraging also to note that both the CDF
and the RUF are seriously engaged in a simultaneous
disarmament process and have returned substantial
amounts of weapons, which the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) has destroyed
and converted into agricultural tools.

As the disarmament and demobilization of the
RUF continues, it is equally important that the
Government of Sierra Leone become increasingly
involved in moving the peace process ahead. We are
heartened by the preparedness of the Sierra Leone
Government to address some of the concerns of the
RUF, including the transformation of the RUF into a
political party. It is only through the political
engagement of the RUF that a peaceful resolution of
the conflict can be finally achieved. We encourage the
Government of Sierra Leone to undertake further
confidence-building measures in an effort to fully
integrate the RUF ex-combatants into civil society.

My delegation fully subscribes to the Secretary-
General's view that reintegration remains pivotal to the
success of the entire disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme. Effective and adequate
reintegration opportunities provide the best deterrence
to a relapse into rebellious activities by the RUF. The
short-term reintegration plan put in place by the
Government of Sierra Leone for ex-combatants is a
move in the right direction.

However, my delegation remains concerned over
the shortage of resources to bring the plan to fruition.
In this regard, my delegation expresses concern over
the fact that no pledges were made by the donor
community at the donors conference which was held in
Paris on 11 and 12 June with a view to generating
financial support for the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) programme. We hope that the
call of the Secretary-General to the donors to finalize
their decision to contribute to the multi-donor trust
fund will be heeded. It is a fact that the DDR
programme, which is so vital to the success of the
overall peace process, cannot be allowed to fail for lack
of resources.

My delegation also welcomes the forward
deployment of UNAMSIL and the Mission's ability to
implement the second phase of its concept of
operations. UNAMSIL's movement into the major
diamond-producing area of Koidu testifies to the fact
that UNAMSIL is gaining control over areas which
were inaccessible to them before. UNAMSIL continues
to play a key role in monitoring the implementation of
the Abuja Agreement as well as the DDR programme.
We look forward to UNAMSIL's implementation of the
third phase of the concept of operations, which will
involve deployment into diamond-producing regions
and some border areas in the eastern provinces.

Given the improvement of the security situation
on the ground, my delegation is heartened to learn that
preparations for holding elections, most likely in
December of this year, are already under way. The
intensive civic education campaign designed to inform,
educate and raise the awareness of the electorate,
should be fully encouraged and supported. The role of
UNAMSIL in providing assistance to carry the
electoral process forward remains crucial.

My delegation remains deeply concerned over the
humanitarian situation in Sierra Leone and the plight of
hundreds of thousands of refugees in the Mano River
Union subregion. As normalcy returns to Sierra Leone,
it is expected that a large number of refugees may
decide to return by road from Guinea. There is a
growing need for more resources to be made available
to the Government of Sierra Leone to cope with the
influx of returnees as well as the resettlement of the
internally displaced persons. The Government must
provide basic infrastructure and services to enable the
returning refugees to settle down and start their lives
afresh. Despite an expansion of humanitarian activities
following the deployment of UNAMSIL in many areas
formerly under Revolutionary United Front (RUF)
control, the Government of Sierra Leone still needs
considerable financial and humanitarian support in its
efforts to resettle the returning refugees and internally
displaced persons.

Before I conclude, I wish to pay a warm tribute to
the Economic Community of West African States, and
in particular its current Chairman, President Konare of
Mali, for its tireless efforts to bring peace and
normalcy not only to Sierra Leone but to the Mano
River Union subregion in spite of being constrained by
the scarcity of resources. I wish to reiterate here once
more that regional and subregional organizations have
a key role to play in maintaining peace and security in
their respective regions. In this regard, they must be
fully supported by the United Nations and the
international community. I also pay a warm tribute to
the men and women of UNAMSIL and to the countries
they come from for their important contribution to
restoring peace and stability in Sierra Leone.

Mr. Shen Guofang (China)(spoke in Chinese) At
the outset, I wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
tenth report on the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Adeniji, for his additional
briefing. The content of the report is comprehensive,
positive and encouraging, and is conducive to
strengthening the confidence of the international
community, including the Security Council, in the
peace process in Sierra Leone. I also wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's open meeting
because the Council's continued attention and timely
encouragement will be very important for maintaining
the momentum of peace in Sierra Leone.

To maintain the momentum of peace, the
stabilization of Sierra Leone's military and security
situation is of particular importance. We encourage the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) to implement the
relevant agreements, including the Ceasefire
Agreement, and we believe that efforts must be made
to effectively prevent the Civil Defence Force from
further provocations in order to avoid providing the
RUF with a pretext for violating agreements. We
should also properly resolve the RUF's concerns
regarding security issues because in the long term, this
will be conducive to the early achievement of peace in
Sierra Leone.

The disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programme is one of the core
issues in the Sierra Leone peace process. Currently
disarmament efforts have achieved a good momentum.
We hope that the tripartite joint committee will
continue to play its proper role. But as was mentioned
in the report, compared with disarmament, the work of
reintegration is more complex, requiring not only
short-term efforts, but also long-term planning. We
hope that the tripartite joint committee will make
further efforts in this regard.

I also wish to mention the question of the
provision of funding. We have noted that the donors
conference held on 11 June in Paris has achieved good
results. We appeal to the donors to provide as soon as
possible emergency assistance to Sierra Leone for the
DDR programme. This will be of the greatest
importance for the systematic fulfilment of the DDR
plan by Sierra Leone.

China is on the whole satisfied with the recent
work of UNAMSIL and the Special Representative,
Mr. Adeniji. Particularly, UNAMSIL has really
strengthened its public outreach work with the local
population. We support UNAMSIL's efforts on behalf
of the peace process. When conditions permit,
UNAMSIL's phased operation programme should be
carried out and proceed on schedule, because in a
definite sense, peace in Sierra Leone is dependent upon
UNAMSIL's full deployment in Sierra Leonean
territory.

We wish to commend for the preparatory work
for the elections done by the Sierra Leone Government.
We support the United Nations provision of technical
and logistic assistance to the Sierra Leone Government.
In this regard, the Security Council should also
encourage UNAMSIL to provide assistance within its
capabilities.

We also hope that the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission and the Special Court will be established
at an early date and begin their work. China has
already decided to provide material assistance to the
Special Court. We also hope that the Sierra Leone
Government will further strengthen its capacity for
restoring State authority, will stabilize its economy and
will properly resolve humanitarian issues within Sierra
Leone's territory.

Now I would like to refer to the region as a
whole. The problems of West Africa ought to be
resolved in an integrated and comprehensive manner.
While we are focusing our attention on the peace
process in Sierra Leone, we should not forget the other
factors of instability in the region. The problems in
Liberia are particularly worrisome. The armed conflict
in the northern part of Liberia may trigger a new
security and humanitarian disaster and will have an
impact on the peace process in Sierra Leone. In this
regard, we must maintain high vigilance. We wish to
commend the Economic Community of West African
States for its tireless efforts in resolving problems in
the Mano River Union region, and we support its
efforts to encourage political dialogue between the
leaders of Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia, for the
purpose of stabilizing the tense situation there.

