Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you warmly, Madam, for organizing
this open debate on children and armed conflict during
your presidency of the Council.

I have to say that it is very difficult to speak after
Sandra Uwiringiyimana's speech, a speech not only
about atrocities but also about the hope that is possible
when such children receive our help. I would also like
to thank Ms. Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict;
Ms. Brandt, the Deputy Executive Director General of
UNICEF; and Mr. Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, for their enlightening
presentations. I would also like to take this occasion
to thank Mr. Forest Whitaker, Special Envoy for Peace
and Reconciliation of UNESCO, for his commitment to
the cause of children affected by armed conflict and for
his truly moving statement.

Six months ago almost to the day, we unanimously
adopted a tenth resolution on children and armed
conflict (resolution 2143 (2014)) during an open debate
(see S/PV.7129) that I had the honour to preside over.
However, despite the successive resolutions adopted
by the Council and the progress they represent for the
protection of children, children continue to pay a very
heavy price in conflicts.

From Syria to the Central African Republic, from
South Sudan to Afghanistan and from Gaza to Iraq,
children are killed, maimed or, depending on the
situation, abducted, sexually abused or recruited, both
by Government forces and non-State actors. Schools
and pupils continue to be the targets of deliberate
attacks. School infrastructure is regularly looted
or diverted from its primary purpose to be used for
military purposes. Such acts deprive children, and the
communities whose future and hope they represent,
of a fundamental right: the right to education. The
ignorance that results from a lack of education fosters
intolerance and perpetuates the cycle of poverty, thus
feeding the violence. I hope the Security Council will
continue to give this issue the attention it requires in
the spirit of resolutions 1998 (2011) and 2143 (2014).

The persistence of violations and abuses
committed against children in conflict situations is a
stark reminder that the progress we make should be
measured not only by the improvements we bring to
our normative framework - however important they
may be - but also by how the Council implements its
decisions in specific contexts. Whether in country-
specific resolutions, peacekeeping operations'
mandates, sanctions regimes or the conclusions of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, the
Council must be consistent and concretely apply what
it has committed to in its thematic resolutions. The
Council's credibility is at stake here.

That is true also for the fight against impunity.
Those who commit atrocities against children must be
held accountable for their actions. In that respect, the
Council must act in accordance with its prerogatives,
including its ability to make referrals to the International
Criminal Court.

As I have just stated, wherever conflicts rage,
children in particular are affected. A conflict of untold
violence has been decimating Syria for three and a half
years now. Far from diminishing, the fighting continues
unabated. The month of July 2014 has been the most
deadly for the civilian population since the beginning
of the conflict. Among the victims, there are now
well over 10,000 children. Thousands more have been
maimed and will remain scarred for life, physically and
psychologically. Countless innocent children have lost
their lives due to indiscriminate attacks on populated
areas and indiscriminate bombardments by barrel
bombs, the sole objective of which is to sow terror and
despair among the civilian population. Others have
fallen victim to deliberate attacks against their schools:
240 children have been killed or wounded in such attacks
between April and June 2014 alone. That does not even
include the children denied access to humanitarian aid
and those detained and tortured by Government forces
or even forced to fight in pro-Government armed
groups, armed opposition groups and terrorist groups,
first and foremost among which is the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).

Reports of abuses committed against children by
ISIL in territories under its control, whether in Syria

or Iraq, are increasing. Recruitment, murder, rape,
abductions and attacks against schools are common.
As the Special Representative, Ms. Zerrougui, has just
recalled in her statement, more than 500 children have
been killed in Iraq since the beginning of the year.
Close to 500 have also been killed during the most
recent cycle of violence in the Gaza Strip during the
summer. Leaving political considerations aside, one can
only be outraged when the number of children killed
during a military operation is as high as the number of
combatants killed. It is simply beyond comprehension.

I could go on and list many other conflict situations
and give many more examples of grave violations against
children, such as the abuses committed by Boko Haram,
which has rightfully been added to the list of shame.
But I would like to conclude on a more optimistic note.
Indeed, despite the reasons for concern - which, it is
true, are many - the commitment of the international
community as a whole has enabled progress to be
made, which constitutes a real glimmer of hope, as
Mr. Whitaker has just reminded us.

Thanks to the tireless awareness-raising efforts
of the Special Representative, Governments continue
to undertake commitments, in particular to end the
recruitment and use of children in conflict. In Yemen,
an action plan was signed by the Government on 14 May,
thereby bringing to seven the number of Governments
committed to ending the recruitment of children. That
is an additional encouraging sign for the success of
the Children, Not Soldiers campaign launched by the
Special Representative and UNICEF. It comes on the
heels of Chad's removal from the list contained in the
annexes of the Secretary-General's report (S/2014/339),
following its Government's implementation of the
action plan it had signed. Allow me to commend here
the determined efforts of the Chadian authorities to that
end.

In Myanmar, which the Council's Working Group
visited last year, the armed forces have continued
with the process of demobilization of children from
their ranks, in line with their commitments. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the President has
appointed his first Special Adviser for the fight against
sexual violence and the recruitment of children. The
regional organizations are also active and are mobilizing
to improve the protection of children, as illustrated by
the creation of a post of Special Envoy of the African
Union for children in Africa.

In the introduction to her study on the impact of
armed conflict on children, Graca Machel underlined
that children are

"both our reason to struggle to eliminate the worst
aspects ofwarfare, and our best hope for succeeding
at it."

That blend of idealism and pragmatism best
characterizes the children and armed conflict agenda.
I hope that the Council will be able to pursue its noble
task of eliminating the worst aspects of conflicts and
find practical solutions to end the violations and abuses
committed against children.

