Mr. Baali (Algeria): Four days after the
horrendous assassination of Sheikh Yassin and six
other Palestinians, blown up by an Israeli missile as
they were leaving a mosque, the Security Council has
been unable to produce either a presidential statement
or a resolution condemning that extrajudicial killing
and calling for the cessation of that practice, which is
contrary to international law. As if doomed to fail
whenever it must deal with the intractable situation in
the Middle East, the Security Council has come to the
conclusion once and for all that it has nothing to say
about the terrible tragedy that is unfolding in that part
of the world.

By not condemning the extrajudicial killing of
Sheikh Yassin, the Security Council is not sending the
right message to the world, which has unanimously
condemned that crime. It is not sending the right
message to those who sincerely believe that the
Security Council is the custodian of international law.
But it is certainly sending the wrong message to Israel,
whose representative boasted two days ago in this very
Chamber about the crime committed and vowed to
continue the unlawful policy of extrajudicial killings.

During the past four days, the sponsors of the
just-vetoed draft resolution made every effort to
accommodate the concerns and the demands of all
those who wished to see the Security Council adopt a
common stance. The text we have before us is indeed a
fair and balanced attempt to satisfy every delegation. It
condemns the assassination of Sheikh Yassin, and it
also condemns all terrorist acts and acts of violence
and destruction against civilians. It calls for the
cessation of extrajudicial killings as well as of all acts
of violence, including acts of terrorism. It calls for
adherence to international law and for implementation
by the parties of their obligations and of the road map
in order to achieve the vision of two States living side
by side in peace and security. In spite of all that, that
balanced approach did not fully satisfy some
delegations, which I would still like to thank for their
efforts to arrive at a general agreement.

While thanking the members of the Council who
voted in favour of the draft resolution, I would like to
express our deep regret that the Council has again
failed to assume its responsibilities.
