Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
Russia for its successful stewardship of the Security
Council this month and, equally important, of the World
Cup. As part of your presidency, Sir, we applaud your
commitment to discussing the root causes of conflict
plaguing the Middle East and North Africa. Russia has
been a historic partner in our region and committed to
addressing the fundamental issue underlying many of
our challenges - terrorism and its bedfellow, extremist
thought and ideology.

At the outset, let me say that the positions of the
United Arab Emirates on regional matters are known.
In response to Russia's call for us to be action-oriented
in our intervention, I would like to offer ideas for an
integrated approach to addressing each of the regional
conflicts that are causing instability in our region.
What is clear is that diplomacy has failed in the Middle
East, yet diplomacy will always be key to solving the
region's crises, and therefore we must renew our efforts
to see it strengthened.

There have been calls today for new initiatives akin
to the Helsinki process of 1975, to build confidence and
resolve tensions in the region. The United Arab Emirates
welcomes any substantive dialogue that contributes
to building confidence among regional States. First,
however, as was the case at the end of the Cold War, we
must all recommit to the central principles and concepts
that drove the creation of the current world order. Until
that common understanding is accepted by all, we will
condemn ourselves to a continuous cycle of violence in
our region and beyond our borders.

For any such dialogue to be meaningful, all actors
must accept the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. As is raised in the concept note (S/2018/524, annex), Iran in particular has consistently violated those
norms and must end its irresponsible presence in Arab
countries in the form of militias and terrorist groups.
As the representative of the United States said today,

"In war zone after war zone and terrorist act after
terrorist act, we find Iran and Hizbullah at the root
of violence in the Middle East."

To counter extremist ideology, which is spreading like a
cancer in our region, we call on Member States to lend
their support to like-minded countries of the moderate
Arab centre that are shifting the Middle East towards
stability, development and the rejection of any State
system based on extremist ideology.

Furthermore, while we understand the need to
partner with external actors, lasting regional security
cannot be decided from afar. True stability in the
Middle East will require Arab decision-making and
leadership. We must not repeat the mistakes ofthe great
Powers after the First World War, which believed that
they knew better than the people of the region, who
have been suffering some of the consequences of that
approach for more than a century now. That way of
thinking must end as the region steps up to shoulder
its own responsibilities for its own future. The era of
hegemony and great-Power politics must be replaced by
a renewed respect for the twentieth-century nation-State
system that we believe can still meet the needs of the
twenty-first century. For that vision to materialize, the
Security Council must play its part as a neutral steward
of peace and security and avoid a slide into irrelevance.

As other speakers have noted, a historical
understanding of the context must form the basis of
our future policymaking. Let us start with Yemen,
where a picture has been painted by some of a nation
plunged into chaos as a result of the intervention of the
Arab coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen. Some
have forgotten that, as recently as four years ago, the
legitimate Yemeni Government headed a functional
State and had a clear process for political transition.
The Council should have taken decisive action when
the Houthis took Sana'a in September 2014, which
caused the breakdown of the Yemeni State apparatus
and the resulting descent into civil war. If the coalition
had not entered at the request of the legitimate
Government and in accordance with resolution 2216
(2015), today we would be dealing with a lawless State
dominated by an illegal militia that represent only 3 per
cent of the population but seek to control the fate of
27 million Yemenis.

In Syria, as the brutal war enters its eighth year, in
our View a prominent Arab role is essential to resolving
the conflict. With all due respect to the Powers that are
deciding the fate of the Syrian people today, Syria is
an Arab nation and its future lies in an Arab regional
solution with the support of the international community
and the United Nations. Along with the negative ones,
there are positive trends in our region. For example,
with regard to Iraq, we join others in applauding the
defeat of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, and
we congratulate the Iraqi people on the success of
their recent parliamentary elections. The United Arab
Emirates looks forward to a renewed Iraqi role in the
Arab political scene.

However, we cannot hope to address new conflicts
without resolving older ones. The call for a Palestinian
State will remain a rallying cry for proponents of
extremist ideologies. Until the rights of the Palestinians
are met, the issue will remain one of the root causes of
regional instability and will prevent Israel from having
a secure place in our region.

Finally, diplomacy in our region will not thrive
unless we restore the deficit of trust that exists. To do
that, we need honest and transparent partners and the
collective vision of our shared security. More than a
year ago, we took diplomatic measures against the State
of Qatar because we could no longer tolerate its policies
and support for the terrorist groups that undermine
stability in our region and throughout the world. The
new Arab centre of which I spoke will go from strength
to strength, as our model speaks to the hearts and
minds of the millions of Arabs who want a future based
on optimism rather than nihilism. We will always be an
inclusive group for those that reject extremist ideology
in all its forms and seek to partner peacefully in a
positive and moderate vision for our region.

The United Arab Emirates and its allies are
actively working to stabilize our region and to advance
its development. Bellwethers for thriving societies
are the protection of the rights of minorities and the
celebration of diversity, ethnicity and creed. Building
and maintaining strong institutions are key to that. The
unrest of the past seven years is largely the result of an
institutional trust deficit across the region, which saw
simmering discontent boil over in the collapse of the
social contract between people and Government.

By contrast, the focus and commitment of the
United Arab Emirates to the strength of its own
institutions, based on inclusiveness, transparency and
good governance, have produced strong social trust. We
must therefore renew our efforts for institution-building
across our region and replenish the trust deficit that
is shaking its very core. We stand ready to facilitate
new strategies to address the multitude of crises in
our region. We seek partnerships with both historical
friends and new ones so as to advance those efforts.
We ask only that our partners respect our equal voice
at the table in deciding our own collective future. An
optimistic and forward-looking model for the region is
critical to our collective success. We should not focus
solely on a future that we do not want. Instead, we must
begin to envision where we want to go and what will be
required to reach that destination.

