Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Let me
congratulate you, Secretary Lew, for convening this
meeting today of so many finance ministers, and I
acknowledge the presence of so many ofyour colleagues
in the Chamber today. Sadly, the New Zealand Minister
of Finance was not able to join you, Mr. President, but
he does send his greetings and his support for the work
done today.

The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/
Daesh is one of the gravest threats we have known
to the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
Over the past year, we have watched in horror as ISIL
and Al-Qaida have conducted attacks against innocent
civilians around the world. There has been a ripple
effect of fear and intolerance that has gone further.
The Security Council's message in today's
resolution 2253 (2015) is simple: the whole United
Nations membership must work more actively to disrupt
ISIL, Al-Qaida and associated terrorist groups. We are
pleased that the resolution takes a more comprehensive
approach to the issue of countering ISIL. We believe
that it is essential that when the Council considers
this threat it look at the whole threat posed by those
groups and consider it beyond the narrow prism of the
sanctions regime, which has sometimes been the only
focus, particularly of the Committee that I chair.

That is why we regard the new element in the
resolution today calling for a comprehensive, strategic
report by the Secretary-General as particularly
important. It should ensure that the Council does have
that totality of understanding when it takes decisions
affecting ISIL. Fundamentally, we need to deny
ISIL, Al-Qaida and their affiliates the resources to
operate - the oxygen that fuels the fire. The targeting
of terrorist financing has never been more important.

As I have previously reported as Chair of the
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011), and
2253 (2015), ISIL generates revenue internally and has
diverse funding sources. The non-traditional sources
of terrorist financing - whether fund-raising through
social media, organized trade in oil and antiquities or
self-funded foreign terrorist fighters - can be difficult
to disrupt without the coordination of efforts at all levels.
That includes coordination with the private sector and
solid financial intelligence. We need to attack all the
financial flows, all of the time.

Member States are obligated to prevent and
criminalize terrorist financing. The Financial Action
Task Force (FATF) provides essential expertise and
support in those areas, in what is now a global standard.
It is worrying, therefore 4 as the President of the FATF
has reminded us - that there are gaps in the legal
effectiveness of some Member States' regimes. We
are talking not about the numbers of laws enacted or
prosecutions undertaken, but about how effective our
overall systems are to prevent, detect and stop terrorist
financing. Our challenge is to operationalize the
sanctions regime and the obligations that we have put
on paper. That requires political will and prioritization,
and a greater practical focus on implementation,
compliance and follow-up.

There is significant but unrealized potential in the
sanctions list. We have the measures, but need the wider
United Nations membership to provide the listings.
While there are existing listings relating to ISIL,
Al-Qaida and their leaders, there is a need to update
the list to reflect the threat, as stated in resolution
2249 (2015). We have to be better at targeting those
who facilitate funding and support, and are within our
grasp. The web of funding streams and support extends
well beyond the territory that ISIL controls, including
to a growing list of affiliates. The list needs to be an
operational instrument, not a policy statement. As a
result of resolution 2253 (2015), the list's annual review
also now has more teeth, with incentives for States to
cooperate and remain engaged. Delisting as a possible
consequence of Member States not providing up-to-
date information is now a reality.

As Chair, New Zealand is committed to openness
and engagement with the broader United Nations
membership. That is for its own sake and to enable
greater understanding, support and implementation.
That is an important point because the regime will not
work if Member States do not cooperate with it. As
Chair, I have to say frankly that there are aspects of
the way the regime operates that have concerned me.
The Committee's rules and practices can, in my view,
compromise the effectiveness of the very regime we
are seeking to implement. While consensus can be a
strength, to require unanimity before any action can be
taken on important matters, such as the investigation
of allegations of non-compliance, is a major weakness.
It politicizes the regime and arguably goes beyond
the Charter of the United Nations provisions on
decision-making. In our view, the Council needs to
have a good look at that aspect of the regime.

As Chair, we want to be practical about sanctions
exemption requests, such as for basic expenses and
travel bans, and encourage Members to utilize them
and work with them. We are pleased, therefore, that
today's resolution provides explicitly for the granting
of exemptions for asset-freezing provisions. That will
allow the regime to be applied practically and will
strengthen rather than weaken the regime.

The Office of the Ombudsperson is essential to
the effectiveness and support of the regime. It is a
real success story. It is vital to demonstrate that the
due-process requirements are being fulfilled. New
Zealand, as Chair, has, like others, put significant
effort into managing the successful transition to our
new Ombudsperson, Ms. Catherine Marchi-Uhel.
However, as the first Ombudsperson reported, there
are still shortfalls in the Office's arrangements. We
hope that the Secretariat will act on the expression of
will in resolution 2253 (2015) to ensure the necessary
arrangements to carry out the Ombudsperson's mandate
in an effective and independent manner. We, as a
Council, need also to ensure that the Monitoring Team
and the Security Council Affairs Division are properly
resourced to carry out the tasks that have been assigned
to them.

We should never allow the threat posed by ISIL and
Al-Qaida to become normalized by the repetition of
"UN-speak" or the tyranny of distance from so many
of our own countries. The atrocities and deprivations
committed by ISIL, Al-Qaida and affiliated groups
are very real and hurt us all. The sanctions regime
is a living instrument that we must regularly adapt.
Resolution 2253 (2015) is just that - an adaptation and
a strengthening of the regime to counter the growing
threat ISIL.

