Mr. Ybafiez Rubio (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting at such a crucial time for Somalia, and to
thank Prime Minister Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke
and the key actors in the region, such as the African
Union, as represented by Ambassador Antenio, for
their presence. I would also like to take this opportunity
to thank Ms. Susana Malcorra, Chef de Cabinet of the
Secretary-General, and especially Mr. Nicholas Kay,
the Special Representative ofthe Secretary-General, for
all his work in helping us to reach this hopeful moment.

During our time on the Security Council, Somalia
has definitely remained high on the African agenda.
Spain is firmly committed to Somalia and the region,
as we have demonstrated through our participation in
major international forums, most recently the High-
level Partnership Forum held in Mogadishu in July,
and through our contribution to and participation in the
operations and missions in the area.

The Somali political process has suffered numerous
ups and downs in the past few years. While we can
say that significant progress has been made, much
still remains to be done. With our focus fixed on the
coming year and meeting the goals established in
Vision 2016, we should urge all the Somali political
actors to be decisive in addressing the country's major
challenges - the process of creating a federation, the
2016 elections and the fight against Al-Shabaab. In that
regard, we welcome the progress that has been made
with the process of building a federal State, in which
a number of states are already participating, and with
successfully completing their interim constitutions,
and we urge them to continue negotiations with the
remaining states.

The 2016 elections will be key for Somalia. We
were pleased to see the launch of the consultative
process for settling the election format and the holding
of the most recent national consultative forum on
19 and 20 October. We hope that spirit of cooperation
will continue in the regional consultations due to take
place in the coming weeks, so that in December, at its
next national consultative forum, Somalia can agree on
a format for the 2016 elections.

In the preparations for the elections, there are two
issues to that we consider to be fundamental. First,
we must ensure that, regardless of the formula used,
the electoral process will be inclusive, transparent
and representative. The second concern is holding the
elections on schedule in August 2016. Achieving that
will require that the executive and legislative bodies
overcome their potential differences and work on
constitutional reform and developing a legal framework
that allows for the holding of the elections. We commend
President Mohamud's commitment made at the United
Nations in New York to holding elections in 2016, and
we are convinced that Somalia, with its various powers,
is ready to carry out that task successfully in the coming
months. To that end, it has the support of the United
Nations and the Security Council.

Al-Shabaab poses the greatest threat to security in
Somalia and the region. Its terrorist activities this year
demonstrate that the group remains active with full
operational capability. While we welcome the advances
of the African Union Mission in Somalia in recent
months, we draw attention to the need to effectively
exercise State authority in the territories that have been
recovered from Al-Shabaab so that their inhabitants can
enjoy the dividends of peace. We believe that military
operations in and of themselves cannot end the threat
of terrorism, and that what is necessary is a broader
approach to fighting Al-Shabaab, including support
for the development of a State capable of providing its
citizens with security, political participation, economic
opportunities and the protection of human rights.

Security sector reform is key in that regard. The
Somali National Army and police should increase
their role and effectiveness so as to ensure security
in the zones liberated from Al-Shabaab and along the
principal supply routes. To that end, we encourage the
Somali authorities to implement the Guulwade Plan
and Heegan Plan, because we consider it crucial to
achieve substantive progress in reforms before the 2016
elections.

The humanitarian situation remains extremely
serious and risks being exacerbated by the El Nifio
weather phenomenon. We are also concerned about
the arrival of Somali refugees from Yemen, given the
limited resources to receive them.

To conclude, Spain is convinced that the peace,
stabilization and development of Somalia will not
be possible without the construction of a State, and
there will not be a sustainable State without Somali
ownership. To that end, while we recognize and
appreciate the efforts made so far, we encourage the
transitional Government and the various institutions
and actors participating in the process to overcome
their differences and work together for Somalia and for
Vision 2016, which have the international community's
support.

