Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Since
this is the first time that I am taking the floor under
your presidency, Sir, I wish to extend to you the sincere
congratulations of my delegation on the assumption by
your country, Chile, of the presidency of the Security
Council for January 2015.

My delegation takes note of the excellent report of

the Secretary-General (S/2014/892), dated 12 December
2014, and thanks the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Cote d'Ivoire, Her Excellency
Ms. Aichatou Mindaoudou Souleymane, for her briefing
on the situation there. I should like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your working visit to Cote d'Ivoire
in November 2014 in your capacity as Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Cote d'Ivoire,
during which you were able to see first-hand the
exceptional progress that has been made in all sectors
of activity in the country. The Special Representative
of the Secretary-General also confirmed in her briefing
the remarkable progress made in all areas as a result
of the efforts undertaken under the authority of
President Alassane Ouattara.

I should like to now stress a few salient points.

First, regarding the upcoming presidential elections
to be held in October 2015, President Ouattara and
his Government are committed to ensuring that the
elections are transparent, inclusive and peaceful in order
to strengthen peace, stability and democracy in our
country. Political dialogue between the Government and
the opposition, facilitated in particular by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, has resumed,
as she said. In this regard, we would like to note with
satisfaction the establishment of the new Independent
Electoral Commission, which is consensual, and which
includes representatives of the opposition and civil
society.

There is now intensive activity among all political
parties in the country in the run-up to the elections
of October 2015. All of this bears witness to the
irreversible commitment of the Ivorian political class
to the culture of democracy.

In the area of justice, President Ouattara is
determined to build an equitable society base on
impartial justice accessible to all. He recently indicated
that following a difficult period, during the post-
electoral crisis, which had led us on occasion to have
recourse to international justice, our judicial system
was now on track thanks to the reforms undertaken by
the Government and the improvement of the working
conditions of the judges. Today our country can
guarantee equitable justice to all and respect the norms
of international justice with regard to the judicial
process and trials. The process under way with regard
to the post-electoral crisis will make it possible, once
justice has been provided to all concerned, including
those indicted by the National Commission of Inquiry,
to definitively turn this painful page in our history and
to consolidate national reconciliation.

With regard to national reconciliation, the Dialogue,
Truth and Reconciliation Commission, has concluded its
sterling work after three years of activity. Its Chairman,
Prime Minister Charles Konan Banny, submitted the
final report of the Commission to the President of the
Republic on 15 December, during a formal ceremony.
The Commission's mandate was to work independently
to build social cohesion among all communities in
Cote d'Ivoire, including through transitional justice.
The Commission's report, which covers this process of
reconciliation, can be broken down into four parts: the
preparatory phase; the quest for the deep-rooted causes
of the crisis; hearings, investigations and testimony;
and recommendations and reparations.

The hearings held by the Commission made it
possible to obtain the testimony of 72,483 people,
including 28,064 women and 757 children. That
testimony shed light on events and made it possible
to identify those who suffered harm during the crisis.
The hearings also provided the basis for a typology
of the kinds of violations committed and the damage
caused and their legal and juridical nature. On the
basis of the testimony gathered, the Commission made
recommendations for reparations.

President Ouattara took note of the Commission's
report and asked the Government to consider it in order
to implement those recommendations that it considers
pertinent in order to complete the process. He announced
that a reparations fund for victims would be put in
place in 2015, with an initial amount provided by the
Government of Cote d'Ivoire of 10 billion CFA francs,
or $20 million. He asked our international partners to
support those efforts by making a contribution.

In the area of security, the situation continues to
proceed apace, and the city ofAbidjan now has the same
level of security as New York and Geneva. However,
we are aware that significant efforts are still needed
to achieve a fully satisfactory situation. That is where
security-sector reform comes into play, as was pointed
out by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General.

In that regard, I note that the Permanent
Mission transmitted to the members of the Security
Council, through the Chair of the 1572 Committee,
a comprehensive account of the security sector
reforms being undertaken by the Government of Cote
d'Ivoire. That dossier sets out Cote d'Ivoire's vision
of security sector reform, which aims to modernize
our defence capabilities, strengthen the operational
capacities of the security forces and ensure regular
capacity-building through training. The doctrine is
centred around the following six pillars: national
security, post-crisis reconstruction, the rule of law and
international relations, democratic oversight, economic
governance, and the human dimension. The doctrine
also incorporates 108 operational decisions and will
be implemented in four stages - urgent, short-term,
medium-term and long-term.

On 11 December 2014, the Council of Ministers
adopted a draft law on the organization of the defence
and armed forces of Cote d'Ivoire. The text, which
superseded the previous law of 1961, was developed as
part of the new Ivorian army in the context of security
sector reform. The draft law will be introduced for
consideration before Parliament as soon as possible
with a view to modernizing the armed forces of Cote
d'Ivoire.

With regard to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, we noted that progress is satisfactory and
that more than 46,000 former combatants ethat is 62 per
cent - had been reintegrated into the socioeconomic
fabric.

With regard to the diamond sector, following the
adoption of resolution 2153 (2014), which lifted the
embargo on diamonds produced in Cote d'Ivoire, the
Government developed a post-embargo strategy that
takes into account the implementation of the Kimberley
Process. The strategy, which seeks to complete the
traceability system for the export chain, is built
around four components: strengthening the governance
framework, building evaluation capacity, implementing
anti-fraud activities and establishing legally constituted
purchasing offices.

Paragraph 14 of resolution 2153 (2014) provides for
a review mission at the end of January 2015. However,
following consultations with the Chair of the Kimberly
Process Working Group on Monitoring, it was agreed
that the review visit would take place from 10 to
20 March 2015, as you noted, Mr. President. This period
was proposed so as to allow for testing of the entire
system, including export. All of these elements are set
out in a letter from the Ivorian Minister of Industry
and Mines transmitted to all members of the Council
through the Chair of the 1572 Committee.

Overall, since 2012, Cote d'Ivoire has been engaged
in the implementation of a diamond supply chain that is
transparent and that upholds the minimum standards
of the Kimberley Process, while maintaining open and
frank dialogue with the 1572 Committee and its Group
of Experts. As such, we are working together to ensure
that the Kimberley Process review mission can fully
meet the spirit of resolution 2153 (2014), which in our
view should evaluate the entire Cote d'Ivoire diamond
value chain.

With regard to economic recovery, economic
growth was expected to reach 9 per cent by the end
of 2014, confirming the renewed dynamism of the
Ivorian economy. President Alassane Ouattara
intends for all Ivoirians to benefit from that growth,
which he is determined must be inclusive. From 2015,
Government action will therefore focus on social
sectors and on strengthening stability, including by
implementing universal health coverage, continuing to
implement technical platforms for hospitals, building
new health facilities, implementing the education
for all programme, stepping up the decentralization
of universities, creating jobs and reducing youth
unemployment, providing housing, fighting poverty
and high living costs, supporting women's economic
and commercial activities and gender promotion,
compensating victims of the post-election crisis,
furthering the process of national reconciliation and
social cohesion, and continuing dialogue with the
opposition.

At the regional level, regarding the Ebola epidemic,
thanks to the drastic measures taken by the Government,
both at borders and within the country, no Ebola cases
have occurred in Cote d'Ivoire. However, Cote d'Ivoire
has shown its solidarity with the affected neighbouring
countries by providing $1 million to the Economic
Community of West African States Ebola response
fund. In addition, Cote d'Ivoire deployed medical
personnel to the affected neighbouring countries, at the
request of the African Union and West African Health
Organization.

In conclusion, given the significant progress made
in all sectors of the country, we can say, as has President
Ouattara, that the year just past marked the beginning
of the transformation and modernization of Cote
d'Ivoire. The construction of the Henri Konan Be'die'
Bridge on the Ebrie lagoon in Abidjan, which opened
on 16 December 2014, in many ways symbolizes the
renewed dynamism in the Ivorian economy. President
Ouattara and his Government remain committed to i now invite Council members to informal
doing everything possible to continue on this promising consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
path so as to consolidate the gains and ensure lasting

stability in Cote d'Ivoire. The meeting rose at 10.43 am.

