Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, Sir, I would
like to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. I wish to thank you for
organizing this meeting with Baroness Ashton, High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
of the European Union (EU).

The European Union plays an increasingly
important role in contributing to international peace
and security. Thus, we greatly appreciate the
opportunity to exchange views on issues of common
interest. I would also like to extend a warm welcome to
Baroness Ashton on her first visit to the Security
Council in her new capacity and to thank her for the
comprehensive presentation that she has just provided.
Let me also welcome the Foreign Minister of Austria,
Mr. Michael Spindelegger, who is with us today.

As called for in Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter, effective cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations is of crucial
significance in maintaining international peace and
security. In today's environment, comprising
multifaceted and complex challenges threatening
international peace and stability, the need for strong
and effective partners at the regional level becomes
even more acute.

In that regard, the EU is certainly one of the
major partners of the United Nations, supporting our
shared objectives and filling an important gap.
Baroness Ashton's statement today, which touched
upon a wide range of issues on which the United
Nations and EU cooperate closely, is, in itself,
testimony to that fact. Indeed, the scope of the EU's
cooperation with the United Nations in the field of
peace and security, ranging from Africa to Latin
America and Asia, is extremely broad and
multidimensional. Certainly, it goes beyond
peacekeeping and addresses the entire spectrum of
peacekeeping, peacemaking and peacebuilding, as well
as the critical linkages between those separate but
inseparable processes.

Thus, the EU has made valuable contributions to
the work of the United Nations in the fields of conflict
prevention, crisis management, mediation,
humanitarian assistance, promotion of the rule of law
and long-term development through the many political,
economic and social instruments available to it. The
unique level of integration among EU members and the
breadth of the Union's multifaceted engagement in
international relations, ranging from climate change to
arms control, present us with many valuable
opportunities for mutually beneficial cooperation.
We also believe that the institutional consultation
brought about with the entry into force of the Lisbon
Treaty will render the EU an even stronger partner of
the United Nations in those fields. In that regard, as a
member of the Security Council and, at the same time,
as a negotiating country on its way to full membership
of the EU, Turkey particularly welcomes the EU's
increasing contribution to international peace and
security, as well as its keen interest in work in
cooperation with the United Nations.

For its part, Turkey actively participates in EU
peace and security efforts. In that context, let me point
out that so far, through its military, police and civilian
capabilities, Turkey has contributed to EU
peacekeeping efforts in Macedonia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Congo, Palestine and Kosovo. Turkey
enjoys a prominent place in terms of the number of EU
operations participated in and the military and civilian
contribution to each area of EU cooperation. However,
more important, the political dialogue between Turkey
and the EU on issues related to our immediate
neighbourhood and beyond has proven to be an even
more valuable tool of conflict prevention and
mediation, serving the interests of the entire
international community.

In that context, it is my sincere belief that the
continued enlargement of the EU on the basis of
common values and principles will also expand the
space of peace, prosperity and security in an area of
great importance to global stability.

