The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United
Kingdom.

Haiti has seen repeated efforts of the international
community that have attempted and failed to provide
stability in the medium to long terms. The United
Kingdom does not want this pattern to continue. It is in
no one's interest that the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) should leave before the
security that it has established can be sustained by the
Haitian authorities.

The United Kingdom notes that MINUSTAH
finds itself in an increasingly difficult position,
however. On the one hand, Haiti is heavily dependent
on the Mission to provide security. On the basis of
current trends, that will remain the case for some years.
On the other hand, Haitians from all levels of society
are becoming increasingly vocal in their calls for
MINUSTAH to leave. There is a very real risk that, if
political uncertainty in Haiti persists, MINUSTAH will
be dragged into the debate, making its task harder still.
In part, these calls are being exacerbated by
allegations of misconduct by MINUSTAH personnel.
The United Kingdom is concerned by such allegations,
which should be taken extremely seriously. We firmly
support the Secretary-General's zero tolerance policy
on sexual exploitation and abuse, and we urge a
rigorous and transparent approach to these allegations.
This would help MINUSTAH to restore its credibility
with the people of Haiti.

In its efforts following the earthquake in 2010,
MINUSTAH has played a significant role in recovery
and in helping to ensure access to basic services. These
efforts have built support among the local
population - support that has been reinforced by the
quick-impact projects that the Mission has delivered.
But the United Kingdom believes that it is now vital
that the Mission focus on working to ensure that
stability and security can be sustained once
MINUSTAH has departed. To that end, the Mission has
two clear tasks.

First, MINUSTAH must build the capacity of the
Haitian National Police so that it can take full
responsibility for Haiti's security. There needs to be a
clearer matching of Mission personnel to the various
aspects of this task. This is not a task solely for
MINUSTAH, but there needs to be clarity among all
those involved, in the Mission and beyond, as to what
capacity the Haitian National Police needs to build and
what the benchmarks and timetable will be for
achieving it.

Secondly, there needs to be greater effort to
support the political process, including elections,
democratic governance and related State institutions.
Political uncertainty is the most likely trigger of
instability. Again, MINUSTAH cannot be expected to
do this alone, and needs to coordinate its efforts with
those of other actors. All actors need to play their part,
working in a cooperative and constructive manner,
respecting the Constitution and helping to ensure
political stability.

In conclusion, the United Kingdom believes, of
course, that conditions on the ground will determine
when MINUSTAH draws down. However, in order that
security and stability can be sustained when
MINUSTAH does draw down, it needs to begin
planning for that drawdown now. Only by doing that
can the right balance be struck between the Haitian
National Police taking up the security burden and a
measured drawdown of MINUSTAH that does not
jeopardize security gains.
I now resume my functions as president of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.

