Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal would like to thank the Chinese
presidency for organizing today's briefing and to
welcome the presence in the Chamber of Mr. Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud, President of the Federal Republic of
Somalia. I would also like to thank our briefers this
morning, Mr. Michael Keating, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia, and Ambassador
Tete Antonio, Permanent Observer of the African
Union, for their clear presentations, which have given
us a better understanding of the political, security
and humanitarian situation in Somalia, as well as the
challenges it is dealing with, particularly in the current
pre-election period.

In that regard, I would also like to welcome the
agreement concluded by Somali leaders, including
President Mohamud, and the Presidents of the regional
states of Puntland, Southwest, Galmudug and Jubaland,
on the modalities for implementing the 2016 electoral
process, at the Somali Leaders Forum held from 9 to
12 April. The communique announcing the agreement
is a clear expression of the growing consensus among
Somalia's leadership on the country's governance. The
Forum also enabled them to arrive at agreement on the
2016 electoral process at the Federal and state levels
regarding the parliamentary elections. In that regard,
we offer them our encouragement and support for the
success of the process, which should help to normalize
the situation in Somalia.

However, in order to achieve that, Somalia and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) will
need the support of their international partners more
than ever. We therefore encourage the African Union
Mission in Somalia to maintain its strong support to the
country. However, we urge greater Vigilance in ensuring
that the violence around the election mentioned by the
Somalia-Eritrea Monitoring Group in its most recent
report (see S/2015/801) does not spread to the rest of
the country.

On the security front, we remain concerned about
the persistent threat posed by Al-Shabaab to the liberated
territories, which are also areas of intercommunal
tension, as well as by the growing presence of the
Islamic State in the region. Despite those continuing
threats, Senegal welcomed the liberation of the town
of Adan Yabaal, in Middle Shabelle region, after a
major offensive against Al-Shabaab led by AMISOM
and the Somali National Army. We encourage such
joint operations, which will unquestionably enable
people displaced by collateral damage - lack of water
and electricity, vandalized equipment, burned food
stocks, explosive devices planted by Al-Shabaab and
so forth - to return home. The rapid provision of
financing and technical support for the security sector
by the international community will undoubtedly help
to improve strategies for combating armed groups,
including Al-Shabaab.

We firmly condemn all attacks on humanitarian
personnel, the expropriation of aid and the creation
of obstacles to its transportation, regardless of the
perpetrators. In that regard, Senegal would like to
pay tribute to the staff of AMISOM, some of whom
have made the ultimate sacrifice in the fight against
Al-Shabaab. We would also like to salute the Somali
national defence forces for their sacrifices, commitment
and determination to defeat Al-Shabaab and achieve
lasting peace in Somalia.

Somalia's mining resources continue to be the object
of growing interest from international corporations, and
that too has the potential to be a threat to the country's
peace, security and stability. In that regard, we condemn
the continuing violations of the ban on exports of
charcoal from Somalia despite a slight improvement in
the situation in the wake of Al-Shabaab's withdrawal
from the production sites. We reiterate our call for a
coordinated effort among the Federal Government, the
Federal states and the international organizations and
military forces on the ground to establish a thorough
and effective mechanism for combating the illegal trade
in Somali charcoal. In that context, we commend the
efforts of maritime forces to fight illicit trafficking in
natural resources.

I would like to conclude by reiterating Senegal's
support and encouragement to the people and the
Government of Somalia as they look forward to the
elections scheduled for this year.

