Mr. Selim (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
on behalf of my Government, I would like to to express
my condolences to the people and the Government of
the United Kingdom for the heinous terrorist attack that
has cost the lives of innocent people. The expanding
area where such acts occur shows how terrorist
organizations are trying to instil fear and despair in
our societies. It behoves us all to take measures and
resolutions aimed at frustrating such murderous plans.

I would like to warmly thank the United Kingdom
presidency of the Security Council for organizing
today's important meeting, and to express my
appreciation to the Secretary-General, the Chair of the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission for South
Sudan and the representative of civil society for their
informative briefings.

On 9 July 2011, the world witnessed the Republic
of South Sudan's declaration of its independence in
response to the will ofits people. It was a crystallization
ofthe aspirations ofits people and their hopes for a better
future. However, less than three years after the birth of
that State, those hopes suffered a setback. The country
found itselfin a dilemma, beset by armed violence that
arose from acute political divisions, exacerbated by a
devastating economic crisis. Those divisions have led
some parties to the conflict to become focused on and
trapped by their ethnicities and thereby disregard the
aspirations expressed by the people of South Sudan in
July 2011.

For six years - the age of the nascent State of
South Sudan - the causes of the conflict became
more acute, while the international community failed
to fully recognize the extent of the challenges that
South Sudan was facing. It was as if the responsibility
of the international community had ended with the
declaration of independence, without anyone taking
stock of the deep-rooted causes of conflict. The
subsequent developments in South Sudan have shown
that international support for countries that are in
political transition is crucial, both pre- and post-
independence. We fully recognize the dangerous
repercussions of this crisis for peace and stability in
East Africa, and its enormous human and economic
toll. The crisis could spill into the neighbouring States
that are shouldering the majority of the responsibility
for humanitarian assistance if it is not contained in a
just and comprehensive manner.

The most important question is how to deal with the
current situation and avoid the earlier mistakes of the
international community in dealing with South Sudan
since its independence, which means working to put
an end to the suffering caused by displacement, sexual
violence and famine. In that regard, our vision is based
on a comprehensive approach. It includes a number of
principles and measures that should be taken together
in order to deal with the crisis and its root causes:

First, all efforts should be based on the Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan, signed in August 2015, as a comprehensive
reference point for all the efforts to achieve a political
settlement. The agreement includes all the basic
elements necessary to reach a political solution and a
peaceful transition of power.

Secondly, the call for a comprehensive national
dialogue issued by President Salva Kiir is an opportunity
that must be taken advantage of, as it provides an
alternative forum for all parties to renounce violence
and deal with divisions in a political context. We should
therefore seek to enable such a dialogue to succeed
without marginalizing any political or ethnic group.
The responsibility of the international community is
to provide political support for that dialogue. In that
regard, Egypt is ready to use its historic relations with
the region and all of the regional parties to provide
whatever assistance the people of South Sudan need, to
help to facilitate a dialogue and to arrive at results that
can set the country on the road to peace and stability.

Thirdly, all parties have an urgent moral, legal and
human obligation to put an end to all forms of violence,
abide by international law and its related relevant
principles, assume their responsibilities towards
civilians, and help facilitate the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan,
which requires that it be able to reach all affected
areas immediately and without restrictions in order to
implement the Council's mandate. Creating obstacles to
humanitarian efforts will only lead to more suffering,
increase the human costs of the struggle and erode the
regional and international efforts aimed at reaching
a political settlement for the crisis and at ending the
suffering of the civilians.

For its part, Egypt has intensified bilateral talks
with the Government of South Sudan and has received
President Salva Kiir in Cairo wth the goal of supporting
all efforts to achieve a political solution. In the past few
weeks, President Al Sisi has continued to make efforts
to that end, including by visiting Uganda and Kenya
and dealing with the active regional parties in order to
strengthen the efforts to put an end to the conflict and
support stability. We have seen that our brother countries
appreciate the role that we have played in this conflict.
At the same time, we emphasize the importance of the
coordination between the regional and international
efforts being undertaken by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the African Union Peace
and Security Council and the Security Council to revive
the political process as an alternative to violence. We
must understand that no political effort will succeed
unless it includes a set of measures that deal with the
root causes of the problem.

We must enhance the strength and capacity of
State institutions and their organizational structure
and reform them, as well as creating the Commission
for Truth, Reconciliation and Healing, in accordance
with chapter V of the peace agreement. All efforts must
focus on the most important purpose - strengthening
the concept of citizenship and transcending the tribal
affiliations that have been exploited both internally
and externally, in order to increase stability and
address those divisions. It is vital to avoid a collapse
of the country's State institutions and to maintain and
strengthen them in the future. In that regard, sanctions-
based approaches are unwise. They have not been
useful and could worsen the situation. Egypt has seen
the possible consequences of the collapse of States in
its region close-up. We know that such a vacuum can
be filled only by anarchy and armed groups that are
extremely difficult to control.

In conclusion, Egypt reiterates its commitment to
deploying every possible effort to reach a comprehensive
settlement through the current membership of the
Security Council, as well as our membership of the
United Nations as a whole and of the African Union
Peace and Security Council, taking into consideration
the excellent relations that link Egypt with all the
parties to the conflict in South Sudan.

