The twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) is an opportunity to reiterate our political commitment to gender equality. Having recognized that the achievement of a peaceful and inclusive society must be based on the promotion of the political and economic empowerment of women in order to achieve the principles of legality, entrepreneurship and equity, Colombia has been a living example of resolution 1325 (2000). Colombia has been working on the implementation of the gender perspective established in the 2016 Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, specifically through the materialization of the 51 gender indicators of the Government's implementation framework. President Ivan Duque Marquez has been emphatic in highlighting those 51 indicators as the path to implementing that approach in a cross-cutting manner. The participation of women in peacebuilding is a priority for my Government, as it contributes to the transformations proposed by the "Peace with legality" policy with regard to economic autonomy, the generation of dignified workspaces and other conditions in order to end the cycle of violence that violates women's rights. That is particularly true for rural women. Women's participation is fundamental at both the national and territorial levels. At the national level, the Special Body for the Gender Perspective in Peace was set up, with the representation of women's organizations and platforms from different sectors and backgrounds of the social movement in Colombia. At the territorial level, more than 65,000 women participated in the formulation of the development plans with a territorial focus. To combat violence against women, my country is working on cultural and institutional transformation. In the face of gender-based violence, we must change social and institutional tolerance practices in order to ensure the safety of women and prevent the recurrence of violence. That is why it is important to draw up guidelines for establishing protocols for the prevention of sexual harassment and gender-based violence and providing care for its victims. We have been working on that on an inter-institutional basis. Additionally, Colombia has been working on the promotion of legal economic opportunities for women in areas that have traditionally been co-opted by illegal economies, primarily drug trafficking and illegal mining. The impact of violence against women, in terms of sexual violence and forced displacement, is recognized globally, but very little has been said about the economic and property violence suffered by women exposed to the control of illegal armed groups and illegal economies. That is why we insist that ensuring their security can contribute to their empowerment and economic autonomy. I would be remiss if I did not mention the impact of the pandemic in relation to gender-based violence. To that end, the Government has been working on ways to mitigate the impact of the coronavirus disease, including specific guidelines to prevent and deal with that violence. The women and peace and security agenda is a priority for my Government, and we will continue to share our lessons learned and challenges in order to continue to make progress in making this agenda a reality.
