The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Equatorial Guinea.

Our delegation thanks the Secretary-General for
his eighth report (S/2019/103) on the threat posed by
ISIL (Da'esh) to international peace and security and
on the range of United Nations efforts in support of
Member States in countering the threat. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov, Head
of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism,
and Ms. Michele Coninsx, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
for their informative briefings.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea categorically
condemns terrorism. We firmly believe that terrorist
acts are unjustifiable and constitute one of the most
serious threats to global peace and security. We also
believe that they remain one of the most serious
contemporary issues, at the national, regional and
global levels. N0 country has been spared the threat or
can face it alone.

As Mr. Voronkov and Ms. Coninsx pointed out
in their briefings, although there were fewer Da'esh
attacks in 2018, that organization remains the most
dangerous terrorist group and the one that receives the
most funding. It has a leadership structure that in based
in the Middle East and a covert global network that
includes local cells and foreign terrorist fighters and
their families in Africa, Asia and Europe. Equatorial
Guinea remains deeply concerned about issues
relating to foreign terrorist fighters and their families,
accountability and international criminal justice
cooperation systems and the strengthening of the joint
United Nations response to terrorism.

In that regard, we acknowledge and highlight the
sharing and implementation of responses adapted to
changing threats, such as the addendum to the Madrid
Guiding Principles, adopted in December last year
by the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism. As we did
during the negotiations, we encourage States to invest
in training and technical assistance so that countries in
need, especially developing countries, can implement
the 17 guiding principles, in particular those related to
border control and data-collection and maintenance.
We also welcome the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Coordination Compact, the reform of its
architecture and the work of the first United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/ISIL. Equatorial Guinea
believes that it is necessary to recognize and assist the
victims of terrorism and prosecute and convict all those
responsible for sexual-based violence, kidnapping and
trafficking so as to prevent impunity.

As stated by the Security Council in many of its
resolutions, and last week at the Arria Formula meeting
organized by France, the fight against the financing of
terrorism is one of the most strategic tools for putting
an end to terrorist acts. Since Da'esh is the terrorist
group that receives the most funding, it is extremely
important to strengthen cooperation among States and
other actors, such as the private sector and civil society,
in the fight against terrorism financing. In that regard,
Equatorial Guinea reiterates its full commitment to
continuing the fight against terrorism in all its aspects,
including funding. The growing nexus between Da'esh
and transnational organized crime has the potential not
only to increase its capacity to generate terrorism but
also to increase its global impact. We believe the nexus
must be further studied in order to eliminate it.

Da'esh is present in Africa mainly in the north, the
Sahel, West Africa and East Africa, where the presence
of foreign terrorist fighters and collaboration with other
terrorist groups and organized crime have also been
reported. We believe that it is necessary to identify and
neutralize the growing terrorist cells in the region and
the presence of lone-wolf actors, who pose a significant
threat to international peace and security and, at the
same time, are increasingly diverse and difficult to
predict. To that end, it is also essential that efforts to
prevent terrorist attacks and avoid radicalization and
violent extremism be accompanied by investment in
sustainable development, as such investment helps to
empower countries over the long term and prepare them
for combating cyberterrorism.

There is no doubt that many States face serious
difficulties in dealing with terrorist threats, owing
to a lack of resources and capacity. We reiterate the
need to ensure technical assistance for the effective
implementation of Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions on the issue.

We also encourage the United Nations and the
international community to support the efforts of States
in order to prevent them from becoming safe havens for
foreign terrorist fighters and criminal groups. A better
collective response in Africa requires the strengthening
of the necessary international, regional and subregional
cooperation for effectively exchanging information and
best practices. Equatorial Guinea has ratified several
international counter-terrorism conventions and
complies with the regulations of the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community and the Economic
Community of Central African States in that area. We
pledge to continue to do so.

In conclusion, we congratulate and encourage
the excellent efforts of the United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Office, the 1373 Counter-Terrorism
Committee and its Executive Directorate, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, and its Sanctions
Monitoring Team. We encourage the United Nations to
work with, and in support of, countries for a world free
of Da'esh and terrorism.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at 12.05 pm.
