Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement
just made on behalf of the European Union.

I would like to comment briefly on three points:
the peace process, elections and the role of Afghan
youth. However, first of all, allow me to thank Special
Representative Yamamoto, not only for his briefing,
but also for his tireless efforts to bring about peace
in Afghanistan.

I would also like to express our deepest condolences
to the Afghan people and their Government following
the recent terrorist attacks. In particular, I condemn the
recent wave of horrific attacks on schools and children.
Impunity for the perpetrators of such crimes is out of
the question.

First of all, with regard to the peace process, the
Kabul process, supported by the Tashkent conference,
must form the basis for a comprehensive and inclusive
Afghan-led and Afghan-controlled peace process. It
is essential that the international community and the
countries of the region provide coordinated support
to the Government's efforts. In that regard, we also
welcome the recent progress made on the Afghanistan-
Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity, as well
as the support expressed by Prime Minister Khan of
Pakistan following his recent election.

Despite the recent and courageous peace initiatives
taken by President Ghani and his National Unity
Government, violence continues unabated. There have
never been so many civilian casualties since 2009.
We deplore the fact that the Taliban leaders have not
responded positively to the Government's overtures.
We call on them to participate in peace negotiations. In
addition, we are also deeply concerned about the lack of
humanitarian access.

With regard to the elections, Belgium commends
the Government on its substantial efforts to organize
free, credible and inclusive elections to be held on
20 October. We commend the people of Afghanistan
for having the courage to register for the elections
despite the major security challenges. We welcome
the considerable efforts of the electoral authorities
to ensure the transparency of the process and call
for close and constructive cooperation among the
Government, opposition parties and the Independent
Election Commission. Political leaders are responsible
for helping to build trust in the process. Belgium calls
on the Taliban not to sabotage the electoral process
through violence or other forms of intimidation. With
regard to inclusiveness, we note that women account
for approximately 15 per cent of the candidates for
the lower house of Parliament and 34 per cent of the
9.5 million registered voters. We welcome the approval
of the Independent Election Commission's gender
policy and hope that it will lead to greater number of
women participating in the process.

Insecurity, poverty and unemployment continue to
have a serious impact on Afghan youth. Drought has
affected livelihoods and led to additional population
displacements. The impatience of the Afghan people,
in particular their youth, for lasting peace is becoming
increasingly clear. Recent civil society initiatives
demonstrate the willingness and constructive spirit of
young Afghans, who are increasingly calling for lasting
peace and are ready to assume their responsibility
during the elections. I again deplore the recent attacks
on schools, which infringe upon the fundamental right
of young people to education and demonstrate the
importance of the swift and full implementation of
the Safe Schools Declaration. Belgium welcomes the
criminalization of child-related offences in the new
penal code. The measure is essential for protecting the
most vulnerable members of society. Belgium calls
on the Afghan Government to implement the new
legislation. We are also very concerned about the use
of child soldiers and reports of the sexual abuse ofboys
and of violence against women.

In conclusion, we attach great importance to peace
in Afghanistan, its economic prosperity and relations
with its neighbours and the rest of the world. Like our
European partners, we will follow developments with
interest and attention in the coming months.

