Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I should like to
express my thanks to you personally, Sir, for being here
at this late hour. Your presence is most appreciated.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands thanks you for having
convened this open debate and congratulates you on the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2388 (2017). We also
wish to thank today's briefers and Secretary-General
Guterres for his leadership in addressing human
trafficking. We support the statement you delivered
earlier, Sir, in the context of our split term with Italy in
the Security Council. I should also like to reiterate and
underscore the words of my counterpart from Kenya in
appreciation of Italy's policies.

We align ourselves with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union.

I should also like to highlight the presence in my
delegation, sitting behind me, of the Acting Prime
Minister of Saint Maarten, Mr. Rafael Boasman,
who is in New York for the Caribbean Conference on
Comprehensive Disaster Management. As the members
of the Council know, Saint Maarten was heavily
damaged by Hurricane Irma.

The recent appalling reports on human trafficking
in Libya further underscore the importance of today's
open debate. We fully support yesterday's statement by
the African Union and welcome the Secretary-General's
call for the situation to be investigated. Stopping human
trafficking in conflict situations, such as those in Libya
and the Sahel, is a shared responsibility that requires a
common effort.

In that context, I should like to focus on
three important aspects: prevention, protection
and prosecution.

First, on prevention, ideally we would eradicate the
root causes of human trafficking and prevent it from
occurring in the first place. The first step towards doing
so is to enhance information position. United Nations
entities operating in conflict and post-conflict situations
play an important role in that regard. We therefore
welcome the Secretary-General's recommendation that
this role be strengthened by including the issue ofhuman
trafficking in country assessments and predeployment
trainings. We must also enhance our understanding of
the relationship between human trafficking and the
financing of terrorism so as to destroy this gruesome
business model. The Netherlands will support the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate in
identifying this relationship and gather good practices
to address it.

Secondly, on protection, trafficking in human beings
is an act that constitutes a gross violation of human
rights. It is therefore crucial for the United Nations
and its Member States to prioritize the protection of
victims. The Kingdom of the Netherlands does its share
by supporting migrant-rescue operations in the Sahel
and the reintegration of victims of human trafficking.

Thirdly, on prosecution, the perpetrators of human
trafficking thrive in a climate of impunity. They must
be arrested, detained and prosecuted. And if, for
whatever reason, we are not able to do so immediately,
we should look for other ways to sanction their behavior
in the meantime.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands commends the
Secretary-Generalforreferringinhisreport (S/2017/939)
to the European Multidisciplinary Platform against
Crime Threats on trafficking in human beings. This
partnership, coordinated by the United Kingdom and the
Netherlands, brings together European Union member
States, INTERPOL and others to share knowledge and
jointly investigate human trafficking cases.

In conclusion, partnerships are at the heart of our
shared responsibility and shared efforts to stop human
trafficking. We welcome the steps taken by the United
Nations to enhance coordination. We encourage all
Member States to ratify and implement the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children.
We also encourage the Security Council to address
irregular migration, including human trafficking, in a
more structured way in mission mandates and reporting.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands stands ready to
take up its responsibility on these issues during our
term on the Security Council next year in the context of
our split term with Italy.

