The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Somalia in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration Without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jengeli
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Ali
Ahmed Jama Jengeli, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Ahmedou OuId Abdallah, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Ould Abdallah to take a seat at the
Council table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the Permanent Representative of
South Africa requesting that the Security Council
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to His Excellency Mr. Ramtame
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union.

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Lamamra to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia, document S/2008/466.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia. I
now give him the floor.


