Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First, Mr. President, I wish to thank your
delegation for having convened this discussion on the
important question of protecting civilians in armed
conflicts. We also wish to express our appreciation to
Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his briefing to the Council on the
situation regarding the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

We recall that this important issue has held a
prominent place on the agenda of this Council in recent
years in a process that has included the adoption of two
substantive resolutions - 1265 (1999) and 1296
(2000) - both adopted during Argentina's term as a
non-permanent member of the Council, along with
successive presidential statements. We should also
keep in mind the valuable contribution of the annual
reports of the Secretary-General and of oral briefings
of the Council such as that we have heard from
Mr. Egeland.

Notwithstanding the measures that have been
taken, including the road map, the aide-memoire and
the ten-point plan, there is a manifest lack of progress
in the field. The persistence of the problem should
prompt thorough reflection on the part of the
international community.

We have already indicated to the Council that no
consideration of national security can take precedence
over the primary obligation of all States to comply with
the norms of international humanitarian law contained
in the Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols. The international community cannot and
must not remain indifferent to the atrocities inflicted on
civilians.

In circumstances in which the judicial system
fails, the international community has an important
role to play, including through the International
Criminal Court, to ensure that the perpetrators of those
crimes are brought to justice. The attacks on civilian
populations or on other protected persons and
systematic, blatant and widespread violations of
international humanitarian law and of international
human rights law in situations of armed conflict are a
threat to international peace and security and require
proper consideration and response from the
international community.

In the past, the Security Council has stated its
readiness to consider the various situations and
conflicts with a view to adopting, whenever necessary,
appropriate measures to help establish a secure
environment for civilians threatened by conflict. In the
current context of violence directed against civilians, it
is essential to improve physical protection for refugees
and internally displaced persons, as well as for women,
children and vulnerable groups in areas of danger. As
part of those endeavours, the peacekeeping operations
set up by this Council should set, as a key objective,
the establishment of a safe environment for vulnerable
populations in situations of armed conflict.

That and other measures should be studied
thoroughly and expeditiously by the Council. We
cannot and must not remain unresponsive to those
situations that are an assault on human dignity. For this
reason we believe it is essential that the Secretary-
General provide recommendations to us on this issue in
his report at the end of this year with a view to the
adoption of a further resolution on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, which will help prevent the
continuation of such violations of human rights and
humanitarian law.

The Argentine delegations reaffirms its
commitment to continue to work to establish efficient
and specific measures and mechanisms to tackle the
challenge of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, both through this Council and in the context
of the discussion in the General Assembly on the
Secretary-General's proposals to the Assembly
contained in his report "In larger freedom"
(A/59/2005).

