Mr. De Vega (Philippines) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, allow me, on behalf of my country, to thank you,
Sir, and to assure you that the Philippines, a developing
country and the only Asian country with Spanish roots,
welcomes Guatemala's presidency of the Security
Council, a primary body of our United Nations.

(spoke in English)

The Philippines expresses its appreciation and full
support for the efforts to bring attention and much-
needed focus to an issue of vital importance. The rule
of law at national and international levels is the bedrock
upon which nations build stable and flourishing
societies and foster strong relations. It emphasizes the
protection of rights and underscores compliance with
obligations. And it exacts responsible behaviour from
both individuals and States.

The rule of law is essential as an instrument and
object of policy as we seek to rebuild and strengthen
societies in, or emerging from, conflict; as we strive
to maintain international peace and security; as we
pursue greater progress and prosperity; and as we
toil to achieve justice. But even as we recognize the
importance of the rule of law in post-conflict, transition
and post-transition situations, we appreciate full well
that it should rightly be considered first and foremost
as an effective tool in preventing conflict and impunity.

For the Philippines, the rule of law is a cornerstone
of the President Benigno Aquino's programme of good
governance. The strict implementation of the rule
of law demonstrates our Government's commitment
to carrying out its responsibilities and obligations in
a democratic environment. Adherence to the rule of
law has contributed to the further strengthening of
our democratic institutions and processes, and it has
translated into significant inroads in economic growth.
It has allowed us to act responsibly as a member of the
community of nations.

Our country's adherence to the rule of law includes
our commitment to settling differences and conflicts not
by resorting to arms, but through positive engagement
and negotiations. That was demonstrated by the historic
signing on 15 October of the Framework Agreement
between the Government of the Philippines and the
Moro Islamic Liberation Front in southern Mindanao.
The framework agreement was signed before President
Aquino and Prime Minister Razak of Malaysia, and
witnessed by the Secretary General of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, Mr. Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu.
The Framework Agreement serves as a road map and
lays down the groundwork to achieve just, lasting and
genuine peace in Mindanao. In the words of President
Aquino:

"In full view of the Filipino people, and
witnessed even by our friends from different parts
ofthe world, we commit to peace: A peace that will
be sustained through democratic ideals; a peace
that heals and empowers; a peace that recognizes
the many narratives of the Filipino people, and
weaves them into a single, national aspiration for
equitable progress."

While that is a clear victory for peace andjustice in
our corner of the world, as an international community
we continue to be seized with situations that require
greater cooperation, coordination and concerted action.
That is particularly the case in combatting impunity for

the crimes of the greatest concern to the international
community: genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity and crimes of aggression.
Ten years after the entry into force of the Rome
Statue, the International Criminal Court (ICC) has
taken its place as a fully functional, independent
judicial institution in the continuing campaign against
impunity for grave crimes. We take note of the statement
made this morning by the President of the International
Criminal Court, Mr. Sang-Hyun Song, apprising us of
the developments, inroads and challenges facing the
Court.

Last year, six States, including the Philippines,
ratified the Rome Statute, more than at any time
since 2002. We welcome the ratification this year by
Guatemala, which brings the number of States parties
to 121. We must continue to work hard to achieve the
universality of the Rome Statute.

The Philippines notes the need to consider
developing a systematic approach towards the Security
Council's relationship with the International Criminal
Court, especially in relation to the situations that
the Council has referred under article 13 (b). That
necessitates a better understanding of how article 13
(b) and the 16 prerogatives given to the Council under
the Rome Statute are best utilized in country-specific
situations on the Council's agenda.

In consideration of that approach, it must be
emphasized again that attention must be given to
exploring ways in which the ICC can assist the
Council as a preventive tool for upholding the rule
of law, ensuring accountability and achieveing peace
and security. In regard to future improvements in the
Council's relationship with the ICC, the pertinent
resolutions of the Security Council must preserve the
integrity of the Rome Statute.

