Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Let me begin by thanking Mr. Ian Martin for his
valuable briefing on the situation in Nepal. I wish also
to welcome the presence at today's meeting of the
Permanent Representative of Nepal.

We note that, following the election of the
Constituent Assembly of Nepal on 10 April, the peace
process seems to be following its normal course. While
we can observe some disruption, that is only to be
expected, because Nepal is going through a period of
political change. We have taken note of the first
meeting of the Assembly, which took place on 28 May,
which adopted important measures, including in
particular the proclamation of a federal democratic
republic in Nepal.

As part of the progress made, we welcome the
25 June signing by the political parties of the important
Agreement to amend the Constitution and take the
peace process forward. We believe that the
commitment undertaken by the parties to the
Agreement to establish five commissions to address
national peace and rehabilitation, State restructuring,
an investigation into disappeared persons, land reform
and the establishment of a truth and reconciliation
commission represents an important step forward. In
the context of Nepal, it is above all crucial to have a
participatory and inclusive process that includes all
social and political actors. Obviously, that includes the
Maoist faction.

There are many encouraging signs reflecting the
determination of the political class to choose dialogue,
which is the only alternative for a real settlement in
Nepal. We hope that the determination to find common
ground will soon lead to the establishment of a
consensus Government - as provided for by the
Interim Constitution - whose priorities will include
tackling the country's numerous development and
reconstruction challenges. That requires that stability
be ensured. We must therefore remain very vigilant
about the issue of security, as there have been some
violations of human rights, a surge in crime and the
emergence of new armed groups. Those are indications
that, despite the progress made, the situation remains

fragile. In any case, steps must be taken to strengthen
policing activities and transitional justice mechanisms.

Likewise, the lengthy period of political
instability in large part explains the country's economic
fragility, which is compounded by the economic crisis.
Efforts to strengthen peace in Nepal must also include
the adoption of an appropriate economic recovery
programme based on poverty reduction. Moreover, the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
for Nepal 2008-2010, which is now in effect, should be
strengthened and supported by the international
community. To that end, we welcome the steps taken to
develop a peacebuilding support strategy. It is above
all critical that we address the problem of
unemployment, reintegrate young people and
rehabilitate basic services.

Given the useful work it is doing in the service of
the Nepalese people, we welcome the efforts and
commitment of the United Nations Mission in Nepal.
Although there are still challenges for the Mission to
overcome - including monitoring the management of
weapons and forces, administering the cantonments
and demining activities - Nepalese officials have
indicated that they would like the Mission's mandate
extended. We support that request. We also favour
continued discussions between the Secretary-General
and Nepalese officials to determine a new
configuration for the Mission.

