Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by reiterating the United Kingdom's long-standing
commitment to a two-State solution. We envision an
Israeli State and a Palestinian State living peacefully
and in security and prosperity, side by side, within
secure and recognized borders and with Jerusalem
as a shared capital. We call on the parties to take
urgent steps to reverse the current negative trends on
the ground, refrain from unilateral actions and start
renewed and meaningful peace negotiations. We are
ready to contribute to all credible efforts to restart the
peace process.
Inflammatory rhetoric threatens the mutual
trust that is required to break the current deadlock.
Statements that demonize or denigrate the Jewish people
are wholly unacceptable. There is no place for denying
either the Jewish or Palestinian connection to the land.
It is important that the Palestinian leadership continue
efforts to implement fully the recommendations of
the Quartet report (S/2016/595, annex) as regards
incitement. Both parties must remain committed to
previous diplomatic agreements, which should form the
basis of renewed peace negotiations.

We recognize that the Palestinian Central Council
recommendation to de-recognize Israel was non-binding,
but it is nevertheless wholly unconstructive. We call on
the Palestinian leadership not to implement it. Rather,
we welcome the Palestinian Authority's continued
recognition of the State of Israel and its support for a
two-State solution. As always, we urge all parties to
promote non-violence and to engage constructively
towards a two-State solution as the only basis for a
sustainable settlement to the conflict.

To that end, we believe that continued settlement
activity and demolitions further undermine the
prospects for peace and must be halted, including in
East Jerusalem. The pace of settlement construction has
regrettably accelerated, notably with the advancement
ofplans for more than 10,000 settlement units, including
the approval of the first new housing units in Hebron in
15 years. The signs from early 2018 are not encouraging.
Only two weeks ago, Israel announced the advancement
of a further 1,122 housing units across the West Bank.
We call on Israel to immediately reverse its policy
of settlement expansion in the occupied Palestinian
territories. It undermines both the physical viability of
the two-State solution and Israel's commitment to it.

We must also continue to support humanitarian
efforts to meet the basic needs of the Palestinian
people, especially in Gaza, which includes support for
the full return of the Palestinian Authority to Gaza. We
encourage further progress on reconciliation, including
with regard to security arrangements and civil service
integration, in line with the Quartet principles. We
welcome the recent increase in electricity supplies to
Gaza as the first of many positive steps required to
improve the dire situation.

The United Kingdom remains a fully committed
supporter of the UnitedNations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), and
we recognize its unique and important mandate from
the General Assembly to provide vital services to the
Palestinian refugee population, both in the occupied
territories and in Jordan, Syria and Lebanon. Although
we agree that there is an urgent need for UNRWA to
become more efficient and cost-effective by stepping up
the pace of reform, UNRWA must continue to be able
to carry out its important functions. Any unexpected
reductions or delays in predicted donor disbursements
can have damaging impacts and undermine stability in
the region.

Finally, terrorism and incitement pose grave
threats to the prospect of the two-State solution and
must cease. To have the best chances of success, the
peace process must be conducted in an atmosphere free
from violence. We note with regret the deaths on both
sides in recent days. We were appalled by the terrorist
murder of Rabbi Raziel Shevach, in the West Bank on
9 January, and utterly condemn that shameful act. Our
thoughts are with his family.

Every Israeli and Palestinian has the right to live in
peace and security. We share the desire of the United
States and that of others in the Security Council to
end the conflict. We continue to support the efforts
of the United States Administration to put forward
detailed proposals for an Israeli-Palestinian settlement.
The United Kingdom stands ready to help implement
a viable deal, including by supporting its security
provisions, contributing to refugee compensation and
enabling flows of trade and investment among the
United Kingdom, Israel, a sovereign Palestinian State
and its Arab neighbours, which could help transform
the region.

To realize that vision, it is time for urgency from
all of us. All parties and the international community
must work together, in the spirit of compromise and
understanding, to make lasting peace a reality. As the
late Israeli President Shimon Peres stated, he who has
despaired from peace is the one dreaming; whoever
gives in and stops seeking peace is naive.

