Mr. Moustapha (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to convey to you, Mr. President, the
sincere apologies of your brother and friend Mr. Idriss
Deby Itno, President of the Republic of Chad, who
would have liked to participate in this debate had the
constraints of his schedule permitted. He has asked
that you, Sir, accept his expression of gratitude for
having convened this important debate on the impact
of mercenarism in Central Africa - a topic that is
highly relevant to the growing security challenges that
surround the subregion and many others.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
whose presence at this high-level debate is evidence
of his commitment to peace and security in Africa.
As well, I commend the relevant and very illustrative
interventions made by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of Rwanda, C6te d'Ivoire and Gabon.

Mercenarism has always been a factor of insecurity
and destabilization throughout the ages. As the preamble
to the Convention for the Elimination of Mercenarism
in Africa aptly points out, this phenomenon poses a
serious threat to the independence, sovereignty, security,
territorial integrity and harmonious development
of States. It is therefore right that the international
community tackle it energetically by putting in place
appropriate legal instruments.

Nevertheless, the evolution of international
security paradigms - with the emergence of non-State
actors, including terrorist groups and traffickers of
all kinds - and the increasing and harmful impact
of their actions on the international scene makes the
fight against insecurity factors, such as the use of
mercenaries, more complex. Similarly, the weakening
or even collapse of States in certain parts of the world
and the prospect of non-State groups controlling
entire portions of national territory have significantly
increased the threat, given the access of those groups
to huge financial and natural resources and, above
all, their control of large quantities of weapons and
ammunition, which they undertake to circulate. That
prospect is of concern to the international community
and requires it to be much more vigilant.

There is therefore an urgent need to implement
the existing legal instruments and tailor them to the
evolving threat. In that spirit, Chad has developed a
legal arsenal to prevent and punish all mercenary acts.
Our new criminal code, adopted in 2017, criminalizes
and cracks down on that phenomenon. It provides for
a prison sentence of 20 to 30 years for any person who
engages in such criminal activity. Legal persons can
also be declared fully responsible for mercenary acts,
and therefore heavily punished. The ratification of
the Organization of African Unity Convention for the
Elimination of Mercenarism in Africa is also part of
that process.

The Government of Chad has always strived to
combat insecurity in all its forms, in collaboration with
its bilateral, subregional, regional and international
partners. At the bilateral level, Chad regularly
organizes, together with neighbouring and friendly
countries, joint general or sectoral commissions that
provide an appropriate forum for discussing issues of
common interest and concern, including those related
to security, with a view to providing the required
solutions. Together with the Sudan, Chad has set up a
joint border force that has achieved exemplary results
in the border security field. In the Lake Chad basin,
the Multinational Joint Task Force, while effectively
reducing the operations of the Boko Haram sect, is also
involved in the systematic dismantling of its networks
for arms and ammunition supply and people recruitment.

Furthermore, subregional organizations serve as a
platform for discussion and information exchange on
the issue of security. For example, the forty-seventh
meeting of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa,
held in N'Djamena from 3 and 7 December 2018,
allowed for a review of the political and security
issues in the Central African subregion. The issue
of mercenarism was included on the agenda. Among
its conclusions, while stressing the complexity of the
mercenary situation, the meeting called on

"the African Union, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the United Nations
to increase their cooperation with a view to
strengthening their commitments to combating
mercenarism, including through the implementation
of existing legal instruments".

In addition, Chad, the Sudan, the Niger and Libya
signed a memorandum of understanding in N'Djamena
on 31 May 2018, aimed at strengthening cooperation
on security and border surveillance among the four
countries in response to the security challenges
arising from the situation in southern Libya, which is
characterized by the proliferation of terrorist groups,
traffickers of all kinds and armed groups engaged
in mercenarism. That constitutes a serious threat of
destabilization for neighbouring countries as well as
for international peace and security more broadly. Chad
has repeatedly emphasized that the volatile situation
in southern Libya offers conditions that allow for the
establishment of armed groups, including mercenaries
being paid for their services in various conflicts.

Despite making immense efforts to consolidate
peace and security for its people and contribute to
peace and security in the subregion, my country, Chad,
remains threatened by this scourge, as demonstrated
by the criminal acts directed against our territory
and citizens. We therefore call on the international
community to give special attention to fragile regions
and countries, particularly in the Sahel and Central
Africa. Chad also remains convinced that resolving
the crisis in Libya and the return of State authority
throughout the territory of that sisterly country will
contribute to reducing the threat throughout the Sahel.

In conclusion, Chad reiterates its commitment to
continuing to work to strengthen cooperation with
neighbouring States, the countries of the subregion and
the international community as a whole, with a View to
combating mercenarism and other threats to peace and
security in the region and the rest of the world.

