Mr. Amin (Bangladesh): It is a distinct honour to
have the Prime Minister of Somalia with us today. We
welcome his statement and recognize his Government's
pragmatic approach and commitment to the peace
process. We are also grateful to Representative of the
Secretary-General, David Stephen, for his presentation
of the Secretary-General's report and for his extremely
valuable insights into the situation in Somalia.

I would like to add my delegation's voice on two
basic principles or policies. First, I reaffirm our support
for the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of
Somalia; secondly, I wish to assert that, as several
members have underlined, the Arta peace process
remains the only viable option, and that all Somali
factions and parties should support the peace process.

Afghanistan has been mentioned in the context of
our consideration of the situation in Somalia. The
Security Council should weigh the risk of delay, or
procrastination, in ensuring an effective engagement in
Somalia. Much has been said about peace-building
needs. We would also link those needs with preventive
measures required by the Somali situation. We would
remind ourselves of the commitments made under
resolution 1366 (2001). Clearly, we should take a
lesson from history and not repeat the experience with
Afghanistan.

I will go a step further and say that a substantive
engagement of the United Nations in Somalia would
be consistent with the recent recommendation of the
Secretary-General in favour of the phase III
deployment of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), starting with Kindu as a forward base,
which would also involve high risks and high costs.

We have taken note of the conclusions of the last
two security assessment missions. They spoke of
marginal improvement, but improvements have been
made. We have also taken note of the Secretary-
General's recommendation not to open a United
Nations peace-building office in Somalia at this time.
The United States put stress on the timing. The only
point we would make in that regard is that at this time
we should not project too far into the future.

The proposed Committee of Friends of Somalia
could be a critically important instrument. In that
regard, we hold the view that the opinions of the
Transitional National Government (TNG) of Somalia
should be taken into account in setting up the
Committee and in defining its policies and objectives.
It will also be extremely important to have some kind
of mechanism or arrangement for a sustained
relationship with the Security Council. The Council
should be in the know about the activities of the
Committee once it is established.

As in any other conflict situation, possibly the
regional countries are very important. We share the
View that they can play a more helpful role.

We would also flag the continued menace posed
by the flow of small arms into the country. Ways and
means should be found to halt arms supplies to the
warlords.

As the Representative of the Secretary-General
informed us, Somalia has undergone a very
fundamental change. The warlords have lost ground
vis-a-vis the people. Now is the time for the United
Nations to step up its support for the peace process.

It is deeply disturbing to note, as the
Secretary-General observed in paragraph 48 of his
report - this was also flagged by Jamaica - that
programmes linked to the TNG have received virtually
no assistance from international donors, including
United Nations agencies. May I, through you, Mr.
President, ask for further information in this regard
from the Representative of the Secretary-General. We
would also be interested to know the reasons for the
meagre response to the appeal for $130 million in
assistance - only about 20 per cent of that amount has
been provided. Is that because of security, fiscal,
administrative or other considerations on the part of the
donors? How can the Council help the situation? The
engagement of the United Nations in the economic
recovery of Somalia at this stage is critical, and we
should explore ways and means of supporting it.

