Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank the Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Ms. Bintou
Keita, for updating us on the situation in South Sudan.

We are deeply concerned by certain information
that we have seen in recent weeks. From October to
December, 4.8 million people - around 45 per cent of
the population of South Sudan - have been reported
as severely food insecure. That represents 1.4 million
more people than during the same period last year. The
number of South Sudanese forced to flee their country
could approach the 3 million mark - one in every four
citizens of the country - by the end of 2018, unless
security improves. That represents almost 1 million
more people than the current number. Additionally,
the number of internally displaced persons remains
at 1.86 million, while 210,000 reside in protection-of-
civilian sites. The people of South Sudan deserve
better. They deserve peace.

I thank Ambassador Nikki Haley for adding real
and vivid images just now to those statistics in her
recounting of recent experiences in that country.
Innocent people, many of them women and children,
are suffering. The primary responsibility for protecting
civilians lies with the Government. The Government
must take further concrete action to alleviate their
suffering, including food insecurity and displacement.

Regrettably, the Secretary-General has continued
to report persistent violations of the status-of-
forces agreement. On 9 November, President
Salva Kiir ordered that humanitarian convoys and
non-governmental organizations should be granted
free, unimpeded and unhindered movement in South
Sudan. His entire Government has the responsibility
for fully implementing that order. The Council stands
with the people of South Sudan and will continue to
urge the Government, as well as the opposition, to allow
humanitarian access. A genuinely inclusive political
process, including the national dialogue, is the only way
to achieve a political solution. Parties must understand
that true peace will never come from fighting.

In that regard, Japan strongly supports the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
revitalization forum process. We are encouraged that
IGAD Ministers have approached the broad range of
parties of South Sudan and obtained their commitment
to, and cooperation with, that initiative, including a
commitment to the cessation of hostilities. The regional
forum will take place in the coming weeks. We urge all
the parties in South Sudan to fully engage and seriously
cooperate with IGAD in good faith. All parties involved
in that process must come to the table with a genuine
desire for peace, and leave behind political games.

At the same time, IGAD should continue to display
unified efforts and strong determination during the
preparation of options and recommendations for that
process. We look forward to concrete results, as a
result of those efforts, with a revised time frame on
the revitalization and implementation of the 2015
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan, including elections,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform.

Japan shares the view of the African Union
Peace and Security Council, in their communique of
20 September, that this process represents a unique
window of opportunity, but also a last chance for the
parties to really achieve peace and stability. The Council
should remain vigilant in ensuring that all parties are
actively engaged in an inclusive political process, such
as the IGAD Forum, aimed at achieving lasting peace
in South Sudan. Japan will spare no effort to find the
best way forward to support the people of South Sudan
in their search for lasting peace and security.

