Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Today
we are witnessing a complex political and economic
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I would like to
express my sincere hope that this Security Council
debate will facilitate a better understanding of the
current state of affairs. Allow me to briefly present my
View on the current situation along with possible future
developments.

There are diverging opinions and analyses among
the political actors, citizens and civil society regarding
current developments in the country. Although we are
witnessing a certain stalemate in the political process,
we believe that additional efforts will be made to
urgently find a way out of the current impasse. That is
a much needed step that would certainly be beneficial
to all of our citizens. That is something that everyone
in Bosnia and Herzegovina expects from their political
leaders and elected officials.

Bosnia and Herzegovina represents a positive
example of the peacebuilding efforts of both the
international community and national institutions.
A stable peace has been established; the country has
been functioning on a constitutional basis; and most
refugees and displaced persons have recuperated their
property, and many have returned to their homes.
Seven general parliamentary elections have been held,
the last several of which were completely organized by
local authorities. The defence sector and armed forces
reforms have been successfully implemented.

Moreover, we are well aware of the fact that the basic
prerequisites for building a functional State and society
include national reconciliation, the building of trust and
putting an end to impunity for all crimes committed.
That cannot be achieved without prosecuting all war
criminals, regardless of their ethnicity. Even though
the initial arrests of indicted war criminals were made
by the international military forces, most of the others
have been arrested and extradited to the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), in The
Hague, by local authorities. In addition to positive
cooperation with the ICTY, increasing numbers of war
crimes trials are now under way in the national courts.

We have to underline that the overall security
situation in the country has been calm and stable for
years. As a result of the apparent progress, NATO and
the European Union have both reduced the number
of their troops on the ground. Having been the host
country for peacekeeping operations in the past, Bosnia
and Herzegovina has now become a troop contributor
to United Nations peacekeeping and the NATO
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan.

1 can confirm Bosnia and Herzegovina is genuinely
committed to the European path, which remains an
issue of the highest priority in our foreign policy.
Our political leaders are pursuing dialogue with the
aim of finding solutions to all open questions so that
the Stabilization and Association Agreement can
come into force, which would in effect enable Bosnia
and Herzegovina to submit a credible application for
membership of the European Union. This process is
not only a major political objective, but the best way to
create a legislative and institutional environment that
will meet the standards for a better life for our citizens,
establish favourable conditions for the development of
our companies, and attract foreign direct investment.
Another foreign policy objective of high importance
for Bosnia and Herzegovina is to work closely and
develop intensive and good bilateral relations with all
countries of the region, especially the neighbouring
countries of Croatia, Serbia and Montenegro. This
commitment has been evident in the recent intensive
political dialogue, conducted through bilateral
meetings, with Croatia, Serbia and Montenegro at the
most senior levels. A good example of such dialogue
is today's meeting in Ankara. Effective cooperation
among neighbouring countries is especially important
on the issues of cross-border cooperation, combating
organized crime, illegal trafficking and smuggling, and
so on.

I believe that all our efforts will be reflected in
the further enhancement of relations and the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the entire region. It
is high time for all of us to turn to our joint future
of European integration, political and economic
prosperity, stability, mutual respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of our countries, and close,
friendly cooperation among all our peoples.

