Mr. Scappini Ricciardi (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the Republic of Paraguay
expresses its profound consternation over the recent
attacks to United Nations peacekeeping missions in
South Sudan, Mali, Togo and the Central African
Republic, where civilian, police and military personnel
have fallen victim. We also condemn those attacks,
which violate international law and violate human
rights. We express our condolences to the families and
the Governments of those who lost their lives in the
service of United Nations peacekeeping missions.

In an enviornment characterized by new threats
created by emerging asymmetrical and hybrid conflicts
that deepen old insecurities and turn peacekeeping
operations and civilians into targets, addressing
this debate with a practical and strategic approach
is especially relevant. For that reason, my delegation
congratulates Senegal's presidency of the Security
Council for this initiative.

The Republic of Paraguay actively participates in
nine United Nations peacekeeping operations, including
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, South
Sudan, Afghanistan and the Central African Republic.
We are convinced that peacekeeping operations are
a way of making the purposes and principles in the
Charter of the United Nations a reality. My country
is also convinced that peacekeeping operations must
firmly adhere to the principles of the consent of the
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except
in legitimate self-defence and defence of the mandate.
Peacekeeping operations must not fight terrorism * that
is the task of States where terrorist groups are present.
Nevertheless, peacekeeping operations must be
prepared to face up to terrorism and thereby ensure that
they comply with their mandates.

Paraguay is aware of this situation and attaches
the utmost importance to the selection of the personnel
to be deployed in peacekeeping operations, with
consideration of their merits and skills, and provides
them with specific training, including predeployment
training on the protection of civilians. The training
of troops once they are deployed in host countries
must only be complementary to that received in
their countries of origin. Furthermore, capacity is
crucial i understood as the resources necessary to
carry out a mandate. Therefore, via the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, the Secretariat must
ensure that updated deployment manuals and accurate
intelligence are provided, in cooperation with States
and regional organizations, so that peacekeeping
operations can effectively comply with their mandates.
That responsibility is particularly important with regard
to the peacekeeping missions deployed under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations.

Finally, the delegation of Paraguay calls on
the delegations of Member States, on troop- and
police-contributing States, on host States, the Security
Council and the Secretariat to continue working
together to ensure the necessary cooperation and adopt
measures so that the contingents of peacekeeping
operations, especially those deployed, as I mentioned
previously, under Chapter VII of the Charter, receive
the proper training, equipment and timely and
appropriate information for the effective fulfilment of
their mandates.

