Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): The Pakistan delegation
would like, Sir, to congratulate you on the successful
Chinese presidency of the Security Council for this
month and on your having convened this important
meeting. We would also like to congratulate the new
non-permanent members of the Security Council:
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon, Lebanon and
Nigeria. We wish them success.

The Middle East is the sacred birthplace of great
religions of our world. It resonates with the kinder
nature of the relationship of eternal God with mortal
beings. It is wrapped in overarching spirituality and
religious good. Its symbols are blessed decorations in
millions of homes around the globe. Its divinity
demands that it be a land of peace and love, in contrast
to the reality of its being the abode of unending
conflicts and the epitome of human political failure.
That failure has given birth to difficult religious,
philosophical and political questions. It has called into
question the notion of limitless human ingenuity. The
very concept of intrinsic human good has been torn
apart by the brutalities committed in this land. In the
turmoil of the Middle East we mortal beings have been
exposed at our worst, in all our callousness, cruelty and
brutality.

The consequences of our collective failure in the
Middle East are disastrous for the region and beyond.
Adding to pessimism about our humanity is the
continuing gravity of the situation on the ground in
terms of the humanitarian plight of the Palestinian
people. Amidst this human tragedy, the ongoing
provocative and aggressive actions of Israel in East
Jerusalem have compounded the plight of the
Palestinian people and made a political settlement all
the more difficult.

There is recognition of the fact that a just
settlement of the Palestinian question is central to
ending the cycle of suspicion and discord that has
undermined peace and security in the Middle East and
has also strained the relations between neighbours in
the region. The question is how to convert this growing
international consensus into credible action that would
bring to fruition this arduous search for peace. An
immediate end to the illegal practices affecting the
human rights of the Palestinian people is the most
important prerequisite for building an environment of
trust and confidence. Trust and confidence, together
with active engagement of the international
community, represent the only way forward for the
peace process and progress towards a two-State
solution in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

There is no option but to return to the negotiating
table. Efforts to create new facts on the ground that
prejudice the outcome of negotiations are neither
recognized by nor acceptable to the international
community. We should also learn from the half-hearted
attempts, unfulfilled promises and aborted peace
processes of the past. Greater political will is required
to bring the parties together and help them engage in a
sustained negotiation process, in good faith and
without preconditions, aimed at achieving within a
reasonable time frame a comprehensive agreement.

In accordance with its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council has a significant and crucial role in
supporting the efforts for renewed negotiations and
their successful conclusion. I wish to conclude by
reiterating Pakistan's full support for this objective and
our strong commitment to the realization of an
independent, sovereign and viable State of Palestine
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.

