Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to welcome Mr.
Galaydh, Prime Minister of the Transitional National
Government (TNG) of Somalia, for his participation in
the meeting. We thank him for his important
presentation. We attach importance to his views and
proposals, to which we will give serious consideration.
We also thank Mr. Stephen, director of the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia, for his briefing
just now.

Since the establishment of the TNG in Somalia,
in order to promote national reconciliation, improve its
relations with its neighbours and gain the recognition
and support of the international community, it has done
a lot of work that deserves our acknowledgement.

However, the situation in Somalia as a whole is
not stable. The country remains divided by the various
factions. Recently, the political situation that was
relatively stable in "Somaliland" and "Puntland" has
become precarious. At the same time, the efforts by the
relevant parties to promote reconciliation have been
shelved, one after another. The peace process in
Somalia, in fact, has come to a standstill. This situation
is very worrying.

It has to be pointed out that the armed conflict in
Somalia has escalated recently. This is intrinsically
related to the spread of small arms in the area. The
relations among the various parties of Somalia are
already complicated enough. Unless the supply of arms
to Somalia is cut off, it will be difficult to achieve
peace there.

We call upon the parties concerned to base their
actions on the long-term interests of peace and stability
in the region, to strictly abide by the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council on arms sanctions
against Somalia and to work more towards
reconciliation among the various parties in Somalia,
and not against it. The key to the solution to the
question of Somalia lies in the common efforts of the
Somali people as a whole to achieve broad-based
national reconciliation. We sincerely hope that the
parties concerned in Somalia will take to heart the
overall interests of the nation and country, set aside
their past differences and work together in unity to
promote the peace process in Somalia.

At the same time, the international community,
including the Security Council, should give the
necessary impetus to the process of national
reconciliation in Somalia. At present, whether we are
going to establish some kind of mechanism for
reconciliation such as a Committee of Friends of
Somalia, as proposed by the Secretary-General in his
report, or send a peace-building mission to Somalia,
the relevant plans should be put on the agenda right
away so that we can take action as soon as possible. We
hope that the Secretariat will make further efforts and
improve communications with the parties concerned in
Somalia, so as to gain their understanding and support.

We support the African Union, the Arab League,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the European Union, and hope they will continue to
play a positive role.

The current humanitarian situation in Somalia is
very grave, and the support and assistance of the
international community are needed. For security
reasons, some areas have no access to necessary aid. If
this stalemate is not broken, the prolonged suffering of
the Somali people caused by the war will continue. We
appreciate the tireless efforts of the relevant United
Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations and
donors. We call upon the donor community to respond
positively to the consolidated appeals process for
Somalia so as to alleviate the suffering of the Somali
people. The Chinese Government will, within its
capacity, continue to provide humanitarian aid to
Somalia.

