Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Venezuela would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
informative briefing. We also thank Under-Secretary-
General Ladsous for his comments and thank the
Force Commanders of the peacekeeping operations for
briefing us in the Council today.

On behalf of my country, I would like to begin by
recognizing the personal commitments and sacrifice
of the officers, troops and staff of United Nations
peacekeeping missions. On a daily basis, they risk
their lives in carrying out their tasks. We would like to
honour those who have lost their lives in carrying out
their mission.

We would like to focus on an issue suggested by
you, Mr. President, which requires deep discussion
within the United Nations, the issue of the protection of
civilians, concerning which we would like to emphasize
the following points.

First, we reiterate the urgent need to protect civilians
under imminent threat of physical attack, as defined by
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
which is the only body empowered to develop policies
and doctrines regarding peacekeeping operations, in
accordance with international law and respect for the
sovereignty of the States concerned. Peacekeeping
operations must emphasize the prevention of violence,
using their political capital to intercede and negotiate
with the parties in conflict, bearing in mind that the
political settlement of the conflicts must be the primary
objective of their actions.

We favour strengthening the deterrent capability
of peacekeeping operations in the protection of
civilians. In that regard, we support the development
of rapid deployment and standby force capabilities
for the protection of civilians. The military personnel
of peacekeeping operations must be able not only to
mobilize quickly to the host country or countries, they
should also be able to deploy swiftly Within a given
territory. The staff therefore need adequate resources.

We reaffirm the importance of respecting and
maintaining the principles that guide peacekeeping
operations in protecting civilians, such as the consent of
the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except
in situations of legitimate defence and in compliance
with the mandate. Peacekeeping operations must not be
used to impose peace. For Venezuela, the key role of
peacekeeping operations must be to support the host
Government, which has the primary responsibility to
protect civilians. We must also provide our support
to developing the institutional capacity of the State
in order to work towards a sustainable solution to the
conflict.
However effective a mission is in protecting
civilians, it can never substitute for the role of the State.
In that regard, we support the zero-tolerance policy
when it comes to sexual abuse against women and
children, which has taken place in some missions. Such
acts are unacceptable, and those who are responsible
should be brought to justice. Therefore, we also support
the need to increase the presence of women in the
management and composition of mission contingents,
as we have discussed previously in the Council.

Turning to the issue of asymmetric threats,
our country wishes to make the following points.
It is increasingly common to deploy peacekeeping
operations in political and security environments
dominated by fragility and violence, where there is no
peace to keep or no political process to support. That
has resulted in a substantial increase in the number of
kidnappings and killings of United Nations personnel
in targeted attacks. Those are unacceptable. The use
of peacekeeping operations in tasks to impose peace
and to combat terrorism and international organized
crime will only increase the risk of asymmetric threats
and attacks against peacekeepers, including civilian
personnel and partner organizations. Therefore, we
must establish mandates and expectations for the
peacekeeping operations that are achievable, on the
basis of a clear-sighted analysis of the conflict and a
long-term political strategy.

Regarding the establishment of safeguards or
caveats by the troop-contributing countries for the
deployment of their contingents, we would like to note
that, given the immense risk to life and limb to which
personnel in today's peacekeeping operations are
exposed, all troop-contributing countries should have
the right to discuss the objectives and purposes of the
mission they are accepting. In that context, we reaffirm
the importance of troop-contributing countries being
able to actively participate in the Security Council's
decision-making process related to the functioning of
the relevant operations involving their personnel, in
accordance with Article 44 of the Charter of the United
Nations.

In conclusion, we wish to reaffirm that peace and
the sustained well-being of peoples can be achieved
through the political resolution of conflicts and
addressing their root causes. Those should be the
guiding principles of our efforts within the framework
of the Organization.

