We thank Estonia, President of the Security Council, for organizing today's open video-teleconference meeting on the protection of civilians in armed conflicts. We thank the Secretary-General for his annual report on the topic (S/2020/366). Every human endeavour has the potential of resulting in conflict. While it is well understood that protecting civilians is a multidimensional and cross-cutting issue, an attempt to view and interpret every conflict situation as requiring United Nations protection is not just misleading but could have unintended consequences. The presumption that every conflict situation requires a United Nations intervention is not only too ambitious but could encroach upon the sovereignty of national Governments, which have the primary responsibility for protecting civilians. Last year was the twentieth anniversary of the protection of civilians becoming a thematic item on the Security Council's agenda. Despite the Council being seized of the issue, we are conscious that the harrowing effects of conflicts continue to worsen the lives of civilians. However, the remedy should not be worse than the problem. At the outset, it is important for us to have clarity on what the term "armed conflicts" means. In the recent past, we have seen not just Member States, but even United Nations entities themselves, take considerable liberty with what mandate "armed conflicts" entails. Even conflicts that are not armed conflicts are now being brought within the ambit of special representatives and other regimes, which is not only an interference in the sovereign space of countries but should remain the primary responsibility of national Governments. Bringing almost all conflicts within this ambit will essentially ensure that we lose focus on the real problem of the armed conflicts in which civilians must be protected. It is in situations of armed conflict that the implementation of well-established norms, such as respecting international humanitarian law and other relevant human rights law by all parties to armed conflicts and ensuring safe and unhindered access for medical and humanitarian agencies to assist people in need, inter alia, are not matching expectations. The application of the concept of protecting civilians in armed conflicts is directly mandated by the Security Council to United Nations peacekeeping missions. Protection of civilians in the context of United Nations peacekeeping operations has been a complex one for a number of reasons: the varying nature of armed conflicts, the concept's contradiction with some long-standing agreed principles of United Nations peacekeeping, limitations on the mandates and the serious inadequacy of the resources made available for peacekeeping missions. As far as India is concerned, even before the protection of civilians was a part of the peacekeeping mandate, India was in the forefront of protecting civilians. We would recall the example of Captain Gurbachan Singh Salaria, who led an Indian infantry brigade group as part of the United Nations Operation in the Congo, in November 1961. This mission's objectives were to restore the peace and unity of the Congo and to protect the lives of the civilian population in Elizabethville. As a result, the greatest number of Indian casualties in a United Nations operation was lost; indeed, 39 personnel laid down their lives. Again, after all these years, we should not be putting our peacekeepers and those who protect civilians in armed conflicts directly in harm's way simply because the mandates that we give them are fuzzy or insufficiently defined so that those men and women at the forefront are not empowered to take protective operational action. The growing instances of serious attacks on peacekeepers and the high level of casualties suffered by peacekeepers in different missions point to the difficulties in implementing robust mandates in situations involving rival warring groups mixed with civilian populations. The expectation that United Nations peacekeepers can effectively ensure the protection of civilians in the absence of clear and prioritized mandates is not realistic. The protection of civilians is one of several other mandated components that peacekeeping missions are individually expected to fulfil. However, peacekeepers are often expected to do more than what they are mandated to do by the missions, and with limited resources. Without proper equipment and resources and clear accountability at all levels, the ability of peacekeeping operations to protect civilians is unrealistic. The Security Council should undertake a serious examination of mandates every time a peacekeeping operation is renewed. The commitments under Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) provide a foundation to tackle some of the challenges and further strengthen the protective role of peacekeepers. We note that strengthening protection remains one of the key priorities in the recently issued document "A4P in the time of COVID-19" for the period May to October 2020. A collective endeavour is required, including by Member States and the Secretariat, to adapt to changing environments. We also believe that increasing women's participation in peacekeeping improves operational effectiveness and a mission's potential to implement protection of civilian mandates. In that context, we support efforts to reduce barriers to women's participation and promote greater participation through incentivization. Going forward, it would be useful to consider evolving a normative architecture for protection of civilians in armed conflict as part of a broad endeavour. A framework that is politically attuned, but not politicized, and clearly defined and that strengthens capacities of national Governments, enhances community engagement, protects those who need it and abides by the do-no-harm principle with a strong gender lens can be a workable solution.
