Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome once again the presence here of Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, and we appreciate her detailed tenth briefing on
developments in Libya, presented in accordance with
resolution 1970 (2011).

As this is the first time that this issue is being taken
up since Uruguay became a member of the Security
Council, we would like to emphasize, as we have done
at other forums, our country's full support for the role
of the International Criminal Court in strengthening
the rule of law at the international level by trying those
responsible for the most serious Violations of the rights
that belong to all humankind, as set out in article 5 of
the Rome Statute, wherever they are committed. In that
regard, we call upon the States Members of the United
Nations that have not yet joined the Rome Statute to
accede to it in order to contribute to the universalization
of such an important instrument in combating impunity
and protecting all of the inhabitants of our planet against
atrocious crimes that pose a serious threat to peace and
security for all humankind.

There have been significant political developments
in Libya since Ms. Bensouda's previous report to the
Security Council. The Libyan Political Agreement,
concluded in Morocco in December 2015, and the
establishment, in March, of the Government of National
Accord, whose members are today in the capital,
Tripoli, are by all indications positive news in moving
forward with reuniting and reconciling the country,
averting further bloodshed among the population and
putting an end to the institutional crisis and the military
conflict, which have devastated the country for the past
five years, including as well making progress towards
the goal of a genuine democratic transition and the
establishment of lasting peace and stability.
We trust that the new Libyan authorities will meet
their commitment to provide justice to victims for
the crimes committed and that they will cooperate
with the Court's Prosecutor to identify perpetrators,
irrespective of who they may be. In particular, we urge
the new Libyan Government to make Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi available to the Court and to provide
Abdullah Al-Senussi and other individuals with trials
that observe all guarantees of fairness.

We are concerned that the Office of the Prosecutor
is forced to deal with budgetary limits in expanding
its investigations into crimes that are currently taking
place in Libya, in particular those being committed by
such terrorist groups as Da'esh and Ansar Al-Sharia.
We therefore support the Prosecutor's request for the
necessary resources to that end in order that she can
comply with her mandate.

In conclusion, we reiterate our commitment
to the work of the Office of the Prosecutor as it
investigates crimes committed in Libya. That work will
undoubtedly contribute to strengthening the rule of law
and the coalescence of a society in Libya that is more
just and inclusive and where there is full respect for
the rights and protections afforded to all inhabitants,
who for many years have seen their most fundamental
freedoms violated.

