Mr. Gambari: I have the honour to present, on
behalf of the Secretary-General, the interim report on
Angola. As the Council will recall, by its resolution
1433 (2002) of 15 August 2002, the Council requested
the Secretary-General to provide an interim review of
the United Nations Mission in Angola (UNMA), which
was established as a follow-on mission to the United
Nations Office in Angola (UNOA) to perform the tasks
recommended in the Secretary-General's report of 26
July 2002 (S/2002/834), as reflected in paragraph 3 of
resolution 1433 (2002).

The report, which the Council now has before it,
summarizes the key developments in Angola since
August. It highlights UNMA's activities in the political,
military, human rights, child protection, humanitarian
and development fields, and identifies the areas where
additional efforts are required in order to consolidate
peace in Angola.

I am pleased to report that, in the four months
since the beginning of this Mission, UNMA has
successfully initiated activities in nearly all the areas
mandated to it, including the conclusion of the work of
the Joint Commission, participation as an observer in
the Military Commission and new activities to promote
human rights in Angola.

The Government of Angola has also confirmed to
me the importance it attaches to human rights issues,
especially in the area of capacity-building. With the
concurrence of the Government, UNMA's human rights
division is expanding its field presence in the
provinces.

The Mission's disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) component is also in place. Its
leader has chaired the sub-group on demobilization and
reintegration, which was established by, and provided
recommendations to, the Joint Commission on the
social reintegration of ex-combatants. We envisage a
continuing role for the technical sub-group in close
consultation with the Government, even after the
formal dissolution of the Joint Commission itself.

UNMA is also coordinating, through the relevant
United Nations agencies, aspects of humanitarian
assistance, including resource mobilization and the
provision of essential life-saving assistance such as
foods and medicines.

After my arrival in Luanda on 14 September to
assume my new functions as the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Angola, head of UNMA
and Chairman of the Joint Commission, the following
four priorities were established.
The first was to re-establish the Joint
Commission, in accordance with the Memorandum of
Commitment signed by the parties on 26 August in the
presence of the Secretary-General, and to bring its
work to a reasonable conclusion, without being
restricted by unrealistic timelines or encouraging
unnecessary delays in its work.

The second priority was the establishment of the
United Nations Mission in Angola as an integrated and
coordinated mission with a two-cluster structure: a
political-military-DDR-human rights cluster, which is
directly supervised by myself, and a humanitarian-
development cluster, which I supervise indirectly
through the Resident Humanitarian Coordinator.

The third priority was to raise domestic and
international awareness of the serious humanitarian
situation in Angola, particularly the plight of more than
4 million internally displaced people, as well as
returning refugees, ex-combatants and their
dependants. In addition, maximum efforts were made
to facilitate the work of the United Nations
humanitarian agencies on the ground and to help
mobilize both resources from within - that is, the
Government of Angola's own resources - and those of
the international community in order to meet the
enormous humanitarian challenges still facing the
country.

The final priority was to assist the Government of
Angola in organizing an international donor conference
to mobilize resources for the medium-term and long-
term reconstruction of the country.

I should like to touch briefly on the status of
implementation of those four priorities.

With regard to the Joint Commission, it was re-
established under the chairmanship of the United
Nations and was composed of the Government of
Angola and UNITA representatives, as well as the
"Troika" observers in order to facilitate and verify the
implementation of the remaining tasks under the
Lusaka Protocol, as particularly specified in the
Memorandum of Commitment of 26 August. Its
substantive work commenced on 26 September 2002
and was concluded on 20 November 2002, eight years
to the day after the Lusaka Protocol had been signed.

The Government and UNITA raised many issues
and concerns relating to the consolidation of peace,
which were discussed within the framework of the
Joint Commission in a very frank - often too frank -
but always transparent manner. Agreement was reached
on most of the issues, while others, such as the holding
of the second round of presidential elections, were
considered by both sides to have been overtaken by
events. There were also some issues on which no
consensus was reached within the framework of the
Joint Commission. For example, it should be noted that
neither the Memorandum of Commitment of 26 August
nor, prior to that, the Memorandum of Understanding
of 4 April addressed some of the remaining tasks under
the Lusaka Protocol. Those included: provision by the
Government and UNITA of information on the location
of landmines and other explosives; verification of the
neutrality of the national police and the disarming of
all civilians; provision of guarantees of basic freedoms
and human rights within the national reconciliation
process; and the implementation of decentralization
and administrative deconcentration programmes.

As Chairman of the Joint Commission, I drew
attention to those omissions during the work of the
Commission. In response, the Government delegation
referred to the efforts being made by the Angolan
authorities to address those issues, while UNITA made
important suggestions in that regard. However, I am
pleased to report that both the Government and UNITA
agreed to address the medium-term and long-term tasks
through a bilateral mechanism that they decided to
establish in accordance with the final declaration of the
Joint Commission, which was adopted on 20
November. I am also delighted to report that since then,
the ruling politburo of the Movimento Popular da
Libertacao de Angola (MPLA) and the UNITA Political
Commission met, for the first time in the country's
history, from 2 to 5 December to discuss common
issues, including the revision of the Constitution as a
prelude to the holding of national elections.

I should also like to refer to the Joint
Commission's final declaration, which was proposed
by the Government, recommending that the Security
Council consider the immediate lifting of all sanctions
imposed on UNITA. In that connection, I am pleased to
report that the decision made by the Council in
resolution 1448 (2002) of 9 December to lift all
sanctions imposed on UNITA since 1993 has been
welcomed by both UNITA and the Government, which
have described it as another step on the road towards
national reconciliation in Angola.

Concerning the establishment of UNMA as an
integrated and coordinated mission, following my
arrival in Luanda, UNMA initiated a number of
initiatives at the policy level, including information-
sharing and regular meetings to exchange views and
coordinate activities between the two clusters of
UNMA. Those initiatives have provided an integrated
strategy for United Nations activities in Angola,
thereby promoting timely feedback from the political
level to the policy and programme implementation
levels. I have provided support for the activities of the
United Nations country team, and, on a number of
occasions, I intervened directly with the Angolan
authorities at the highest levels on behalf of a number
of agencies in situations in which they had encountered
specific problems or difficulties in their operations.

The Humanitarian/Resident Coordinator in
Angola was also appointed a member of the United
Nations delegation to the Joint Commission, and he has
made valuable contributions to its work, especially
when it comes to discussions of the humanitarian
situation in the country. As members are aware,
following my return to Headquarters, the Deputy
Special Representative was designated officer-in-
charge of UNMA in order to ensure the continued
coordination and integration of UNMA's work and to
underscore the principal remaining challenges in
Angola, which are humanitarian and developmental.

I now turn to the humanitarian situation. The
overall humanitarian situation in Angola remains
extremely difficult, although there has been some
notable progress in meeting the needs of the Angolan
people. Since June 2002, the humanitarian operation
has doubled in size and more than 1 million people
have been assisted as a result of the delivery of food,
health care, water and sanitation items. Nevertheless,
there is still a need to redouble those efforts as the
process of resettlement of 80,000 ex-combatants and
200,000 family members, millions of internally
displaced persons and hundreds of thousands of
returning refugees from neighbouring countries gets
under way.

At this stage, the humanitarian community
remains focused on meeting acute emergency needs,
while hoping to move towards recovery and
reconstruction in the coming months. It needs to be
assisted financially and materially and with logistical
support. On 26 November, I participated in the official
launch of the consolidated inter-agency appeal for
2003, which we hope will be the last emergency appeal
for Angola. The appeal requires some $384 million to
enable the agencies to fund and complement the efforts
of the Government of Angola in many ways,
particularly through the provision of vital assistance to
the affected population in need.

With regard to the international donor conference,
it will be recalled that the Government of Angola had
requested the United Nations, and the Security Council
has agreed to authorize UNMA to assist and support its
efforts to convene such a conference in order to secure
additional financing for humanitarian assistance and
post-conflict development. In that regard, consultations
and coordination efforts have been ongoing between
the Government of Angola and the United Nations. As
a result, it has been agreed that the conference should
not be rushed, but rather that it should be properly
prepared for and that the prerequisites for a successful
outcome should be met, because there is no point in
having an international donor conference in which the
donors do not donate. Therefore, that would include an
effort on the part of the Government in order to allay
any concerns that the donor community might have
with regard to the allocation and spending of national
revenues. Meanwhile, the tentative date for the donor
conference would be during the first quarter of 2003,
and the venue would be in Brussels.

In conclusion, while it is fair to say that
enormous progress has been made in the peace process,
there is still much that remains to be done by the
people of Angola and by the international community
to further consolidate peace and to enhance national
reconciliation, national reconstruction and national
development. Next month, Angola will take its place at
this table as a member of the Council. At that time, the
country will move from being a recurring item on the
Council's agenda to becoming a valuable contributor to
the maintenance of international peace and security.

Meanwhile, however, we should continue to
support the efforts of the Angolan Government aimed
at the comprehensive implementation of
demobilization, social reinsertion and resettlement
programmes for ex-combatants, internally displaced
persons and refugees. We should also respond
positively to the Government's request by providing
technical assistance for the forthcoming national
elections, tentatively envisaged for 2004. Our efforts
must also be intensified to help address the
humanitarian situation, to help build capacity in human
rights, with particular emphasis on children's rights,
and to provide assistance in mine action.

Finally, I wish to recall that the United Nations
has been involved in the promotion of a peaceful
resolution of the conflict in Angola since 1988, when
the first United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. I) verified the withdrawal of Cuban and
South African forces. That initial United Nations
presence has been followed subsequently by that of
UNAVEM. II, UNAVEM. III, the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola, the United Nations Office
in Angola, and currently UNMA. At all times, the
United Nations has been, and I hope will remain, a
steadfast partner in the efforts of the Government and
the people of Angola at peacemaking and national
reconciliation. In that regard, we must not forget
Alioune Blondin Beye and many others who have lost
their lives while serving the United Nations in Angola.
Indeed, it seems to me that the greatest tribute to their
memory should be the irreversibility of peace in
Angola and a new resolve that never again will the soil
of Angola receive for burial the bodies of its sons
killed in a civil war.

