Mr. Liden (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The candidate
countries Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Montenegro and the member of the European
Economic Area Norway, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Armenia, align themselves
with this statement.

The suffering in Darfur has been allowed to go on
for too long, and a political settlement is desperately
needed. The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), which is at the heart
of our common efforts to alleviate the suffering, cannot
be a substitute for a political process; nor can it impose
peace. It is up to the parties themselves to take
concrete steps towards a political solution to the crisis.

UNAMID fulfils a central role in the efforts to
provide protection and security and to facilitate
humanitarian access in Darfur. It is encouraging that
UNAMID is expected to approach its full strength by
the end of the year. The current gaps between
deployment figures and objectives are hampering the
mission's ability to carry out its mandate. Also, we
must ensure that the mission is adequately equipped to
carry out its priority tasks of protecting civilians and
providing security for effective humanitarian action.

The European Union notes the improved
cooperation among the United Nations, the African
Union and the Government of the Sudan through the
Tripartite Mechanism. However, obstacles remain that
hamper the effectiveness of UNAMID - for instance,
with regard to freedom of movement, administrative
hurdles in getting customs clearance for critical
equipment, and visas for UNAMID staff. At present,
nearly 100 nationals of the European Union are waiting
for their visas to be able to work for UNAMID. I took
note of what the representative of the Sudan said
regarding this issue, but I wish to reiterate that the
Government of the Sudan has the responsibility to
remove those obstacles and ensure that agreements are
implemented at the local level.

We are faced with a critical humanitarian
situation that may further deteriorate during the rainy
season. The Government of the Sudan and all parties to
the conflict must respect and adhere to international
humanitarian law and ensure safe and unhindered
access to people in need of humanitarian assistance.
The Government's decision in March to expel a
number of non-governmental organizations has
hampered the ability to provide humanitarian
assistance to the population in need in Darfur.

The European Union takes note of reports that a
small number of internally displaced persons have
started to return to their Villages. It is important to
ensure that such returns take place in a safe, voluntary
and dignified manner, with assistance and protection in
place, and to monitor these returns.

The European Union strongly supports the joint
mediation efforts of the African Union and the United
Nations, under the leadership of Mr. Djibrill Bassole,
for a sustainable cessation of hostilities. We regard the
multi-track approach of the mediation - which also
engages civil society in Darfur - as essential. We call
on the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) and the
Government to honour their commitments as set out in
the Doha Agreement of Goodwill.

There can be no sustainable peace without justice.
The European Union's position on the International
Criminal Court is well known. The Court and its key
role in the promotion of international justice have our
full support. The European Union urges the
Government of the Sudan and all other parties to the
conflict to cooperate fully with the Court, in accordance
with Security Council resolution 1593 (2005).

The national elections next year provide an
opportunity for the Sudan to lay down a political path
for the future. Peaceful, transparent and credible
elections are fundamental to the consolidation of
democracy. UNAMID has a role in assisting the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan in preparing for and
organizing the elections. The European Union
welcomes the decision of the Permanent Court of
Arbitration on the determination of the boundaries of
the Abyei area. We call on the parties to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement to cooperate fully in
its implementation.

The dynamics of the region continue to be
marked by instability. The European Union military
operation in eastern Chad and north-eastern Central
African Republic, deployed in 2008 and transferred to
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad in March 2009, should be seen in
that context. The European Union, the Security Council
and others have called on the Sudan and Chad to
respect and fully implement their mutual commitments.
Recurrent cross-border attacks seem to make the
agreements meaningless. Both countries need to show
clear political will to resolve their outstanding issues.

The bringing of peace to Darfur is long overdue.
In order to promote progress, all relevant actors within
the international community need to pull in the same
direction. The aim should be to impress on the parties
the need for flexibility in the search for peace.
Ultimately, however, the responsibility lies with the
parties themselves. It is time for them to show concrete
and serious political will and a commitment to peace.

