Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I am
delivering this statement on behalf of the Group of
Arab States.

First of all, I would like to welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation
of Equatorial Guinea. I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate. I also thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, African
Union High Representative for Silencing the Guns in
Africa; and Mr. Vasu Gounden, Founder and Executive
Director of the African Centre for the Constructive
Resolution of Disputes, for their briefings.

In Africa there is a saying that "It takes a village
to raise a child". That applies equally to resolving the
problems on the African continent. Africa's problems
call for the planetary village to work together to resolve
them. I speak on behalf of a group linked to Africa
through history, geography, culture, language and
religion. Africa's problems and prosperity are our own.
Arabs have historically been interested in Africa and its
people, as well as in progress and peace. The continent
has long suffered from armed conflict, which has had
a considerable impact on the humanitarian, economic
and social situation of its countries and people.

The Arab Group reaffirms its support for the
principles and objectives of the United Nations for
the peaceful resolution of conflict, in accordance with
Chapters VI and VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. At the core of the Arab Group, we have many
African countries. We therefore reiterate the importance
ofthe Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative, as
well as the Lusaka Roadmap, which advocates African
solutions to African problems.

The peoples of Africa are determined to shoulder
their responsibility for establishing security and
stability in their continent, as well as for the resolution
of ongoing conflicts. We commend the progress made
in conflict resolution in order to realize peace and
security in Africa. There are many examples of that,
such as the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic in
Khartoum, under the auspices ofthe Sudan; the signing
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan; and the peaceful transfer of
power in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Madagascar. However, the continent still faces many
challenges, including non-traditional threats to peace
and security, such as terrorism and organized crime.

The Arab countries, including Arab African
countries, for years played a critical role in conflict
resolution and in silencing the guns in Africa. Many of
them have participated in national reconciliation and
mediation processes with regard to conflicts in Africa.
On 16 September 2018, reconciliation efforts between
Ethiopia and Eritrea, with Saudi sponsorship, led to the
Jeddah peace agreement between Eritrea and Ethiopia,
after many decades of conflict. In 2007, Saudi Arabia
helped reach a reconciliation agreement between the
Sudan and Chad in order to restore stability to Darfur
and neighbouring areas in Chad.

Similarly, Morocco has always supported
preventive diplomacy efforts, mediation, peaceful
conflict resolution and political dialogue to put an
end to conflicts in Africa, including mediation to
restore stability to the Mano River basin. It also hosted
inter-Libyan political dialogue, which led to the Skhirat
Political Agreement of 17 December 2015. In August
2009, Morocco hosted the Ministerial Conference of
African States Bordering the Atlantic, which led to
the Rabat Declaration against maritime piracy and
transnational crime. In November 2013, Morocco
hosted a regional ministerial conference on border
security between Sahel and Maghreb States in order to
bolster border security between the Sahel countries and
the Arab Maghreb countries.

The State of Qatar sponsored negotiations between
the Sudanese Government and the opposition factions,
which led to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
The Security Council welcomed that document as a
step towards reaching a comprehensive solution. Qatar
also participated in mediation efforts to put an end
to border disputes between Djibouti and Eritrea, and
launched an initiative to deploy peacekeeping troops
that maintained stability for an entire decade.

Algeria hosted negotiations between Malian parties
and led international mediation, which culminated in
2015 with the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali, emanating from the Algiers process.
Algeria continues to make efforts to implement the
agreement through its chairmanship of the Agreement
Monitoring Committee.

The Arab and Gulf countries have also played a
leading role in combating terrorism in Africa, with
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates pledging
$118 million and $35.4 million, respectively, to support
counter-terrorism forces in the Sahel and West Africa.
The Arab Group welcomes the strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
on issues of peace and security, economic and social
development in the continent. We underscore the
positive outcome of that partnership and coordination
between them and hope to see it continue. We call on
the international community to support that partnership
in all its aspects. We commend the United Nations for
its efforts to resolve the crisis in Libya and the African
Union for its support to help bring peace and stability
to Libya.

Africa continues to pursue the development of joint
African peacekeeping forces across the continent. We
must provide predictable and sustained financing to
African peacekeeping operations.

The close link between peace and security, on
the one hand, and economic and social development,
on the other, requires all partners in the international
community to reinforce the cooperation and synergy
frameworks with the African Union and African
countries in order to address the root causes of
armed conflict, including economic challenges such
as poverty, unemployment and food insecurity.
National reconciliation will not be possible unless we
address such challenges, including gender inequality,
marginalization, the accumulation of wealth in the
hands of the few and feelings of injustice and despair.

It is well known that Arab countries have played a
critical role in bolstering stability in Africa to enable
economic, social and human development. We have
excellent and cooperative economic relations with
Africa. The State of Kuwait, for example, through
the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development,
established over more than 56 years ago, has effectively
strengthened sustainable development in many
countries, including African countries. The Kuwait
Fund cooperates with 42 African countries. During the
fiscal year 2017-2018, the Fund provided them with 312
concessional loans.

The Arab Fund for Technical Assistance to African
Countries, which was established at the seventh Arab
Summit in Rabat in 1974, represents the Arab Group's
commitment to the principle of Arab-African solidarity
and common destiny. Since its inception, the activities
of the Arab Fund have supported support economic and
social development in the continent.

Cooperation between Arab States and the
African Union is embodied in joint initiatives aimed
at strengthening the pillars of peace, stability and
development in Africa, exemplified most recently by
thejoint initiative between Qatar and the African Union
to support the return of migrants to their countries
of origin. We also stress the central role played by
Arab communities in Africa, especially the Lebanese
nationals living in Western African States, in the
economic and social development of those countries.
The migrant labour is also important as part of the
economic and social ties linking Arab and African
countries, in particular the Gulf countries.

Regarding investment, the United Arab Emirates,
which is the second largest investor in Africa after
China, invested approximately $11 billion in the
continent in 2016. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
intends to invest $10 billion in South Africa's energy
sector. It is also considered the biggest investor in the
agriculture sector in Africa. The State of Qatar signed
a contract of $4 billion to manage the Red Sea port of
the Sudan in 2018. It invests in the agriculture and food
sectors in the Sudan.

Regarding human support, the Arab countries, in
particular countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council,
engaged in charitable activities in Africa. Assistance
to refugees on the continent is another element of
Arab support for efforts to limit human outflows and
lessen factors of instability in Africa. For example,
the King Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre
contributed more than $250 million to assist refugees in
Djibouti in 2017.

In 2013, the State of Kuwait hosted the third Arab-
Africa summit on the theme "Partners in development
and investment". During the summit, His Highness
the Emir of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber
Al-Sabah, announced an initiative involving five-year
soft loans to non-Arab African States issued by the
Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development. That
Arab partnership with the United Nations was made
into reality by Kuwait's pledge at the Summit of
$1 billion through the General Investment Authority,
in cooperation with World Bank and its affiliated
institutions, as well as the China-Africa Development
Fund, with the aim of investing in the infrastructure of
the African continent.

The Arab Group believes that greater focus
should be placed on post-conflict reconstruction and
development. We emphasize that the objective behind
silencing the guns does not end with achieving political
settlements but is closely linked to reconstruction
and development. In that context, the Arab Group
commends the announcement regarding the opening
shortly of the African Union Centre for Reconstruction
and development in the Egyptian capital, Cairo. That
Centre will be involved in coordinating efforts and
policies of the African Union in that regard.

