Mr. Madeira: This is a crucial year for Somalia, in which the country is expected to deliver on pressing national priorities. Inclusive politics, elections and debt relief under the advancement of the transition plan are just some of the most immediate of those priorities. So far, the signs are positive, despite the many challenges. On 25 August, with the support of the international community and partner organizations and after due consultations with the Federal Government of Somalia and the Galmudug authorities, the African Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM) deployed forces in Dhuusamarreeb, with the purpose of helping to create a reassuring atmosphere for the reconciliation conferenceto take place and support the establishment of security conditions for the ensuing electoral process to evolve in a peaceful and violence-free environment. The successful holding of the Federal Government's promoted Galmudug reconciliation conference resulted in the stakeholders agreeing on the modalities for the election. The state formation effort was given a boost with the successful conclusion of the negotiations regarding the quota of parliamentary seats to be reserved for Ahl Al-Sunna Wal-Jama'a, which opened the way for the state electoral process to begin and the election of the 89-member state Assembly and other organs of the state to take place. We made it clear then and we make it clear now that the election was but one step in the right direction among the many that are required. The reality on the ground in Galmudug, under the paralysis of state institutions, demands that the primacy of politics remain at the forefront of all efforts under way to once again make Galmudug a functioning and viable federal member state that is capable of achieving sustainable peace and providing for its people. In that context, the inclusive politics momentum that was garnered with the successful holding of the Galmudug reconciliation conference should be harnessed and enhanced, not lost. A lot remains to be done to make Galmudug a strong, vibrant and reconciled society. We therefore urge the leadership of Galmudug to continue to work in earnest to ensure that no genuine Galmudug stakeholder is alienated and that all 11 clans that constitute the state of Galmudug have a guaranteed place around the table where their future is being shaped and their destiny sealed. It is therefore important that we, the international partners engaged with helping Somalia overcome its present challenges, continue to work in earnest to encourage the Somali people to embrace and emulate the spirit and letter of the Dhuusamarreeb reconciliation conference and ensure that genuine dialogue and harmonious interaction are established between the leadership of the federal member states and their communities and between the Federal Government of Somalia and the governments of the federal member states. It is AMISOM's strong belief that this multifaceted interaction, if supported, harnessed and sustained, will unlock the immense reconciliation capacity of the Somali people, the most assured pathway to sustainable peace in Somalia. We applaud the Federal Government's continued commitment to fostering dialogue among the Somali people, as demonstrated by the recent meeting between President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo and Mr. Muse Bihi Abdi of Somaliland, in the margins of the thirty-third African Union Assembly, earlier this month. This is a very encouraging development and a source of great hope for the future of Somalia. As I noted earlier, Somalia is embarking on an important year, and one of the most important priorities this year is the organization of peaceful and credible national suffrage for the election of members of the Federal Parliament and that of the Federal President. The fact that Somalia's federal electoral law has been approved by the House of the People and signed into law by President Farmajo a few days ago is an important and very positive development. We at AMISOM recognize that there are still a number of important issues to be ironed out in order to ensure the unhindered and smooth implementation of the electoral law, but we remain optimistic and confident that the momentum gained in the last two months will continue and that whatever obstacles may stand in the way of the elections in the last quarter of this year will be successfully overcome. For this, a lot of responsibility has been placed in the hands of the National Independent Electoral Commission and Ms. Halima Ismail Ibrahim, its Chair. It is our duty to support her in this endeavour by providing the Commission with the commensurate material and financial resources it will need; the security and mobility that will be indispensable for the effective holding of the election; and the expertise that it will require, in terms of both regular electoral staff and specialized personnel. We at the African Union reaffirm our continued readiness to support the peace process, both technically and in terms of security. We are galvanized by the tenacity, steadfastness and resilience with which the Federal Government of Somalia has been implementing its commitment to the terms agreed with the Bretton Woods Institutions. This capacity to stay the course against all odds is now paying off. Somalia has met the required benchmarks under the fourth staff-monitored programme with regard to domestic revenue, mobilization, public financial management, financial-sector stability, and compliance with anti-money-laundering and combating the financing of terrorism. As a result, early this month the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank agreed that Somalia is now eligible for assistanceunder the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries initiative. We congratulate the Federal Government of Somalia on that great achievement. The recently concluded threat assessment indicates that Al-Shabaab remains resilient and retains the capacity to carry out attacks against the Somali security forces, AMISOM and innocent civilians, mostly using improvised explosive devices, mortars and targeted assassinations. In a concerted effort to degrade and contain the enemy, AMISOM and its partners continue to support the Somali security forces with ground and air operations focusing on Al-Shabaab's presence and activities in Middle Shabelle, Lower Shabelle, Middle Juba and Mogadishu. The implementation of the transition plan remains the rallying point of our mandated tasks towards 2021. Our operations in this regard are confronted with challenges related to the slow pace in the generation and equipping of the Somali security forces; the lack of sustained intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance capability service; and inadequate logistics support for the Somali National Army. As mandated by the Council under resolution 2472 (2019), AMISOM is required to draw down another 1,000 of its troops, the third batch since 2018. This is a task that is ongoing and will be completed by 28 February. The drawdown will be on a pro rata basis. There will be, however, consideration for a threat assessment when reconfiguring the remaining forces within our sectors. The current politics of drawdown are a complete mismatch with the reality obtaining in the theatre of operations. The process of generating adequate, well- trained, well-equipped and logistically well-supported Somali forces to take over security responsibilities for AMISOM is not in tandem with the targets and timelines we have set for ourselves in the transition plan. The process is slow, underfunded, profoundly dependent on the goodwill of individual partners, with no shared and coordinated training plans and no evident correlation with the need to generate, in a timely manner, forces capable of taking full security responsibility from AMISOM and allow the completion of the current transition by 2021. As a result, the AMISOM forces that, per the transition plan and concept of operations, are supposed to be reconfigured into more flexible and more mobile forces capable of sustainably going out and taking on and degrading the enemy are the same forces that are currently still holding the bulk of the population centres they have liberated from Al-Shabaab. In that context, the operations they can undertake against the enemy cannot go beyond a limited distance from the population centres they are holding. These negatively impact the task of securing the main supply routes, the pursuit of the enemy through its strongholds and the capturing and holding of new territory from Al-Shabaab. The Security Council may wish to look more closely into the reality that is confronting our forces and those of the Federal Republic of Somalia in the theatre of operations and consider the additional measures that need to be taken to allow pressure to be exerted on Al-Shabaab in a sustainable, consistent and relentless manner so that the enemy can be effectively degraded and the Lower Shabelle successful joint operations extended to much wider Somali territorial expanses.
