Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too would like to associate ourselves with the
words of welcome addressed to Ambassador Jean-David
Levitte. We know him as one of the most prominent and
talented diplomats of France and as a well-known jurist and
orientalist. We are convinced that Ambassador Levitte, like
his predecessor, Ambassador Dejammet, will make an
extremely important contribution to the work of the
Security Council.

We would also like to express our gratitude to
Assistant Secretary-General Hedi Annabi for his briefing.
We believe that the information given in the briefing on the
current situation in East Timor provides sufficient grounds
for an optimistic evaluation of the situation, despite certain
contradictions. Of course, only the first stage has been
accomplished in the difficult matter of establishing
independence in the territory, creating democratic
institutions and stabilizing the political and economic
situation, although it was an extremely important stage.

However, one can say even now that the positive
trends that characterize today's situation in East Timor -
primarily in the area of security - are definitely gaining
ground. To a significant extent that has been possible
thanks to the forthright efforts of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET),
under the able guidance of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello. At the same
time, like other members of the Security Council who have
spoken before us, we cannot fail to be concerned over
reports of a resurgence in the activities of the pro-
integration militia, which is trying to impede the return of
refugees to East Timor.

In general, from our standpoint, the speedy and
effective resolution of the problem of refugees and the
facilitation of their safe return will, to a large extent,
determine the successful handling of tasks in the area of the
rehabilitation and development of East Timor. Other
conditions are just as important for the further
normalization of the situation in East Timor - namely, the
revival of a functioning economy and the establishment of
effective governance. We, like our colleagues in the
Security Council, are convinced that the Council must
continue to carefully and regularly follow developments in
the situation in East Timor.

