Mrs. Kaur (India): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Guatemalan delegation for having organized
today's debate on the situation in Somalia. As the new
authorities start their work in Mogadishu, it is a good
time to deliberate upon the progress achieved so far,
the challenges that lie ahead and how the international
community can continue its support for the Government
and people of Somalia.

We have carefully noted the views expressed
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Augustine Mahiga, and I would thank him for his
valuable statement.

During the course of the past year, there has been
remarkable progress in the process of stabilizing the
political, security and humanitarian situations in
Somalia. That has created a historic opportunity that
must be seized for the full restoration of peace and
stability in Somalia after two decades of conflict.

The adoption of a provisional Constitution, the
formation of the new Parliament, the elections of the
President and the Speaker, and the appointment of the
new Prime Minister clearly reflect the collective resolve
of the Somali people to move from the transitional
institutions to a more representative Government that
can meet the legitimate aspirations of all sections of
Somali society.

Those important milestones would not have
been possible but for the coordinated and concerted
efforts of the international community, including the
African Union and the United Nations. The important
role played by Special Representative Mahiga in the
successful completion of the transition process deserves
our special appreciation.

Our congratulations are also due to the new Somali
leadership, particularly His Excellency Mr. Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud, the new President of Somalia. It is a
matter of immense pride for us that President Mohamud
spent a few years studying in India in the late 19805.

The gains on the political front have been made
possible by the impressive achievements of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali
forces on the security front. Thanks to AMISOM,
Mogadishu is today firmly under the control of the
Somali authorities. Last week, AMISOM. and the
Somali forces secured the strategic towns of Kismayo
and Wanla Weyn from Al-Shabaab.

The support of the international community to
AMISOM. operations has been instrumental in that
success. We commend all troop-contributing countries,
in particular Uganda, Burundi and Kenya, for their
commitment to the Mission and for the sacrifices their
troops have made.

In order to consolidate the gains made, the
new Government in Somalia has to embark upon
building effective State institutions that can pursue
national reconciliation, provide for the rule of law,
revitalize economic activities, and restructure and
strengthen the security forces. It is also necessary to
expeditiously implement the pending tasks of the road
map. In that regard, we welcome the six-point policy
framework set out by President Mohamud, and call
upon the international community to fully support the
implementation of the framework.

AMISOM. remains the mainstay of the international
community's efforts for stabilization of the security
situation in Somalia. AMISOM. and the Somali security
forces have continued to expand their control in all four
sectors of operations. Still, AI-Shabaab remains a major
threat to peace and stability in Somalia, and has turned
to asymmetric warfare.

The changing security situation demands further
augmentation of resources for AMISOM, including
enablers and force multipliers. We therefore support
the request made by the African Union for a technical
rollover of four months, continuing the current
support package. We also support the expansion of
the logistics support package to cover the deployment
of additional civilian personnel and to include naval
assets for contingent-owned equipment reimbursement.
The latter is crucial to safeguard the supply routes of
AMISOM. and to prevent Al-Shabaab from benefitting
from illegal maritime trade and piracy.

Maritime piracy off the coast of Somalia and
the humanitarian plight of hostages held by pirates
remain a major cause of concern for India. Much
of India's trade - estimated at over $160 billion
annually - passes through the Gulf of Aden. Indians
constitute 7 per cent of the world's seafarers, and a
consequence of piracy has been the tremendous human
cost that those seafarers have had to pay. According
to the Secretary-General's latest report, 259 hostages
from 18 ships are still held by pirates. Of those, 43
are, unfortunately, Indian nationals. We hope that the
international community will provide full assistance
to the new Government in Somalia to implement the
comprehensive set of measures to counter piracy as
identified in the road map.

India and Somalia share two millennia of
civilizational exchanges across the seas. Not many years
ago, India made a major contribution to peacekeeping
in Somalia through its significant involvement in the
United Nations Operation in Somalia II. Last year,
following our Prime Minister's announcement at the
second India-Africa Summit, India made a financial
contribution of $2 million to AMISOM. This year, we
are making another contribution of $1 million.

We have also continued to extend help to Somalia
in capacity-building through human resources
development and have recently increased the number of
scholarships available for Somali experts and students
to utilize in Indian academic institutions. We have
also contributed to the development of the information
technology sector in Somalia.

As Somalia moves on to a new phase ofpacification
and peacebuilding, the continued support of the
international community will remain critical for its
success. I would like to assure the new Government of
Somalia of India's continued support for our common
endeavours to put Somalia back on to the path ofpeace,
stability and prosperity.

