The President (spoke in French): I note that the
procedure I have proposed to follow is not acceptable
to the delegation ofthe Russian Federation.

I have proposed that the Council should not take
a decision, whether positive or negative, on all the
requests as a whole.

Bearing in mind that disagreements arose during
the prior consultations on one of the requests, I have
proposed that the Council should decide, successively
and separately, on the requests under rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Council, next on
those referring to rule 39 and, finally, on
Mr. Jovanovie's request.

The delegation of the Russian Federation has
proposed another method, which consists of taking a
single decision on all the requests, considered as a
whole. Under this method, the Council would be called
upon either to accept all the requests or to reject all of
them.

In the present circumstances, I feel it is necessary
to put the proposal of the Russian Federation to the
vote.
I therefore request the Council to determine
whether it wishes, as proposed by the Russian
Federation, to take a single decision on all the requests,
considered as a whole, which would mean that the
Council would either accept all the requests or reject
them all. If the Russian Federation's proposal does not
receive the required number of votes, I will follow the
procedure that I myself have proposed.

If no member wishes to take the floor, I shall take
it that the Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
proposal ofthe Russian Federation.

It was so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
China, Namibia, Russian Federation, Ukraine

Against:
Argentina, Bangladesh, Canada, France,
Malaysia, Mali, Netherlands, Tunisia, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

Abstaining:
Jamaica

The President (spoke in French): The result of
the voting is as follows: 4 in favour, 10 against and l
abstention. The proposal of the Russian Federation has
not been adopted because it has failed to obtain the
required number of votes.

As I announced before the voting, I shall now
invite the Council to consider successively the requests
under rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure of
the Council, next those referring to rule 39 and, finally,
that of Mr. J ovanovic'.

First, do I hear any objection to giving a positive
response to the requests to be invited to participate
submitted by the representatives of Albania, Austria,
Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Greece,
Japan, Norway, Pakistan, Portugal, Slovenia, the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey
under rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure of
the Council?

There being no objection, I invite the
representatives of Albania, Austria, Belarus, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Greece, Japan, Norway,
Pakistan, Portugal, Slovenia, the Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Turkey to take the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nesho
(Albania), Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria), Mr. Sychov
(Belarus), Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina), Mr. Sotirov (Bulgaria), Mr.
Gournaris (Greece), Mr. Kobayashi (Japan), Mr.
Johansen (Norway), Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan), Mr.
Monteiro (Portugal), Mr. Petric (Slovenia), Mr.
Calovski (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Mr. Vural (Turkey) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.


The President (spoke in French): Secondly, do I
hear any objection to extending an invitation to Mr.
Carl Bildt and Mr. Javier Solana under rule 39 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure?

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Carl Bildt to take a seat at the
Council table.

I now invite Mr. Javier Solana to take the seat
reserved for him at the side ofthe Council Chamber.

Do I hear any objection to our giving a
favourable response to the request for participation
submitted by Mr. J ovanovic'?


