Mr. Matjila (South Africa): It is good to see you,
Sir, once again presiding over this meeting. We thank
the delegation of Kuwait for convening the debate on
this very important matter. We also thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing. It is such a great pleasure to see
former President Mary Robinson, Chair of The Elders,
as well as Mr. Ban Ki-moon, former Secretary-General
and Deputy Chair of The Elders, and we thank them for
their valuable briefings and input.

Immediately after being sworn in as the first
President of a democratic South Africa in 1994, Nelson
Mandela said,

"[N]ever, never and never again shall it be that this
beautiful land will again experience the oppression
of one by another".

With those words, he embarked on the long
and protected negotiations on a new, inclusive,
transparent, all-party, multi-racial South Africa that
would be non-racial, non-sexist, multi-religious and
multicultural. The democratic South Africa was born
after three and a half centuries of racial conflict in
South Africa. Those historic developments enabled
a democratic South Africa to begin making a modest
contribution to conflict mediation around the world,
including in Syria, Palestine, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Zimbabwe, Libya, Sri Lanka, Nepal,
Burundi and Madagascar. The list goes on.

The promotion of the peaceful resolution of
conflicts is a cornerstone of South Africa's foreign
policy. That is borne out of our historical experience
in successfully and peacefully transitioning from a
colonial past to a constitutional democracy based on
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all. It is through that spirit and commitment that we
seek peaceful resolution and mediation for challenges
and crises in the Sudan, South Sudan, Venezuela, the
Central African Republic and many conflicts around
the world. Mediation brings about reconciliation, less
destruction, fewer killings and less displacement. We
believe that United Nations peacekeeping should not
be a means to an end, but instead complement those
essential tools of peacemaking.

Resolving disputes peacefully and through
mediation, ceasefire monitoring and assisting in
the implementation of peace accords should be the
hallmark of the United Nations approach to resolving
conflicts worldwide. It is important to remind ourselves
that the prevention of conflict remains the primary
responsibility of States. Actions undertaken within the
framework of conflict prevention by the United Nations
should support and complement the conflict-prevention
roles of national Governments and regions.

In that regard, the Council should strengthen its
own instruments for the pacific settlement of disputes,
in accordance with Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations. Before considering the use of force
under Chapter VII, we must consider a peaceful
political solution to conflict, as envisaged in Chapter
VI. Article 33 of the Charter specifically states that
parties to a dispute shall "first of all" seek a solution
through political means, including negotiation and
mediation. The settlement of disputes through those
means has the added advantage of assisting parties to
a conflict to recognize and address the root causes of
conflict and embark on negotiations, thereby fostering
a spirit of trust and cooperation.

South Africa believes that cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations could play an important
role in conflict prevention. In that regard, the African
Union and the United Nations undertook to enhance
collaboration, cooperation and coordination in the
search for sustainable solutions to ongoing and future
conflicts and to respond early, coherently and decisively
to prevent, manage and resolve conflicts.
In that regard, South Africa calls for enhanced
strategic and operational coordination of conflict
prevention, resolution and mediation efforts by the
United Nations, the African Union (AU), subregional
organizations and other international and local actors,
in the case of many conflicts. Such efforts should
be aimed at strengthening the efficacy of conflict
prevention and resolution efforts and supporting
African-led peace and security solutions based on
subsidiarity and comparative advantage.

For its part, the African Union Commission
operationalized the AU Mediation Support Unit in
mid-March. The AU Commission has devoted efforts
towards strengthening the Mediation Support Unit,
including though capacity-building on mediation
and mainstreaming gender in mediation. In addition,
the AU Commission is also spearheading efforts
to institutionalize a mediation doctrine in the
Commission, while the process of validating and
adopting an advanced mediation training module for
the AU is under way.

The recent operationalization of the AU Peace
Fund will further boost AU capacities and efforts in
mediation and conflict prevention in Africa. The Peace
Fund is structured around three thematic windows:
first, mediation; secondly, preventive diplomacy
through institutional capacity; and thirdly, peace
support operations. In this regard, the AU member
States should be commended by the Council for their
efforts to contribute to the Peace Fund, the endowment
of which currently stands at $115 million.

The role of women and youth in peacebuilding and
mediation cannot be emphasized enough. It is common
knowledge that, when women are involved in peace
processes, such processes are more sustainable and
effective. We welcome the role already being played by
the FemWise-Africa network in various conflicts across
the continent. In particular, we believe that the Security
Council should commit to providing greater support
for the development of female mediators, specifically
women from countries and regions affected by conflict.
Without the adequate representation of women in these
efforts, the credibility ofthese processes is undermined.
We are confident that the greater representation of
women in mediation efforts will correspond to the
greater success of our efforts.

We believe that a comprehensive, integrated
and coordinated approach to conflict prevention
should also address the root causes of conflicts and
strengthen political processes and respect for the rule
of law, as well as the promotion of sustainable and
inclusive development. Again, I turn to the wise words
of our former President, Mr. Nelson Mandela: "All
conflicts, no matter how intractable, are capable of
peaceful resolution."

South Africa supports the promotion of peaceful
solutions to conflict through mediation, peacemaking,
peacebuilding and reconciliation efforts.

