Mr. Christian (Ghana): I also wish to
congratulate you, Mr. President, for assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of December,
and I assure you, Sir, of the cooperation of my
delegation. I also thank you, Sir, for organizing this
informative briefing.

My delegation commends Ambassador
Natalegawa for the excellent work done during
Indonesia's presidency in November.

Ghana shares the view that the question of justice
for the victims of war crimes and crimes against
humanity is a integral part of the peace process and
national reconciliation. In this regard, we wish to
emphasize that the destabilizing effects of impunity are
very real and must not be underestimated, especially
within the context of the Sudan. We firmly believe that
resolution 1593 (2005) has a special place in the Darfur
peace process that must be fully implemented with the
support of both the Government of the Sudan and the
International Criminal Court. My delegation, therefore,
remains concerned about the lack of significant
progress in the judicial process in relation to the case
involving those individuals for whom arrest warrants
were issued in April 2007.

In this context, we call on the Government of the
Sudan not to take any steps that could be construed as
an affront or challenge to the Council's authority. We
are of the view that the lack of cooperation by the
Government of the Sudan with the Council and the
International Criminal Court is not in the interest of
any party. Appropriate measures must therefore be
taken to break this impasse. In this regard, firm
persuasion and pressure from the international
community must be sustained. It is only then that we
can make progress in this matter. To prolong the
stalemate will send the wrong signal to potential and
actual perpetrators of the most serious crimes
elsewhere.

The recent killing of 10 peacekeepers of the
African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) reinforces
our belief that when war crimes go unpunished, that
only emboldens the spoilers to continue obstructing
progress towards a political settlement and durable
peace in Darfur.

On the question of admissibility, we agree with
the Prosecutor that under the provisions of the Rome
Statute the situation on the ground gives a strong basis
for the admissibility of the Darfur situation before the
Court. The Court therefore has a solid legal and moral
basis to exercise jurisdiction.

Finally, we encourage the Office of the
Prosecutor to continue with its outreach programme
aimed at sensitizing victims and communities. It is
vitally important that the Sudanese people see the
International Criminal Court as an important ally in the
protection of human rights.

