Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks you, Sir, for having organized this
meeting on the situation in Myanmar. We also thank
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, for his most enlightening briefing.

In that briefing, he informed us that the
Secretary-General's good offices mission to Myanmar
is beginning to produce positive results. We note with
satisfaction the progress that has been made,
particularly the lifting of the curfew, the withdrawal of
the military presence from the streets, and the
opportunities for action enjoyed by the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy, who was able to have fruitful
meetings with the various actors in the crisis in
Myanmar, particularly the Prime Minister and
Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi, although the progress achieved
is not yet sufficient, particularly from the
Government's side.

As for the Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in Myanmar, Mr. Paulo Sergio Pinheiro,
his report gives us an even clearer picture of the human
rights situation in that country. While she is still
working in very straitened circumstances, Ms. Aung
San Suu Kyi has been able to meet with members of
her party and with representatives of the authorities,
particularly the Labour Minister, who has been
appointed to act as liaison with her.

My delegation hopes, despite everything, that
Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi will soon be free, along with all
the other political prisoners. We note her statement of
optimism about the prospects for national
reconciliation and that she is prepared to cooperate
with the junta in power. In my delegation's view, in the
light of such progress - limited as it may be - we
should continue to encourage a patient process of
dialogue with the junta in power and Myanmar society

as a whole if national reconciliation is to be achieved
in accordance with the road map as a step towards the
gradual establishment of democracy in the country. It is
in that spirit that we supported and adopted the
presidential statement of 11 October (S/PRST/ 2007/37), which was very encouraging as far as
Mr. Gambari's mission is concerned.

Congo, given the results that have already been
achieved and the hope they give rise to, recommends
that, in the spirit of reconciliation and conciliation, the
good offices mission of the Secretary-General
continue, conducted by Mr. Gambari, who was invited
by the authorities of Myanmar to return. We welcome
the efforts by the countries working to facilitate
Mr. Gambari's mission. We also welcome the support
of the countries of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) region, in particular in convincing
the authorities in Myanmar to make progress.

My delegation is, however, aware that the
situation is still an issue of concern and must be
patiently followed. We note the expulsion from the
country of the head of the United Nations team in
Myanmar, the human rights situation, the situation of
political prisoners and the need to improve the living
conditions of the people of Myanmar. In that way and
in a spirit of openness and dialogue that must be
inclusive and based on a precise timetable, Myanmar
will finally be at peace.

