Mr. Starcevie (Serbia): I, too, should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council this month.

At the outset, I wish to congratulate the President
and the Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge Patrick Robinson
and Mr. Serge Brammertz, on all their efforts and the
professionalism they consistently display in their work
and in the submission of their reports. As it was in
December 2009, the presentation of the cooperation
between Serbia and the ICTY in these reports is in
accord with Serbia's own assessment of the level of
cooperation that has been reached so far. My
Government appreciates the fact that the reports
contain an accurate description of the efforts and
actions undertaken by Serbia during the reporting
period and their recognition by Judge Robinson and
Prosecutor Brammertz.

Serbia continues in its endeavours to fulfil its
legal and moral obligations relating to the work of the
ICTY. It has managed to sustain the level of
cooperation achieved in 2009, in accordance with the
Prosecutor's recommendations in his previous reports.
There are currently no outstanding requests for
assistance in regard to the provision of documents,
witness protection or access to State archives, and we
continue to provide full assistance to the Trial
Chambers, the Office of the Prosecutor and the
Registry. Serbia thus considers that the level of its
cooperation with the Tribunal remains high.

As far as the issue of fugitives is concerned, the
efforts and commitment of the services engaged in
tracking down and apprehending them continue to
demonstrate Serbia's political will to successfully fulfil
its outstanding responsibilities in regard to this issue.
The Prosecutor's suggestions and recommendations
included in the present report are already being
implemented. Given the high level of cooperation
established between the Republic of Serbia and the
Tribunal, this additional improvement in the method of
searching for the fugitives will, we hope, lead to the
results both Serbia and the Tribunal are looking for.

I wish to mention here that the search is being
conducted on a daily basis and that the authorities of
the Republic of Serbia will not cease these operations
until both fugitives are brought to justice. Serbia is
well aware that the arrest of the two remaining
fugitives will put an end to the remnants of the past
that have burdened the recovery of Serbian society for
some time.

Serbia would like to reiterate its continuing
support for the ICTY completion strategy in its
entirety, including the issues related to the potential
residual mechanism and the location of the archives
after the closure of the Tribunal. Serbia maintains the
position communicated to the Security Council in
October 2008 and March 2009, and reiterates its strong
and consistent interest in this subject. It remains at the
disposal of the Security Council for possible future
discussions on this matter in order to contribute to the
resolution of these important issues.
In conclusion, I wish to emphasize once again
Serbia's commitment to full cooperation with the
ICTY. The reports presented to the Council today
affirm this commitment and testify to the usefulness of
joint efforts to bring this undertaking to its successful
end.

