Mr. Sumaida'ie (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): We
wish to thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting and
for providing the delegation of Iraq with the
opportunity to speak before the Council at a moment
that marks a turning point in the modern history of my
country.

Allow me to express first the appreciation of the
Government of Iraq for the role played by the United
Nations in my country in providing humanitarian
assistance and development and reconstruction support
and in helping to make the political process a success. I
extend special thanks to Mr. Ashraf Qazi and the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq for their
tireless efforts to that end, particularly their facilitation
of consultations during the drafting of the constitution
and the preparation of the electoral law. We also
appreciate their contribution in the political arena in
bringing together the different viewpoints of the
various political forces in Iraq.

However, those successes do not mitigate the fact
that the United Nations presence in Iraq remains
inadequate. We seek an increase of United Nations
personnel in order to facilitate communications with
State institutions and civil society organizations and
with the functions and programmes of United Nations
agencies in Iraq.
Developments in the Iraqi political process are
clearly proceeding on schedule, in accordance with
paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 1546
(2004). The constitutional referendum took place as
scheduled on 15 October 2005. Tomorrow, all Iraqis
will go to the polls to elect their representatives in the
National Assembly. Recent achievements, particularly
in the constitutional and political areas, would have
been impossible without the great sacrifices made by
the Iraqi people and the multinational forces that are
helping the Government and the people to achieve
political change. They would also have been
impossible without the help of the United Nations.

We continue to face great challenges that will
demand even more sacrifice and assistance. In the
meanwhile, the terrorists have stepped up their
violence and destruction, targeting the infrastructure
and innocent people. They have sought to sow
confusion and to incite civil war in order to block the
political process leading to the emergence of an Iraq
based on the new principles of democracy,
multilateralism and federalism and in which power is
exercised peacefully.

Following the most recent elections, the
formation of the provisional Government, the drafting
of the constitution and the creation of the presidential
Government and Assembly institutions, it has become
clear that the provisional Government should include
representatives from all walks of Iraqi life, including
from parties that did not participate in the elections.
We were largely successful, and we followed the same
pattern in expanding the committee in charge of
drafting the constitution, at which we were equally
successful.

Our political approach seems more inclusive now.
Following the Cairo Conference of 19 to 21 November,
we will be able to absorb more parties, as long as they
reject violence and declare their commitment to
peaceful participation in the political process and
governance.

By 15 December the first phase of the political
process will have been completed, and a new process
will start in Iraq, based on the principles adopted
during the first phase with the adoption of the new
Constitution, which had social, economic and political
effects at the national and international levels. In the
future, as it builds democracy and good governance
and engages in reconstruction, Iraq will face the major
challenge of terrorism, which is supported by
organized crime. Iraq will have to defeat and
completely eliminate terrorism. That cannot be achieved
without the support of the international community,
particularly the countries neighbouring Iraq.

Iraq is exposed daily to all kinds of
indiscriminate acts of terrorism, which target people
from all walks of life, including civilians, especially
children, women and the elderly. Hospitals, places
where travellers gather, markets, schools and mosques
are attacked. All of those acts are carried out by people
under the banner of false religious and nationalistic
slogans. The whole purpose of such terrorist acts is to
halt the process of the democratic change in Iraq, to
return the country to the era of darkness and
underdevelopment and to destroy the free, creative will
of the people.

Iraq is committed to standing against terrorism.
That commitment stems from the principles of tolerant
Islam, true nationalism, humanity and freedom.
Stability and progress cannot be achieved in Iraq
without the elimination of terrorism. The Iraqi armed
forces and the national police bear the main
responsibility in standing against terrorism. The Iraqi
security forces will be assisted by the multilateral force
until they are capable of acting alone. That is why we
are requesting an extension of the mandate of the
multinational force.

In addition to combating terrorism, the main task
faced by the Iraqi Government is reconstruction. The
Government is making many efforts in this regard, and
still greater efforts will be made by the new
Government following the elections, particularly with
respect to revitalizing the economy, rebuilding
infrastructure and providing basic services for our
citizens.

The Council is aware that Iraq's resources are
limited at present. It is also aware of the level of
economic, social and humanitarian destruction
inherited from the collapsed regime of Saddam
Hussein. The terrorist and criminal acts being
perpetrated by the forces of darkness are blocking the
economic rebirth of Iraq, which is therefore in dire
need of international support. The international
community has demonstrated its commitment, as
shown at the Madrid donor conference and confirmed
at the Brussels and Amman conferences. We believe
that it is high time to speed up the implementation of
those commitments in order to accelerate the domestic
economic process, without squandering our resources
on side issues. We want to break the cycle of violence
and achieve stability.
The question of human rights violations in Iraq
has recently been raised. Of course, we must stand
courageously against that phenomenon. Yet we must
put this in its proper context. What happened involves
only a few individual cases, and does not represent
systematic behaviour on the part of the Iraqi forces. It
does not reflect the policy of the Government. The
current leaders of Iraq were victims of gross violations
of human rights under the previous regime, and the
response of the Iraqi Government has been swift. The
Government has established a commission to
investigate the violations. Furthermore, the Iraqi
Government has expressed its desire for international
support with a View to developing its institutions in
accordance with internationally accepted regulations
and norms in the area of human rights and with a view
to protecting those rights. It is cause for hope that Iraqi
non-governmental organizations were the first to refer
to those Violations, which indicates those
organizations' vitality in the field of human rights and
reflects the democratic practices of the Iraqi people.

Iraq is now entering a new phase. It has adopted a
permanent Constitution, based on democratic
principles, that prohibits any activities aimed at
producing or acquiring weapons of mass destruction. It
is high time for the Security Council to close its
disarmament file on the previous regime. We must
close the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission file, which is not acceptable on
any pretext. The new Iraq is looking for a new and
clear position on the part of the Security Council that
takes into consideration the resounding fact that the
Iraq of today is not the Iraq of Saddam Hussein.

Every day, Iraqis are writing, in their own blood,

the story of their heroism and steadfastness. That story
will be a source of inspiration for the whole world - a
shining beacon of hope in the march towards freedom.
I have just returned from Baghdad, where there is a
conflict between, on the one hand, terrorists and
criminals who were nurtured by the first regime, as
well as their counterparts from outside Iraq - and
there are very few of them - and, on the other, the
dreams of millions of brave children, men and women
who face death without hesitation. Tomorrow, the
whole world will hear the voice of hope sound loud
and clear. Tomorrow, terrorism will finally be judged a
failure.

