Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): The
United States commends the contribution of the President
of Gabon, the former President of Mali, other African
States and France to the consolidation of peace and security
in the Central African Republic. In particular, we welcome
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Gabonese Republic:
your presence here today underscores the importance of
stability in the Central African Republic.

Through the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB), the
international community has re-established security in
Bangui, conducted an effective disarmament programme
and helped create the conditions necessary for the
implementation of the Bangui Agreements. For this
reason, the United States fully supports an initial
extension of the Chapter VII authorization of MISAB
until 16 March. We will vote in favour of this draft
resolution.

The United States will be prepared to take a decision
on a possible United Nations peacekeeping operation in
the Central African Republic by 16 March. We will
consider whether the process of institutional, political,
military and economic reforms in the Central African
Republic could be assisted by the security umbrella that
a peacekeeping operation could provide. We will study
closely the Secretary-General's recommendations
regarding the size, the mandate, the cost and the exit
strategy of the proposed peacekeeping operation.

We will give equal consideration to the commitment
of the parties in the Central African Republic to the
implementation of the Bangui Agreements. The
international community can assist, but cannot replace, the
efforts of the Government of the Central African Republic
to achieve long-term stability. To be effective, a
peacekeeping operation must be linked to the
implementation of fundamental political, economic and
security reforms by the Government of the Central
African Republic. We urge the Government of the Central
African Republic to undertake these reforms without
delay.

The United States supports the Secretary-General's
intention to appoint a special representative to the Central
African Republic. We believe the prompt appointment of
a special representative could help the Government of the
Central African Republic, United Nations agencies and
the international community develop a coordinated
transition programme that could resolve the crisis in the
Central African Republic and build a more permanent
peace. A group of friends of the Central African
Republic, comprising interested Governments and
organizations, could provide essential support to the
special representative's efforts.

