Mr. Linkevicius (Lithuania): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing and to wish you,
Mr. President, and all of us a Happy New Year of the
Golden Sheep.

On 24 October 1945, the United Nations came into
existence in response to the unspeakable horrors of the
Second World War, which left the indelible scar of the
Holocaust on the conscience of humankind and caused
as many as 80 million deaths. Addressing the United
Nations Conference on International Organization
in San Francisco earlier that year, President Truman
stressed that with ever-increasing brutality and
destruction, modern warfare, if unchecked, would
ultimately crush all civilization. He said,

"We still have a choice between the alternatives:
the continuation of international chaos, or the
establishment of a world organization for the
enforcement of peace."

When the Charter of the United Nations was
signed on June 26 1945 by 50 nations, Lithuania was
not among them, owing to Soviet occupation. While
others were celebrating the fall of Hitler's monstrous
regime and engaging in the creation of a new world
order, Lithuania's future was being hijacked by Stalin's
totalitarian grip. During Stalin's rule, up to 300,000
Lithuanians were deported, exiled and locked up in
Soviet gulags in the most remote parts of Siberia, the
Arctic Circle and Central Asia. Farmers, teachers, public
servants, housewives and entire families were rounded
up, barely given time to collect their belongings, and
boarded onto cattle wagons. Many died of starvation
and diseases along the way. Most were never to see
Lithuania or their families again.

My people were not the only ones affected. At least
14 million people of various nationalities were sent to
Soviet gulags from 1929 to 1953, with a further 7 to
8 million deported and exiled to the most remote areas
of the Soviet empire. Induced famine and starvation,
including the Holodomor in Ukraine, were used to
subdue those whom Stalin's regime considered its
enemies.

While we pay our tribute and respect to the
sacrifice of the Allied forces that defeated Hitler, we
also remember all of those whose lives were taken by
all the totalitarian regimes of the twentieth century.

Five decades later, Lithuania broke free from
captivity. Next month, Lithuania will celebrate
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the restoration of
independence - the longest period we have ever
been free in modern time. In the context of Russia's
attempts to rewrite history and reverse the transitions
of the 1990s, the twenty-fifth anniversary is even
more precious. It also reminds us that the international
community should not lower its guard. The United
Nations came into existence in order to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war and to ensure,
by the acceptance of principles and the institution of
methods, that armed force shall not be used, save in
the common interest. What we are seeing in Europe
today, however, is Russia's military might being used
in violation of the sovereign rights of States.

To small countries in particular, respect for the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
international legal norms is paramount. We do not
have the tanks, Grad missiles, Tornados or the multiple
rocket launchers and heavy weaponry, the likes of which
are ravaging the eastern part of Ukraine as we speak.
Respect for international law and the principles and
norms enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations is
our first line of defence.

It is therefore particularly disturbing to see these
norms and principles and the Charter itself being
violated by a permanent member of the Security Council.
The exclusive status of the five permanent members
was granted so that they could act as custodians of the
higher interest of peace, that common interest of which
the Charter speaks so clearly. It is not for Russia to
pressure or wage war against its neighbours. Indeed,
70 years after the end of the Second World War, Russia,
which suffered tremendously from that war, should
know better than to risk international peace and
stability for the sake of redrawing Europe's borders by
violence and force.

From eastern Ukraine to Moldova's Transnistria,
to Georgia's Abkhazia and South Ossetia regions, a
pattern exists of Russia's interference in the sovereign
affairs of neighbouring States. For a year now, Ukraine
has been under attack by Russian commandos and
mercenaries, supported by tanks, heavy weaponry,
equipment and supplies.

A year ago, as Crimea was being annexed by force
and falsehood, Lithuania called for the first Council
meeting on Ukraine. The Council has since held
at least 30 meetings on the situation in Ukraine, but
little has changed on the ground. Even as we speak,
Russian proxies continue to violate the latest ceasefire
agreement, in violation of resolution 2202 (2015).
Russian arms and Russian humanitarian convoys
continue to flow across the borders into the militants'
hands. The geographical area of violent provocations
is expanding beyond the ceasefire line, as seen from
yesterday's terrorist bombing attack in Kharkiv.

Thousands are dead and millions displaced as
Russia continues to stoke incitement and hate against
the Ukrainian people, whose only fault is their desire
to choose a European path of development. The
anti-Ukrainian rhetoric is disturbing. Only because the
Ukrainians wanted a clear break from the corruption
and cronyism of the past, have they been branded as
fascists. The peaceful protests in the Maidan, whose
anniversary was marked this past weekend, has been
referred to as an extremist coup. Let us be clear. The
desire ofa nation to decide its own future is not a crime.
The acceptance of European values is not a crime.
The Kremlin's propagandistic manipulation of the
fascist card, which has been used from time to time, is
irresponsible and highly dangerous, especially as part
of efforts to whitewash the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact.
As we approach the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations, all States, without exception, must
recommit unequivocally and clearly to the values
enshrined in the Charter and to the norms and principles
ofinternational law. Anything less -especially attempts
to redraw today's international borders - would
constitute a betrayal of the memory of those who
brought us peace 70 years ago at the cost of their lives,
and betrayal of our future as humankind.

To quote President Truman in his address to the
San Francisco Conference exactly 70 years ago:

"We must not continue to sacrifice the flower of
our youth merely to check madmen, those who in
every age plan world domination. The sacrifices of
our youth today must lead, through your efforts, to
the building for tomorrow of a mighty combination
of nations founded upon justice - on peace."

