Allow me at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, on behalf of the Government and the people of Yemen, for having convened this important and timely meeting on the issue of the FSO SAFER oil tanker, which, if left unaddressed, would imminently result in an economic and environmental catastrophe that would affect not only Yemen and Yemenis but also the region and the entire world. The reason for calling for this special meeting was simple. We knew that the only way to resolve this potential disaster, which has lingered on for years because of the Houthis' intransigence despite all our efforts, is to put pressure on them and draw the world's attention to this matter through the Security Council. The solution to this devastating disaster is not a difficult one and starts with allowing the United Nations technical team to access and assess the floating oil tanker. But that simple procedure, however, never came to fruition because the Houthis have not allowed it. And, as time went by, we realized that the Houthi militias saw the importance of the FSO SAFER tanker to us and the international community and decided to use it as a bargaining chip or leverage in the peace process negotiations, with complete disregard for the potentially drastic consequences of that unethical behaviour. Ever since early 2018, we have been trying, with the help of the United Nations, to convince the Houthi militias to grant the United Nations team access, and we have failed. Under pressure, however, the Houthis always make empty promises, and, when the pressure is off, they renege on their commitments. We have seen it happen on this issue before and on other issues as well. That is also why we need this meeting - to send the Houthis a strong signal that this time they must comply. When we look at the alarming consequences of this disaster - which will, among other things, result in an oil spill of more than 1 million barrel of crude oil into the Red Sea and the closure of the vital port of Al-Hudaydah for months; endanger marine life and biodiversity; and expose millions of people in Yemen to toxic gases in the event of a fire - we realize that we have to act now. We believe that the best course of action is to support the latest stand-alone detailed proposal on the FSO SAFER oil tanker, which we received last month from the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths (see S/PV.8753) . We agreed to it on the condition that it would not be linked to any other issues or processes under discussion. The proposal consists of three stages: first, assessment and necessary repairs; secondly, basic maintenance to facilitate oil extraction; and thirdly, disposal of the tanker. All potential revenue from the sale of oil is to contribute to paying the salaries of civil servants in Yemen. The Government of Yemen has agreed to this and the Houthis have not. I am afraid that settling for the Houthis merely granting access to the tanker at this stage will not solve the problem. Instead, it would enable them yet again to hijack the issue in the future when the pressure is lifted. In conclusion, allow me once again to express our gratitude to the members of the Council for answering the call to put an end to this looming catastrophe. I truly hope that today will be the last time the Council hears about the ongoing issue regarding the FSO SAFER oil tanker and that it will be resolved before it is too late.
