Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Alvaro de Soto,
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing on the situation with regard to the Middle
East settlement process. Russia has been working
consistently to bring about stability and lasting peace
in the region, and that is a focus of the current visit by
Mr. Vladimir Putin, President of the Russian
Federation, to several States in the Middle East.

In recent weeks a number of significant events
have occurred in the Middle East; these merit careful
analysis and assessment. The most important of these
were the talks held in Saudi Arabia between leaders of
the main Palestinian factions, Fatah and Hamas. These
led to agreement on the formation over the course of
the coming weeks of a Palestinian government of
national unity. We welcome this as an important,
indeed fundamental, step towards uniting Palestinian
groups and overcoming the prolonged crisis of power
in Palestine. We hope that a future Palestinian National
Authority government, established in line with the well
known demands of the Quartet of international
mediators, the norms of international law and the
provisions of the Arab Peace Initiative, will be an
important factor in relaunching Palestinian-Israeli
peace talks.

We believe also that implementation of the
agreements reached at Mecca with the help and support
of the leadership of Saudi Arabia should be
accompanied by the removal of roadblocks in the
Palestinian territories; these are a cause of suffering
and other harm to civilians.

Across the Muslim world, there was a pained
response to the Israeli archaeological dig and
construction work in the historic area of Jerusalem. We
need to be aware that any insensitive activity in
Jerusalem risks sparking tension in the region. We
believe that determining the status of Jerusalem is
among the issues that must be resolved through direct
Israeli-Palestinian final-status negotiations. In that
context, we consider that the parties to the conflict
must refrain from taking unilateral measures that could
exacerbate the situation with regard to this very
delicate element of the Palestinian-Israeli settlement
process. In our view, the order by the Mayor of
Jerusalem to suspend work on the Temple Mount is a
step in the right direction.

The Quartet of international mediators continues
to work actively. It recently held a ministerial meeting
in Washington, DC, and another meeting, in Berlin, is
on the agenda. We believe that at the latter important
gathering there will be discussion of the need to define
a comprehensive framework for a Middle East
settlement, first and foremost with respect to the
Palestinian-Israeli dimension but without losing sight of
the Syrian and Lebanese tracks. In our view, such a
comprehensive approach could come about through a
carefully prepared international conference. It is
important that the work of the Quartet include active
and regular participation by leading regional actors and
the League of Arab States, as well as by the parties to
the conflict.

Unrest continues in Lebanon. We call again on
Lebanese political groups to seek compromise. There is
still no alternative to achieving a common Lebanese
agreement. All Lebanese forces must refrain from
violence. We are gravely concerned at today's
explosions in Lebanon, and we hope that the Lebanese
will display sufficient restraint and political will not to
permit the situation to escalate into armed conflict.

