Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We listened carefully to Special Representative
Kubis' briefing. We welcome the active and dynamic
efforts made by the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI).

Russia is tied to Iraq historically. Because of our
friendship, we support with political and practical steps
those of the Iraqi Government being taken to regain
control over territory taken by terrorists, ensuring the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country.
We would like to see the threat posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) eradicated as soon
as possible. In view of the close relationship between
Iraqi and Syrian terrorists, the possibility ofa complete
victory over ISIL in Iraq, independent of its destruction
in Syria, hardly seems likely. In that regard, international
counter-terrorism operations should be thoroughly
coordinated with the aim of presenting a broad front
in the fight against terrorism. The Russian Federation
is ready to cooperate with efforts in that regard. We
welcome Baghdad's use of bilateral communication
channels with its regional partners and its positive
efforts to maintain good relations with neighbouring
States. It is essential to ensure that those involved in
combating terrorism in Iraq respect its sovereignty and
coordinate their actions with the authorities in Baghdad.

Despite the Iraqis' limited successes in combating
terrorism, the situation remains tense and the
Government of Iraq needs more attention and assistance
from the international community. Terrorists are still
present in a number ofcities and governorates. Civilians
are being used as human shields and terrorists are using
chemical weapons increasingly often. We insist that
such crimes must be objectively investigated, including
by harnessing the potential of a joint investigative
mechanism in order to help the Iraqi Government put
an end to this threat. At the same time, however, we
realize that stability cannot be restored in Iraq by force
alone. Along with providing humanitarian assistance,
it is vital that the country's entire administrative,
economic, housing and socioeconomic infrastructure
be rebuilt. Prime Minister Al Abadi's Government is
already accomplishing a great deal in that area, but
international assistance is still needed here too.

The key to achieving post-conflict normalization
in Iraq is promoting a national dialogue and creating
the conditions that can bring every religious and ethnic
group into that dialogue with the goal of restoring a
peaceful existence in Iraq for people of all faiths.
We believe that the assistance of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq in establishing that dialogue
through support for national reconciliation initiatives
launched by the various Iraqi political forces and their
transformation into a single comprehensive settlement
plan for Iraq should remain a priority for the Mission.
We commend the spirit and conscience of its staff as
they continue to work in conditions that are seriously
threatened by terrorism and the ongoing war with ISIL.
Iraq needs international assistance, and there is still
much to do to normalize its situation.

