Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): Let me first thank you,
Sir, for your invitation and for organizing this session
on sanctions. There could be no better time than this, I
think, to focus on the need to improve the instruments
for the maintenance of international peace and security.

Many situations in the past, when words of
condemnation have had little effect and military force
has been seen as the last resort, have triggered a search
for other means to influence behaviour and obtain
compliance with the decisions of the Security Council.

Something between words and war - that is how
the instruments of sanctions can be described. Like
other tools, they can be truly effective only if they are
sharp enough, focused enough and designed for the
particular operation they are intended to perform. This
is about targeted sanctions, and how such sanctions can
be developed into an even more important tool to help
the Security Council fulfil its primary task of
maintaining international peace and security.

I am here to present to the Council the results of
what we have called the Stockholm Process on the
Implementation of Targeted Sanctions. That project has
dealt with how to increase the efficiency of sanctions
by reforming and improving their implementation,
while also minimizing unintentional negative
consequences.

This is the third initiative in a growing
international debate on the need for more efficient,
more fine-tuned and more humane sanctions. The first
was taken in Interlaken, Switzerland, and focused on
targeted financial sanctions. That was followed, as the
Council knows, by the Bonn-Berlin process on arms
embargoes, travel and aviation-related sanctions. The
Governments of Switzerland and of Germany
recognized early on the need to make sanctions
smarter.

The Stockholm report is the result of a process
that lasted for more than a year. It has engaged
government officials, non-governmental organizations,
regional organizations and international institutions, as
well as academics and experts from various areas with
expertise in the field of sanctions implementation.

Targeted sanctions are designed to focus
specifically on the individuals or other entities that are
responsible for threats to and breaches of international
peace and security. Ideally, such sanctions will leave
other parts of the population, as well as international
trade relations, unaffected.

The main goal of the Stockholm Process has been
to suggest ways to strengthen the capacity to
implement such targeted sanctions, both here within the
United Nations system and among Member States. One
priority has been to identify measures to enhance the
planning, monitoring, reporting and coordination
among sanctions committees and monitoring bodies.

In the booklet that is before members, which is
full of suggestions for the implementation of United
Nations policy options, there is a set of guidelines for
how the work of United Nations panels and
mechanisms that are tasked with the monitoring of
sanctions can be improved. Members will also find that
it suggests the idea of establishing a sanctions
coordinator, or special adviser, to further improve and
support coordination among sanctions committees,
expert panels and monitoring mechanisms.

My own conviction that more can be done within
the United Nations system to improve the sanctions
regimes goes back several years, to 1997, when I was
chosen as the first chairperson of the Sierra Leone
sanction Committee. Looking back at my work then, I
clearly see missed opportunities - situations in which
too little rather than too much was done. With better
resources and better coordination, much more is now
possible.

But sanctions are only as strong as the structures
within which they are implemented. That is why the
Stockholm Process has looked at different ways to
enhance and support Member State implementation by
strengthened national capacity. The report before the
Council includes an elaborated model law for
developing legal frameworks for sanctions
implementation.

Members will also find various national
measures, listed according to the type of sanctions to
be implemented. In addition, there is a
recommendation to address a special questionnaire to
Member States on their capacity to implement
sanctions and on their ability to provide technical
assistance to Member States that need it.

While the use of these tools or sanctions has
increased, there has been growing concern over the
negative effects of economic sanctions on vulnerable
populations and societies in general. The collateral
effects of sanctions on third States have been
highlighted, and rightly so. At the same time, many key
actors - those that are intended to be the targets of
sanctions - have evaded and circumvented such
measures by various means. That is a problem that is
increasing. It not only affects the effectiveness of
sanctions themselves, but risks eroding the very
legitimacy of the measures imposed. The Stockholm
Process recommends a number of different strategies,
depending on the type of sanctions, to counter
sanctions evasion and maintain the accuracy of
sanctions.

How to target sanctions best may look to some
like a technical question. To me, these issues are very
political. When the Security Council takes a decision, it
must be respected all over the world. That respect may
easily be eroded if the action decided upon cannot be
well implemented. That is why sanctions that work,
and sanctions that lead to results, will be so important
for public support, and for the support that the United
Nations itself would thereby gain.

The Government of Sweden sincerely hopes that
the concrete and practical results of the Stockholm
Process will be of value for policy makers and
implementers at all levels. Above all, I hope that they
will be of some use to you, Mr. President, and your 14
colleagues, as you constructively carry out your
immense responsibility, on behalf of all of us, for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

