Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
The last leg of the Security Council's mission was in
Kinshasa on 20 June, and I had the honour to lead it. It
was the Council's eighth visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, but this visit had a particular
nature because it came in the new context following
the elections, which were successful. One can say that
the page has been turned, in terms of the transition.
Thus, this visit took place in a new context.

The mission took place following the adoption of
resolution 1756 (2007), in which the Council decided
to extend the presence of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) by adapting its mandate to the
post-transitional period. We were thus able to reaffirm
to the new Congolese authorities the commitment of
the United Nations to help them consolidate peace,
democratic institutions and the rule of law during that
period, while reviewing with them the chief challenges
still facing the country.

After meeting with Bill Swing and his team, we
met the President of the Republic, several members of
the Government together with the acting Prime
Minister, the Conference of Presidents of the Senate
and the Conference of Presidents of the National
Assembly. We had two thematic meetings with
Congolese officials on key subjects - one on security
sector reform and the other on the region of the Kivus.

I believe that the mission was very useful; I will
address the chief issues dealt with by the mission and
give the Council my assessment.

First, we welcomed the adoption of the
Government's programme and encouraged the
authorities to implement it rapidly, in particular the
good governance contract it contains, so that the
populations may receive peace dividends. There is a
legitimate impatience among the Congolese, and the
authorities assured us of their determination to make
rapid progress, although the Government had been in
power only for three months. The Government stressed
that it was beginning to work on each of the five
priority areas it had identified, as could be seen in the
budget adopted by the National Assembly, which will
soon be considered by the Senate. A road map for local
elections has been drawn up. It seems to me a good
omen that, we were told, relations were good between
donors and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
authorities, which is important for the smooth
implementation of the Government's programme.

We raised with the new authorities the question of
regular political dialogue which could be established
between the Congolese authorities and the main
international partners, taking fully into account the new
situation arising from the establishment of
democratically elected institutions. I am informing
Council members that President Kabila said that he
was open to such a dialogue, while indicating that
whether to make it formal or informal was merely a
technical question.

I now come to a subject which is a source of
concern for everyone we spoke with: the situation in
the Kivus. The instability in the Kivus due to activities
of the troops of Laurent Nkunda and members of the
former Rwandan Armed Forces (ex-FAR) and
Interahamwe was raised at each of our meetings. I
believe I can say again - in any case that is how I
felt - that this is currently the most pressing concern
of the Congolese authorities. President Kabila
informed us of his intention to seek a solution
preferably through political and diplomatic means,
without, however, completely excluding recourse to the
selective use of military action against some groups,
given the unacceptable nature of the continuing
violence.
At the political level, the authorities were
planning to organize a round table, in order to involve
the entire population of the Kivus in finding a solution.
At the diplomatic level, the countries of the region
have been increasingly working together, but it seemed
to me that clarifications and greater trust are necessary.
The Congolese authorities stated they were in favour of
pursuing the process. The relations between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda in
particular are key in order to fully resolve the problems
in the east. Parliamentarians with whom the mission
met expressed their full support for an approach that
stressed the political and diplomatic paths. They noted
that the impatience of a population that has been sorely
tested might lead to quick solutions, but that in reality
the military option had shown its limitations.

With regard to the brigades operating in North
Kivu, the mission left - and it is my belief -
convinced that only brassage was an option, and not
mixage, which is a harmful method of circumventing
the process of army integration.

That leads me to my second point, which was at
the heart of our discussion: security sector reform. The
general view, mentioned by everyone we spoke with,
was that this must remain a priority. That is also the
opinion of the Security Council. At that point, it
appeared to us that more progress had been made to
date with respect to the police than with respect to the
army, even though, as Council members know, a
number of integrated brigades had already been
established. We stated that we thought it necessary to
immediately consolidate the gains and to add to that
initial effort in order to build a truly professional army.
So that the international community could organize in
order to help the Congolese authorities, we asked those
authorities to formulate a plan defining the size and
type of army that country needs and that matches its
resources.

We also called on our interlocutors to take the
necessary measures to put an end to the abuses
committed by elements of the national security forces;
the Congolese authorities, including President Kabila,
assured us of their determination to address that
problem by taking action at all levels of the military
hierarchy. In more general terms I think we all noted
with interest the commitment of the authorities,
starting with the President of the Republic, to
combating impunity and reforming the judiciary.
In accordance with our terms of reference, we
also raised the question of the relationship with the
opposition: the importance of respecting the space and
the role conferred on opposition parties by the
constitution and the need for all political parties to
remain committed to the political process and to
national reconciliation, with full respect for the
constitutional framework and the rule of law. Those
were subjects we raised with all of our interlocutors.
We noted that the opposition played a significant role
in the parliament and that the National Assembly had
just adopted a draft law on the status of the political
opposition, which has now been transmitted to the
Senate.

I wish finally to take this opportunity to thank,
before the Council, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Bill Swing, and all of the
personnel of MONUC for their tireless efforts in the
field to help the Congolese people. Now that the
transition has concluded, it is important to stress that
the relationship between the United Nations and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is a partnership.
The scale of the challenges will come as no surprise to
the Council, since it recently decided to maintain
MONUC at full capacity; that Mission remains the
largest peacekeeping operation currently deployed by
the United Nations.

But I think that what we can draw from the
mission is, above all, the determination to act
expressed by the Congolese authorities. That
determination is in response to the high expectations of
the population. The Council should thus continue to
give the Congolese authorities its unstinting
encouragement and support, with full respect for
Congolese sovereignty.

In conclusion, I should like, on behalf of all the
members of the Council, to thank President Kabila and
the Congolese authorities for the warm welcome we
received at Kinshasa.

