The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Canada, Chile,
the Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Denmark, Egypt,
India, Indonesia, Israel, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya,
Malawi, Namibia, Nigeria, the Philippines, the
Republic of Korea, Senegal, South Africa, Switzerland,
Ukraine and Zambia, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cappagli
(Argentina), Mr. Tesch (Australia), Mr. Westdal
(Canada), Mr. Maquieira (Chile), Mr. Ikouebe
(Congo), Mr. Stagno (Costa Rica), Mr. Simonovie
(Croatia), Ms. Laj (Denmark), Mr. Aboul Gheit
(Egypt), Mr. Nambiar (India), Mr. Thayeb
(Indonesia), Mr. Lancry (Israel), Mr. Neil
(Jamaica), Ms. Inoguchi (Japan), Mr. Ligabo
(Kenya), Mr. Lamba (Malawi), Mr. Andjaba
(Namibia), Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria), Mr. Manalo
(Philippines), Mr. Lee Ho-jin (Republic of Korea), Mr. Fall (Senegal), Mr. Kumalo
(South Africa), Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland),
Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine) and Mr. Musambachime
(Zambia) took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jayantha Dhanapala, Under-
Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs.

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Dhanapala to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members have before them the report of the
Secretary-General on small arms, document
S/2002/1053.

I now call on Mr. Jayantha Dhanapala, Under-
Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs, to
introduce the report.


