Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me also thank Her
Excellency Ms. Mary Robinson and His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon for their briefings.

Germany very much welcomes the Secretary-
General's vision and priorities, which strongly focus
on conflict prevention and resolution. We highly
appreciate the work of the United Nations good offices,
notably through the Special Envoys and Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General. We need to
support them in their often very challenging work. At
the same time, we highly appreciate all the other ways
in which the United Nations contributes to mediation
efforts through special political missions and mediation
support, which often remains invisible but is highly
important for conflict resolution and prevention.

Mediation is a key instrument for advancing the
peaceful resolution of conflicts. It can help bridge the
societal and ideological divisions between conflicting
parties because it covers the entire spectrum,
from conflict prevention and supporting ceasefire
negotiations to implementing agreements and the
political reform processes arising from them. We
are convinced that we need to think of prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding as a continuum.

Mediation processes can serve as a starting point
for additional support efforts, for example in cases
of pending comprehensive transformation processes,
such as demilitarization, promotion of the rule of law
and security sector or constitutional reform. In such
situations, mediating in conflict means creating entry
points for further engagement. In all such efforts,
human rights also play a very crucial role in mediation
processes, as well as in conflict prevention. That helps
to identify grievances that, ifleft unaddressed, can lead
to conflict. Human rights standards should not be used
negatively only for naming and shaming, but should
be used positively to provide a framework to devise
sustainable solutions to address those grievances.
Human rights can thus make mediation processes better
geared towards conflict prevention.

The Security Council can play a powerful role
in preventing conflict and in mediation processes
and should make use of it with regard to its mandate
of maintaining peace and security. Our Indonesian
colleague just reminded us of that core task of the
Council. We also feel that the Council should, more
often, not only identify early warning but go from early
warning to early action. That would be very important.
The Council's work would be alleviated, much more
efficient and much better geared towards fulfilling its
mandate according to the Charter of the United Nations
if it were not merely reactive. For example, when it
comes to mediation, the transitions from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding often occur in environments of
political transformation of the peace process.

Mediation on different tracks needs to be included
when transforming the United Nations presence in
a country in order to align international support to
expectations and deal-making on the ground. We
believe that the United Nations, and in particular its
Mediation Support Unit, should remain a strong actor
in mediation. That is also why we - Germany - are
one of the main donors to the Mediation Support Unit,
with a contribution of €3 million in 2018.

The same applies to conflict prevention. Conflict
prevention remains a key priority for our membership
of the Security Council. It is a topic in which we
have invested politically and financially. We are the
largest donor to the Joint United Nations Development
Programme-United Nations Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs Programme on Building
National Capacities for Conflict Prevention and have
also invested considerable resources into our own
Foreign Office, with a dedicated early warning unit.

At the same time, I would like to underline that the
Council should use the entire toolbox at its disposal when
it comes to conflict prevention. Very often, we focus
on the use of the military in peacekeeping operations.
We feel that we should invest more time and energy
into considering the use of police in peace operations.
Police work is often the best way to achieve prevention.
In many operations, police can be used much more
significantly, and we should always consider the use of
preventive police work wherever it makes sense.

Now, many colleagues have already alluded to the
issue of inclusion, which I would also like to underline.
When it comes to mediation and conflict prevention,
what we always need is an inclusive process. Peace
processes cannot be sustainable when they involve only
those in power or those who hold guns. They obviously
need to involve a broad range of parties, elites and
local actors, including women and youth. Experience
has shown that the most successful peace processes are
supported by the population and benefit from the buy-
in of all concerned groups. Women mediators are an
especially important part of successful and sustainable
mediation efforts. Germany is an active supporter of
the women and peace and security agenda, including
during our time as an elected member of the Council.

Before I conclude, let me say a few words on what we
are doing nationally to promote conflict prevention and
mediation. Our approach to peace mediation adheres
to the United Nations guiding principles for mediation,
and we will continue working closely with other United
Nations Member States to increase the role of mediation
as an instrument to prevent conflict and sustain peace.
In two days, on 14 June, the Federal Foreign Office will
launch its own peace mediation framework in Berlin
and discuss it with cooperation partners.

Germany not only mediates directly, as in the
case of Ukraine, but also supports more than 30
peace processes by sending mediation experts and
assists in dialogue processes on the regional and
local levels. Independent and third-party actors are
close and important cooperation partners in those
endeavours. We also work in close cooperation with
local communities, both on the settlement of disputes
and climate protection issues.

Many speakers before me have alluded to the
important nexus between climate change and security.
As climate change is often a driver of instability, we
therefore feel that we have to look more Closely into that
issue, including when it comes to conflict prevention and
mediation. The nexus among climate issues, sustainable
development, security and peace promotion is, from
our point of View, very relevant. It often goes hand in
hand and needs to be addressed as an interdependent
factor in mediation and conflict prevention.

In conclusion, let me say that Germany is also a
proud member of the Group of Friends of Mediation,
chaired by Turkey and Finland, and I would like to
thank the Chairs and all the members of the Group for
their work. We believe that the Group has contributed
to the professionalization of mediation support.

