Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I wish at the
outset to thank the Acting Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for his briefing. We very much
appreciate the presence here of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Timor-Leste and his participation in today's
debate.

This has been a pivotal year for Timor-Leste. It
has marked the tenth anniversary of its independence
and conducted a landmark general election that
resulted in a democratic and peaceful transfer of
power to a new Government. That election was held
against the backdrop of an increasingly stable security
environment. It conformed to international standards,
and its outcome was accepted by all parties. We
commend the Government and the people of Timor-
Leste on those achievements. They are significant
milestones in Timor-Leste's continued development
and represent real progress in consolidating their State.

The United Nations has played an essential role in
that progress, helping the people of Timor-Leste get back
on their feet. Because of that progress, it is right that
the international community's relationship with Timor-
Leste should continue to evolve. Indeed, this year has
seen a real shift in the United Nations relationship with
Timor-Leste, with the planned departure of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).
We welcome UNMIT's successful drawdown and look
forward to its full withdrawal by the end of this year.

The level of cooperation between UNMIT and
the Timorese Government throughout the Mission's
mandate has been exemplary. The Joint Transition
Plan has set the benchmark for future transitions, with
the United Nations and the host State working closely
together and producing a comprehensive, detailed plan
for safeguarding the future stability of the country.

The Joint Transition Plan will need to be looked
at again in the light of the proposal that changes the
engagement of the United Nations from a peacekeeping
Mission to a country team. For that change to be smooth,
we must adequately plan to scale up the United Nations
country team and ensure that it has the capabilities that
it needs.

UNMIT's departure is a key test for Timor-Leste.
To date, we have ensured that the Mission's drawdown
proceeds effectively and efficiently while safeguarding
stability. That can be a difficult balance to strike.
But the drawdown has been an example of effective
disengagement, establishing sound principles for future
successful transitions elsewhere.

The lessons learned from that process should
be incorporated into the guidance on transition and
mission drawdown that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations is now developing. A great deal of thought
has already gone into what shape the United Nations
follow-on role should take. We support the Timor-
Leste Government's desire to see the Organization's
efforts in Timor-Leste led by a United Nations country
team, as set out in Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao's
September letter to the Secretary-General (S/2012/736, annex). At the same time, it is right that the Security
Council should remain informed on the situation in
Timer-Leste. We therefore propose that the Secretary-
General give due consideration to how best that might
be achieved.

As the United Nations Mission draws down and
transitions into a country team, we also welcome the
willingness demonstrated by the Timorese Government
and people to take responsibility for their development
and for safeguarding their hard-won security. In that
regard, we applaud the Timor-Leste leadership in
promoting the implementation of the New Deal for
Engagement in Fragile States, its role as a co-Chair of
the Group of Seven Plus fragile States, and its decision
to act as a pilot country for the New Deal.

While UNMIT, along with the people and
Government of Timor-Leste, has laid firm foundations
for peace and security, we will need to remain vigilant
to protect that progress. Relapses into conflict can be
all too sudden. The United Nations should keep the
Council informed of any warning signs in that regard,
perhaps through the reports of a special envoy or the
horizon-scanning conducted by the Department of
Political Affairs. Hard-won gains in security and
stability should not be lost for want of keeping alert to
and acting upon signs of renewed fragility.

Almost exactly 10 years ago, Timor-Leste was
the l91st State to join the United Nations family. The
intervening years have been turbulent and tough. It
is a tribute to the people of Timor-Leste and to the
commitment of the international community that a
country, while still fragile, is able to take another step
towards sustained peace and stability.

