The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Kazakhstan.

We join others in expressing appreciation to Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix for his comprehensive
briefing and we welcome the presence of Mr. Tieman
Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali,
in the Chamber. We endorse the Secretary-General's
quarterly report (S/2017/1105), and wish to follow up
with some observations.

The key step is to prioritize the full and inclusive
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. We encourage all parties
to comply with the recently revised timeline
for implementing the remaining provisions of
the Agreement.

We believe that the assistance of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and of the international community
is crucial to ensure the transparent, fair and peaceful
conduct of the 2018 elections, as they, in turn, will
facilitate realizing the Agreement.

Likewise, it is necessary to establish, through
reform, the foundations for a stable rule of law,
reinforced by independent and accountable judicial
and security institutions. We also appreciate the
United Nations efforts to ensure accountability and
to fight impunity by the creation of the International
Commission of Inquiry. The genuine inclusion of
women in the peace process and in decision-making is
another important measure for enduring stability.

Kazakhstan is alarmed by the security and
humanitarian situations, which have significantly
deteriorated, and calls on international partners and
donors to provide the pledged humanitarian aid.
We believe that the upcoming strategic review of
MINUSMA will contribute to enhancing the Mission's
capabilities and to improving the security situation.

We are pleased to note the strengthened
cooperation among MINUSMA, the African Union, the
European Union and the Sahel countries in combating
terrorism and other cross-border threats, and commend
international partners for mobilizing financial support
for the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel.

Finally, to address the root causes of conflict in
Mali, military operations must go hand in hand with
well-integrated and coordinated development efforts,
reinforced by sustainable funding. In that regard, we
fully support the projects of the Peacebuilding Fund,
as well as the Government's multidimensional strategy
for the central regions, and call for the finalizing of the
development agenda for the northern regions.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of the Republic
of Mali.

