Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, my delegation would like to congratulate the
Kuwaiti presidency for its excellent and participatory
work in guiding the Security Council's efforts during
this particularly busy month, which is reflected in the
number of resolutions that have been adopted.

Peru voted in favour of resolution 2480 (2019), as
we believe it is vital to continue to support Mali in its
efforts to assert the State authority, protect civilians
and achieve peace and national reconciliation.

We would like to thank France for its efforts
undertaken during the discussions on the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
in order to achieve consensus among all members of
the Council, bearing in mind the importance of this
peacekeeping operation. We welcome in particular
the fact that this resolution establishes clear and
specific criteria for the effective implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
which we reiterate must remain the priority for the
people and Government of Mali. We also underscore
that the resolution includes a more appropriate mandate
for MINUSMA, which can help it address the dramatic
situation in the centre of the country. Once again, we
stress the importance of Council members continuing
to work together to provide MINUSMA with the
necessary tools, because its presence on the ground is
essential for achieving stability in Mali.

Before concluding, my delegation would like
to take this opportunity to convey to Ambassador
Francois Delattre, Permanent Representative of France
to the United Nations, our best wishes for success in the
high-level functions that have been entrusted to him by
his Government, which he will soon take up. We are
sure that his outstanding contribution in the new role
that he is taking will be as valuable as it has been in the
Council, during which time he has worked effectively
to address the issues on the Council's agenda, such as
the maintenance of international peace and security.
I warmly congratulate him and extend to him the
friendship of the Peruvian delegation.

