Mr. Jtirgenson (Estonia): We join other Council members in thanking the briefers for their insightful overviews. Last year, during the high-level week of the General Assembly, Prime Minister Hamdok introduced his Government's ambitious goals to bring peace to the country, lead a successful transition to democracy and restore the economy. Despite the multiple challenges, such as the coronavirus disease, the Sudan has made great efforts to achieve those goals. While a great deal of work still lies ahead, we recognize the progress already achieved. In that regard, allow me to congratulate the Sudan on reaching the peace agreement. We further encourage the parties that have not yet joined the peace agreement to do so urgently. We hope that this agreement will pave the way for lasting peace in the Sudan. For this to happen, addressing the root causes of conflict is imperative. As with any peace agreement, implementation is key. While the Sudan will be clearly in the lead, we hope that it can feel the full and unwavering support of the international community through the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) in the endeavour of implementation. We also welcome the progress the Sudan has made in the political transition to democracy. For instance, the appointment of civilian governors was a key milestone. Equally significant was the adoption of legal reforms that strengthen human rights. We encourage the Sudan to continue on this path of institution-building, as strong democratic institutions form the backbone of democracy. Again, we hope that UNITAMS can be a solid partner in the endeavour of helping the Sudan to achieve full democracy. The Sudan continues to face immense economic challenges. Estonia was proud to contribute to the High- Level Sudan Partnership Conference held in June, but it recognizes that more needs to be done. The Sudan needs continued support to heal its crippled economy. We hope that sustained support will be provided by UNITAMS, among other actors. UNITAMS was established with the sole purpose of supporting the Sudan during its historic transition. Given the immense challenges the Sudan is facing, it is crucial that UNITAMS have sufficient capacity andadequate resources and be fit for purpose to offer support in all areas where the Sudan needs help. This also applies to the security situation. We welcome the willingness of the Sudan to address civilian protection head-on, but also recognize some of the capacity constraints, where the United Nations can be helpful. On that note, we would also like to commend the cooperation between the Sudan and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in addressing the recent outbreak of violence in Darfur. It serves as a true example of how much more can be achieved if actors work together for a common goal. Therefore, it is our hope that UNITAMS, as well as UNAMID, are embraced by the Sudan as true partners that will help the Sudan to rise to the challenges it is currently facing. We also join other colleagues in highlighting the importance of appointing the Special Representative of the Secretary-General as soon as possible. In conclusion, Estonia wants to see the Sudan succeed. We hope that, with the support of the United Nations, including UNITAMS, the Sudan is able to reach all of its goals of achieving peace, democracy and prosperity.
