Mr. Kulyk (Ukraine): At the outset, Madam, I
would like to express appreciation for the excellent
manner in which you are presiding over the work of the
Security Council. Let me thank you and the delegation
of Chile for convening this important meeting.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
substantive report (S/2003/1053). Ukraine also
congratulates his Special Representative on Children
and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, and the
Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Carol Bellamy, on
their tremendous work in the interest of children.

Since the first consideration of this issue by the
Security Council with the participation of Ukraine, in

1998, we have made certain progress in this field. Four
Security Council resolutions formed a strong basis for
advocacy on behalf of war-affected children. The scope
of international instruments has been strengthened and
expanded. Among them is the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. I am pleased
to inform the Council that two weeks ago the President
of Ukraine submitted the Optional Protocol to the
Ukrainian parliament for ratification.

However, success in standard-setting must not be
cause for complacency - quite the contrary. While the
existing standards are high, the picture continues to be
very grim when it comes to implementation on the
ground.

Ukraine reiterates its support for the Security
Council's efforts to reinforce the protection of children.
We emphasize the innovative contribution that
resolutions 1379 (2001) and 1460 (2003) represent,
particularly the publication of a list of parties to armed
conflicts that recruit or use children in violation of
international law. The political importance of this list is
undeniable, and it should certainly be maintained.
However, its true value will become apparent only
when the Security Council defines the actions it needs
to undertake in that respect. We support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to the
Council to take concrete steps where insufficient or no
progress has been made by parties in implementing
resolutions 1379 (2001) and 1460 (2003).

As we see from the report, the list of
Governments and armed groups using children in
armed conflicts has now become much longer than it
was a year ago, and the assessment of progress made
by those parties during the same year is very modest.
Frankly speaking, I am not sure that every group
named in the list has been made aware of the fact of its
publication.

It is incumbent upon all of us to move away from
general statements to specific action and to build a
system of accountability that cannot be ignored. In that
regard, as Mr. Otunnu rightly pointed out, we need a
systematic, integrated and concerted monitoring and
reporting mechanism to provide timely and accurate
information on violations of the rights of children in
armed conflicts.

Who should undertake this monitoring and
reporting? In our opinion, it should be a network of
actors, each of whom would bring the added value
represented by their respective areas of jurisdiction,
competence and expertise. Those actors include the
Security Council, the United Nations Children's Fund,
the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
United Nations peacekeeping missions and country
teams and other United Nations agencies, as well as
non-governmental organizations. I believe we can
create a global culture that will hold anyone to account
who uses or abuses children or destroys them and their
innocence, as one would hold anyone to account who
uses weapons of mass destruction.

Peacekeeping missions have a crucial role to play
in providing protection for children. Ukraine continues
to advocate the deployment of child protection advisers
in peacekeeping missions in order to effectively
integrate the rights, protection and well-being of
children into peacekeeping and peace-building
processes. We especially appreciate the fact that child
protection advisers are already being deployed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Cote d'Ivoire and
Angola. In addition, the training of both military and
civilian peacekeeping personnel in child protection and
children's rights should be undertaken in every
peacekeeping mission.

When designing peacekeeping operations, the
Security Council should make every effort to protect
both children and their supporting environment:
schools, hospitals, health centres and religious
institutions. Once child soldiers have been rescued
from armed groups, they should not be left alone to
survive in circumstances socially and economically
devastated by war. Their sustainable rehabilitation will
require coordinated efforts and resources from the
United Nations system and the rest of the international
community.

We must make a better effort to assist those
children who have been orphaned, made homeless,
handicapped, traumatized, deprived of education or
abused in countless other ways by war. It is also
important to focus on children in post-conflict
reconciliation programmes. There is an urgent need for
the international community to support programmes -
including advocacy and social services - for the
demobilization and community reintegration of child
soldiers. Such children should be offered new
experiences that will change their identity from that of
soldiers. Education and training remain fundamental to
that end; they will not only help children avoid
participating in conflicts, but will also build an
educated society in post-conflict countries and promote
their development.

In conclusion, I wish to express the hope that this
debate - and the forthcoming draft resolution initiated
by the French delegation - will set out an important
agenda and a basis for the future work of the Council
and that of other United Nations bodies. They must
undertake joint actions not only to curtail the abuse of
children, but also to protect those who have yet to face
the world from losing their childhood and their dreams
before they have the opportunity to truly come to life.

