Mr. Skau (Sweden): I would like to align myself
with the statement to be made later today on behalf of
the European Union.

I would also like to thank Special Envoy Mladenov

for his timely briefing to the Security Council
this morning.

Together with Egypt and France, Sweden called for
yesterday's discussion in the Council because we were
deeply concerned by the heightened tensions and violent
clashes, including loss of life in and around occupied
East Jerusalem, particularly at Haram Al-Sharif/Temple
Mount. It is critical to avoid any further escalation of
the situation, which, as highlighted by Mr. Mladenov,
could have consequences far beyond the walls of the
Old City.

Since the Council met yesterday, we have learned
that Israel has decided to remove the metal detectors at
the entrances of the Holy Esplanade - a key demand
from the Palestinian side, as well as Jordan and many
other Arab countries. That is a step that we hope can
pave the way for de-escalation. It remains of great
importance to uphold the historic status quo at the
holy sites.

Jerusalem is home to three religions, and it has a
special status granted by the United Nations in 1947.
The special role of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
and of His Majesty King Abdullah II, as recognized in
the peace treaty between Jordan and Israel, is key, and
we appreciate the efforts that Jordan, as well as many
others, are making to find a solution to the crisis.

While we are hopefully close to a solution to
the immediate crisis, we must not lose sight of
the urgent need to find a just, comprehensive and
sustainable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Developments on the ground, unfortunately, continue
to take us further away from the two-State solution.

We are deeply concerned about the recent Israeli
announcement of the issuance of building permits
for 1,500 new settlement units in East Jerusalem. As
reaffirmed in resolution 2334 (2016), the establishment
of settlements by Israel in occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, constitutes a
flagrant violation of international law. Settlements
further constitute a major obstacle to peace and, if not
reversed, will render the two-State solution impossible.
We call on the Israeli authorities to immediately reverse
that decision.

We unequivocally condemn all acts of violence
against civilians, including acts of terrorism. We
condemned the attack on 14 July in the Old City
of Jerusalem and we welcome the swift and firm
condemnation by President Abbas in that regard. In
line with resolution 2334 (2016), we reiterate the call
for immediate steps to prevent such violence, as well
as all acts of provocation and destruction, and for
accountability in that regard.

We are extremely worried about the situation in
Gaza, particularly the humanitarian consequences of
the energy crisis and Israel's policy ofclosure. Civilians,
including women and children, should not pay the price
for this long-lasting crisis. However, they continue to
do so on a daily basis. The energy crisis, which has
resulted in lack of access to basic essential services,
including water and sanitation, is an assault on their
human dignity. Sweden is one of the major donors to
Gaza and recently made additional funding available,
given the gravity of the situation.

While humanitarian assistance is needed to
mitigate the effects on the people of Gaza, it alone will
never resolve the problem. All Palestinian factions
must commit to finding a solution to the energy crisis.
Furthermore, while fully understanding the legitimate
security concerns of Israel and Palestine, full and
sustained access for humanitarian actors and all donors
is crucial. An immediate end to the Israeli closure
policy is therefore necessary.

The question of Gaza should not be separated
from the peace process. All Palestinian factions need
to engage in good faith in a reconciliation process
that leads to a unified Palestinian leadership and the
reunification of Gaza with the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem.

Fifty years ago, the Council affirmed that the
fulfilment of the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations required the establishment of just and lasting
peace in the Middle East, including the right to live in
peace within secure and recognized boundaries, free
from threats and acts of force. Today, 50 years later, we
have yet to realize that just and lasting peace.

Ending the occupation and achieving a two-State
solution is the only way forward. The two-State solution
reflects the consensus of the international community
and must not be called into question. However, it
is becoming more distant by the day. Unless we act,
we are moving rapidly towards not only perpetual
occupation, but a one-State reality, which would not be
in the interests of the State of Israel.
The United States has always played a leading
role in efforts to advance peace in the Middle East.
We are encouraged by continued efforts by the United
States Administration, and we welcome the holding
of the Quartet meeting of 13 July. We hope that it
will constitute the first step towards relaunching a
meaningful peace process, leading to the achievement
of the two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine
living side by side in peace and security.

