Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I thank Under-
Secretary-General J can-Marie Guehenno for his
valuable briefing on the current situation in Kosovo.

Kosovo is a key element for peace and stability in
the Balkans. Brazil supports the process of peace and
reconciliation foreseen by resolution 1244 (1999) and
the "standards before status" policy for Kosovo.

The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) have performed quite well on the ground.
After five years of work, the United Nations presence
has been central in the fight against crime, terror and
ethnic cleansing.

However, last month the worst outbreaks of
violence since the end of the conflict took place in the
region, proving that extremism and separatism are still
very much alive and that their proponents are anxious
to take every opportunity to create further instability.
Those responsible for the murderous riots must be
brought to justice.

Despite peacekeeping and international police
force efforts, the escalation of violence could not be
avoided, and it resulted in many casualties. Moreover,
in an extremely unfortunate development, KFOR
soldiers and UNMIK civilian police themselves
became victims of that violence. As a result, it became
necessary to deploy new peacekeeping units in order to
prevent further clashes. We welcome the deployment of
those troops. Their presence has helped to restore calm
to Kosovo, although there are still reports of looting
and unrest.

The Secretary-General's Special Representative
has announced the creation of a body to review the
United Nations Mission's response to the recent crisis.
We agree that an independent evaluation of the
situation can lead to valuable suggestions for
improving the effectiveness of the work of the Mission.

We remain aware of the fragility of the situation
on the ground. Brutal incidents have unveiled
intentions to force a solution to the status question
through violence and intimidation. The international
community must respond in a clear and unequivocal
manner. After all, the Council has already condemned
violence, particularly ethnically motivated violence.
Armed groups carrying out their own agendas cannot
be allowed to jeopardize the long-standing commitment
of the United Nations or to derail the reconciliation
process. Moreover, it is our mission to avoid the
recurrence of the shameful episodes of ethnic cleansing
that took place in the past.

The goal of a stable, democratic, tolerant and
multi-ethnic Kosovo can be reached only through joint
action. Full protection of human rights is essential to
reach peace on the basis of international law.
Rebuilding confidence and trust among the different
ethnic communities goes in tandem with rebuilding
churches and homes that were destroyed.

In this regard we welcome the launching of
Kosovo's very detailed Standards Implementation Plan,
which must be carried out in strict compliance with
resolution 1244 (1999). The Plan sets up valuable
guidelines and goals in key areas in the effort to bring
peace and stability to Kosovo, such as building
democratic institutions, holding locally managed
elections, enforcing minorities' rights and freedom of
movement and strengthening the economy. It sets the
re-establishment of the rule of law as its first priority,
which, given the recent events, is fundamental. In this
connection we see the entering into effect of Kosovo's
provisional criminal procedure code and provisional
criminal code as positive developments.

Brazil has stressed on many occasions the
importance of the cooperation of all parties involved -
above all, cooperation between the authorities in
Pristina and Belgrade. The success of the Standards
Implementation Plan, which points to a truly multi-
ethnic society in Kosovo, requires dialogue and the
participation of all individuals and groups, including
all minorities. Strong commitment to the Provisional
Institutions, engagement in the political process and
the adoption of economic reforms remain the only hope
in the face of the resurgence of conflict.

