Mr. Mayr-Harting: I am speaking on behalf of
the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
acceding country Croatia; the candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Iceland and Serbia; the country of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

We welcome the initiative of the United States to
discuss strengthening the capacity of the United
Nations to assist Member States in securing their
borders against the illicit trafficking and movement of
materials, funds and goods, as well as human beings.
We should all aim for better coordination of all the
United Nations bodies that contribute to the fight
against such illicit cross-border trafficking and
movements.

As we all know, in the context of globalization
borders cannot now be perceived as barriers. The
fluidity of circulation of goods, funds and people is of
great importance to trade, economic prosperity and
human development. Facilitating that, without reducing
security, is therefore important for all trade, financial
and cultural flows. At the same time, international
terrorism and organized crime have increasingly
exploited globalization and technological progress to
facilitate the development of illicit trafficking and
movements, generating illegitimate gains and seriously
undermining through corruption and violence the
stability and development of States and regions,
creating the vicious cycle of an environment conducive
to such illicit activities.

For the European Union and its member States,
border management is a priority area of action to
address and prevent such threats and challenges.
Integrated border management, linking migration
management tools as well as control of the movement
of goods and funds, underpinned by an intelligence-led
and multidisciplinary approach, is part of the European
Union's comprehensive panoply of weapons in the
fight against ever more sophisticated and often
interconnected forms and groups of international
organized crime and terrorist groups and activities.

The European Union is addressing the threats
related to the smuggling and trafficking of goods and
persons at borders by applying the Global Approach to
Migration and Mobility. The role of the European
Agency for the Management of Operational
Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member
States of the European Union has recently been
strengthened to allow it, for example, to share personal
information with the European Police Office (Europol)
and other European agencies on those suspected of
cross-border crimes and to cooperate more closely with
the suspects' countries of origin and transit.

All those efforts are supported by relevant
legislation and coherent policies, in particular in the
area of the control of illicit movement of goods, funds
and persons, transport security, maritime surveillance
and international cooperation. EU structures such as
Europol, Eurojust, the European Arrest Warrant, the
joint investigation teams and police and customs
cooperation provide us with efficient mechanisms to
better tackle terrorism and organized crime.

Support for relevant United Nations international
legal instruments and United Nations programmes of
technical assistance, as provided by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, for example, should help
to further augment international cooperation aimed at
addressing such global threats and challenges.

The fight against illicit cross-border trafficking
and movements requires international cooperation, the
sharing of best practices and standards and the
exchange of information and intelligence in order to
develop a comprehensive picture of threats and to
facilitate a coordinated approach. Ensuring the proper
implementation of sanctions regimes, for which
effective border management is also relevant, is
important.

Integrated border management is only one
element, but a key one, in the global effort to ensure
greater effectiveness on the part of the international
community in fighting illicit cross-border trafficking
and movement. Where efficient tools already
developed by organizations such as Interpol, the World
Customs Organization, the International Maritime
Organization and EU agencies are in place, they should
be systematically used instead of being applied as ad
hoc solutions, which may negatively impact long-term
sustainability and ownership of United Nations
assistance. Numerous United Nations agencies are
directly or indirectly involved in those domains, with
different scopes and mandates, and their enhanced
coordination is foreseen.

We wish to assure the Council of our appreciation
of the importance of today's topic. The European
Union and its member States provide political,
technical and financial assistance to United Nations
agencies and other partners in numerous regions of the
world. We would therefore welcome and stand ready to
assist the proposed diagnostic assessment by the
Secretariat in order to focus our efforts in the most
effective way possible.

