Mr. Ja'afari (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): First of all,
we would to welcome Mr. Jean Asselborn, Minister
of Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg, who is presiding
over this important meeting. I duly note his remark
that he personally visited the camps of Syrian refugees
in Turkey. I hope that he will visit Syria itself so that
he can see first-hand the conditions of millions - not
just dozen hundreds or thousands - of Syrian children
who suffer from mortar bombs and recruitment by
armed terrorist groups, as is mentioned in the report
of Ms. Zerrougui (A/68/267), and to which I will turn
later. I hope that he will visit Syria so that he can get a
complete picture from the the other viewpoint.

I note with interest the briefings made this morning
and I take this opportunity to reaffirm the commitment
of the Syrian Arab Republic to all international treaties,
conventions and instruments which it acceded to and
ratified at an early date, in particular the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its two Optional Protocols.

Syria has always been a pioneer in providing for
all the needs of children and in promoting their rights
and protection, in particular quality free education and
medical services. This fact has been recognized in the
reports of specialized United Nations agencies over
decades. However, it is regrettable that the current crisis
in Syria has led to inhumane extremist manifestations
that are contrary to the Syrian values of moderation.
Syrian children were the first to suffer under the practices
of mercenaries and takfiris openly imported from all
parts of the world to impose obscurantist Wahhabi
ideas on our children and young people and commit
the most horrific crimes against Syrian children. They
recruit these children and youngsters and train them to
commit the most horrific crimes of terror - slaughter,
kidnapping. maiming, dismemberment, beheading with
axes and swords, disemboweling pregnant women,
hanging their foetuses on trees by the umbilical cord,
and human and organ trafficking. Those are just some
examples.

During scores of meetings of the Security Council,
directly or indirectly related to Syria, I have never
heard that one or more States with influence over the
armed groups in Syria - some of which are members
of the Council - has exercised any pressure on these
terrorist armed groups to lift the blockade of a certain
area in Syria or to stop the militarization of a hospital
or a school in Syria, or to free religious leaders, priests,
nuns and orphans who have been kidnapped for months
or even years. I have not once heard that any of any
States that exercises pressure on terrorist armed groups
had pressed for the release of Syrian women and
children who had been taken hostage, kidnapped and
used as human shields, from Latakia to Deir ez-Zor,
Al-Raqqa and Deraa. I have never heard of anybody
who had pressured those terrorist armed groups to
release women and children who were kidnapped after
dozens and hundreds of them were slaughtered.

The great calamity is not that a group of criminals
and terrorists should commit such acts; it lies in the
fact that these terrorist groups are publically financed,
supported and armed by the Governments of Arab,
regional and international States that have vowed to
take part in these grievous crimes and great sins. They
lost no time and spared no effort in offering large sums
of money, influential media and abhorrent sectarian
incitement to undermine the social, educational and
economic progress that has been achieved by my
country, Syria.

Their aim has also been to subjugate the independence
of the national political decisions of Syria, intentionally
cover up the ongoing terrorism, destruction and
sabotage in Syria, deplete its national wealth of oil and
gas, and open the borders of neighbouring countries to
terrorists and foreign mercenaries into Syrian territory

under shameful pretexts that harm the image of Arabs
and Muslims. Despite this tragic and bleak picture,
some senior officials in the Secretariat still consider
that these events are mere reports that have yet to be
verified.

Despite all of these daunting and unprecedented
challenges, the Syrian Government continues to make
every effort in compliance with its commitments to
protecting children. It has maintained its positive
engagement with the United Nations to uncover the
details of what is happening in Syria, notably the
violations of children's rights as a result of the practices
of armed terrorist groups.

The permanent delegation of the Arab Syrian
Republic to the United Nations circulated an official
memo to the members of the Security Council on
6 February, containing detailed and documented
information and examples of the crimes committed
by armed terrorist groups against Syrian children.
We explained in the memo how these groups have
launched systematic and repeated attacks on schools
and hospitals, stolen their equipment and killed their
staff. We provided the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the members of the Security
Council with a list of 28 cases in which terrorist
groups have targeted schools throughout Syria, and
54 cases of the killing, maiming and kidnapping of
children. Unfortunately, no one in the Secretariat has
made an effort to verify those reports or ask the Syrian
Government for more details about them.

While terrorist armed groups continue to recruit
Syrian children, boys and girls for their military
operations, the relevant authorities in the Syrian
Government are taking legal action with regard to these
recruited children, in accordance with the law on the
recruitment of children adopted on 6 May 2013, which
criminalizes those who recruit children to take part in
any form of combat. That is punishable by a term of
10 to 20 years of hard labour, reaching a life sentence
if the child dies while in combat. It is very important
to underscore that this law deals with the recruited
children as victims by virtue of the juvenile code under
Syrian law. They are placed in social protection centres,
rather than in detention centres, where they reside until
they face a fair trial and are immediately referred to
rehabilitation institutions in cooperation with civil
society and under the supervision of expert mentors.

In another violation of Syrian children's rights,
certain foreign parties and satellite channels
broadcasting from Arab Gulf Arab States recruit Syrian
children to work for them as armed rebels against
the authority of the State and as war correspondents,
giving them cameras and communication equipment
and sending them to unsafe areas to report the news,
thereby jeopardizing their lives, of course, in a violation
of all principles and instruments on the protection of
the rights of the child. We call on the relevant agencies
of the United Nations and the Special Representative
Zerrougui to launch an immediate investigation of
such shameful acts, especially since the competent
authorities in Syria has detained one of the gangs that
manages the recruitment of children. Their confessions
were aired by Syrian television recently.

The Syrian Government, via the Health Ministry,
continues to implement its programmes to promote
child health care. It has launched the fourth stage of
the vaccination campaign against polio, a disease that
was eliminated more than 10 years ago in Syria. Having
said that, everyone knows now that the spread of that
virus in Syria was caused by infected individuals from
the very armed terrorist groups that came to Syria from
Afghanistan, Pakistan and other countries.

We are extremely concerned over the ongoing tragic
situation and grave violations against Syrian children
in the camps of neighbouring countries. Despite the
fact that all actors in the international, regional and
non-governmental organizations, as well as the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, are aware
of the blatant violations that our children face in these
camps, as documented in their reports, we find it
extremely bizarre that there is not a single reference to
any such violations, including sexual violence, forced
marriage, lack of access to education, the separation
of family members in several camps, the violation of
the rights to work and freedom of movement even from
camp to camp, let alone the militarization of many of
those camps and the recruitment of a large number of
Syrian children by armed terrorist groups, whether
under supervision or by the host Governments turning
a blind eye to some of these cases. We are eseriously
concerned that the United Nations has yet to take any
tangible measure with the Governments of neighbouring
countries to address this dangerous phenomenon.

The United Nations is called upon today to work
impartially, transparently and effectively to adopt
measures to protect Syrian child by reminding the
Governments of Member States - some of which are
members of the Council - of their commitments under
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, and to prompt the Governments of States that
support, finance, train and facilitate the transfer of
these armed terrorist and extremist groups to stop these
acts immediately, and to urge those States that take
illegal, unilateral and coercive measures to lift them
immediately.

In conclusion, my country reaffirms that it will
deal firmly with any form of human rights violations.
It stresses its willingness to continue cooperating
with the United Nations and partner regional and
international organizations to uncover the truth of the
situation in Syria, without politicizing, misleading or
agitating public opinion, in order to put an end to all
forms of violence against children in armed conflict
and to punish the perpetrators and instigators of these
acts wherever they come from.

