Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): On
behalf of the United States, I would like to thank High
Representative Solana for his briefing.

We greatly appreciate the efforts of the European
Union to provide a safe and secure environment in
which the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) can operate.
The European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR)
has provided invaluable security protection to refugees,
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and assistance
workers. EUFOR personnel have performed their jobs
admirably under very difficult circumstances. We
recognize their contributions and ask Mr. Solana to
convey to them our deepest gratitude for their efforts.

EUFOR member States have some of the finest
and most experienced troops in the world, who have
gained unique experience over the past six months
while deployed to the region. The proposed follow-on
United Nations force would, of course, profit
immensely from the continued participation of veterans
of the EUFOR deployment. We are very happy to note
that some EUFOR member States have expressed
interest in participating in the proposed follow-on
United Nations force.

We remain very concerned about the continuing
political, military and security volatility in the region,
outlined in the Secretary-General's report of
12 September (8/2008/601). In particular, we are
deeply troubled that internally displaced persons and
refugees in Chad and the Central African Republic
continue to suffer owing to political instability and
general lawlessness and that Sudanese rebel
movements continue to recruit from refugee camps in
eastern Chad. A follow-on United Nations force must
build upon the EUFOR effort and develop the capacity
to protect those vulnerable populations.

The United States continues to support the
presence of MINURCAT in the Central African
Republic. In the Central African Republic, nearly
25,000 IDPs, refugees and humanitarian aid workers
are subject to criminal attacks and increasing banditry.
We believe that a United Nations military presence is
needed in that country to prevent insecurity that could
potentially harm those populations.

We note that a well-trained and well-equipped
security force must be in place prior to EUFOR's
withdrawal next March. There must be a transition
period of sufficient duration and with sufficient
interaction between the departing and arriving forces.
We hope that EUFOR facilities will be transferred to
the United Nations, as that would help with
deployment in a timely manner.

The armed struggle within Chad continues. We
strongly encourage all parties to work diligently
towards full implementation of the Dakar Agreement
and of all existing peace agreements. We commend the
efforts by the Contact Group, and particularly the
Government of Libya, for their work to support a
comprehensive peace between Chad and the Sudan. We
emphasize, as stated in the draft resolution before the
Council today, that a proper settlement of the Darfur
issue and an improvement in the relations between the
Sudan, Chad and the Central African Republic would
contribute to long-term peace and stability in the
region.

