Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I hope you do not
mind, Sir, that I introduce myself by name, because
this is the first time that I am addressing the Council.
My name is Peter Wilson, and I am the new Deputy
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom. It is
an honour to be in this group, and I am proud to be here.

First of all, I really do want to thank the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006),
under your chairmanship, Sir, as well as the Panel of
Experts for their continued work in supporting the
implementation of the Security Council's resolutions
on Iran. The United Kingdom, like others in the
international community, remains deeply concerned
by Iran's nuclear programme, as others have said very
clearly today.

The latest report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), released on 28 August (GOV/2013/40),
highlights Iran's installation of around 1,000 more
advanced centrifuges, which are now capable of
beginning enrichment at short notice, and its continued
rapid installation of regular centrifuges elsewhere.
There is no plausible civilian purpose for the amount of
enriched material that Iran already possesses, let alone
the amount that it can now produce. After 10 meetings,
Iran has also made no progress on addressing the
IAEA's questions over possible military dimensions to
its nuclear programme.

Iran has a new President and a new Cabinet team. We
were interested to hear from Under-Secretary-General
Feltman, during the horizon-scan meeting that was held
yesterday, about his discussions early this week. We
agree with others in the Council that President Rouhani
has an opportunity to pursue a different course for
the future by addressing international concerns about
Iran's nuclear programme and its other destabilizing
activities across the Middle East. If he does this, a
more constructive relationship with the international
community will be possible. As the British Foreign
Secretary said recently, if Iran is prepared to make that
choice, we are prepared to respond in good faith.

Turning to the work of the Committee, we regret that
Iran continues to breach its international obligations.
In particular, the Panel of Experts reached the clear
and unanimous conclusion, in its January report, that
Iran's launch of a ballistic missile last year constituted
a violation of paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010). As
you, Sir, have just briefed us and others have underlined
in the Council, the efforts of the Chair to engage with
Iran on this issue have, unfortunately, been spurned.
Iran has still not responded to the Committee's letter
of 12 April requesting further information, despite
requests that it do so.

We, along with others, therefore reiterate our view
that the Committee must now take appropriate action
in response. The evidence of this breach is compelling.
The Committee needs to recognize that formally as a
violation of United Nations sanctions. It should then take
further action, including by sending an implementation
assistance notice to assist all Member States in
implementing ballastic missile-related sanctions on
Iran, as well as considering the designation of those
involved.

The Panel of Experts' final report, issued in
May, makes six recommendations to the Committee,
including the designation of a company involved in
Iran's proliferation efforts, and proposals to provide
guidance to Member State on the implementation of
sanctions. It is disappointing that little progress has
been made in implementing these recommendations.
They are, or should be, uncontroversial. The Committee
should redouble its efforts to make swift progress on
implementing these.

We in the United Kingdom are also concerned
by credible information that Iran continues to illicitly
transfer arms within the region, in contravention of
the United Nations embargo on the export of weapons
by Iran, as the Panel's reports on Gaza and the illicit
arms interdiction reported by the Government of
Yemen demonstrate. Iran's continued efforts to
increase instability across the wider region and beyond
must end. The United Kingdom calls on the Panel to
continue to monitor these issues, identify individuals
and entities responsible, and include recommendations
in due course.

More generally, we are increasingly concerned
about the failure of the Committee to take clear action
in a number of specific recent cases. It is the role and
responsibility of the 1737 Committee to monitor and
take action on alleged violations of Security Council
resolutions on Iran, and to strengthen the effectiveness
of those measures. This unity and resolve have become
less evident in recent months. We urge the Committee
to come together and to collectively address these
issues, or it will not fulfil its mandate.

The United Kingdom remains committed to finding
a peaceful, negotiated solution to the nuclear issue, as
others have said and argued for. If Iran is prepared
to engage seriously in negotiations on its nuclear
programme, we are ready to respond in good faith. The
confidence-building measures proposal submitted by
the E3+3 in Almaty is a fair and credible offer. We urge
Iran to engage with that offer seriously, but until Iran
takes positive steps to address international concerns,
the political and economic pressure will increase.

