Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like to start by
thanking the United States delegation for bringing
today's important matter to the Security Council for
our discussion. The interest the topic generates is
eloquently demonstrated by the number of speakers
inscribed on the list.

I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his thought-provoking briefing.

Portugal attaches great importance to the efforts
being developed throughout the United Nations system
to respond to requests for assistance by States in areas
of national concern related to the ever more
sophisticated and often interconnected threats and
challenges posed by illicit cross-border trafficking and
movement of materials, funds and goods, as well as
human beings.

Those areas of concern include the need to
protect and secure borders, a need echoed by an
increasing number of requests by States for assistance
in tackling the various forms of illicit cross-border
trafficking and movements, with the aim of countering
and preventing the negative impact of those
phenomena on their national systems and the
unravelling of regional and subregional stability and
security. Indeed, all these types of illicit trafficking and
movements have a tremendous impact on every State,
but in particular on the most fragile ones, debilitating
their efforts towards institution-building, peace,
stability, the rule of law and sustained development.
This is where the United Nations, in its efforts to
promote and coordinate the international community
assistance, has a crucial role to play.

In November last year, under the Portuguese
presidency, the Council organized a briefing on new
challenges to international peace and security (see S/PV.6668). It was evident then, as it is evident now,
that the Council cannot disregard its role in conflict
prevention and has to increase its awareness of new
realities that are increasingly challenging or have the
potential to threat peace and security. We suggested
3
then that the Council could establish a kind of
observatory tool - an informal working group of
Council members - to monitor these issues on its
horizon and to review information derived from reports
of the Secretary-General, which could serve as the
foundation for concerted, articulated, prompt and
effective action of the international community. We
think the Council should give this further thought.

Today's debate follows, in our View, a similar
logic. We believe also that there is clearly here a role
for the Security Council to play. The Council cannot
simply turn a blind eye to the impact of illicit
trafficking and movements across borders in the
destabilization of States and regions and their impact
on peace processes and on fuelling conflicts - not to
mention its links with international terrorism, namely,
through its financing. These are concerns that the
Council should keep on its horizon, and we should be
prepared to act whenever necessary and at the request
of the affected countries or region, to which falls the
primary responsibility. However, these are issues that
the Council should not deal with alone.

Indeed, for the United Nations, helping States to
secure their borders through technical assistance is
already a well-established task, as reflected in a wide
range of activities carried out and programmed by a
large number of its bodies and organs, both within the
orbit of the General Assembly and in the sphere of the
Security Council. As in other segments of its activity,
however, we believe that the United Nations may and
should improve its performance in this area - on the
one hand, by improving the effectiveness and
operational coordination of its internal efforts to assist
States and regions in need, and, on the other, by
enhancing its coordination with relevant non-United
Nations partners and bodies.

The identification of areas of existing overlaps
and gaps seems to be a logical step in order to further
improve the adequacy and effectiveness of the efforts
being carried out. That is why we appreciate and
welcome this debate and its anticipated outcome,
particularly in respect to the invitation made to the
Secretary-General to submit, in six months, a report
providing a comprehensive survey and assessment of
the United Nations work to address Member States'
requests for assistance in countering and preventing
illicit cross-border trafficking and movement through
their respective borders.
We believe that this report will provide a very
valuable basis for the work of the Security Council, the
General Assembly and all other relevant United
Nations organs and bodies, with which, we believe, it
should be shared, opening the way for better
coordinated and more effective assistance strategies
and plans of action. We also believe that improving the
coherence of action between Headquarters-based
bodies and the United Nations structures in the field,
distinctively tailored to each specific context and
situation, and pursuing consistent preventive
approaches could be of great value to this endeavour.

As we said at the open debate in November, it is
our duty to deepen our knowledge of these phenomena
so as to ensure that they do not turn into conflicts. As
the main body responsible for maintaining peace and
security, the Council must be ready to shoulder its
responsibilities.

