Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina thanks the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her
presentation of this report in accordance with resolution
1593 (2005). We should view the Prosecutor's report
not with frustration but as a challenge to us to shoulder
the responsibility of acting in a coordinated fashion.

Argentina is deeply concerned about continuing
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. In February, the Council highlighted
in resolution 2091 (2013) the fact that the people
of Darfur are in an urgent humanitarian crisis, and
reiterated its request for an end to all serious violations
of human rights and human rights law. Argentina
commends the Office ofthe Prosecutor for its dedication
to monitoring current crimes, which include aerial
and ground bombardments, a high number of civilian
killings, forced displacement, sexual and gender-
based violence - aggravated by the fact that children
are both victims and perpetrators, and by the serious
problem of rape and other abuses going unreported for
fear of reprisal - attacks on human rights defenders,
members of civil society, humanitarian workers and the
personnel of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), serious obstacles to
access to humanitarian assistance and to the ability
of UNAMID personnel not only to assist affected
civilians but also to investigate an alleged aerial attack.
Argentina encourages the Prosecutor to continue to
investigate those acts, which qualify as crimes under
the Rome Statute.

The description of the crimes currently being
committed occupies a long section of the Prosecutor's
report. It is necessary for the Security Council to
understand that without justice impunity is not only
perpetuated, but also multiplies, becoming structural
by inspiring the commission of new crimes. Argentina
concurs with the evaluation made by the Panel of
Experts on Sudan, as prevailing impunity perpetuates
a status quo in while civilian victims become ever mre
numerous while the indictees remain at large. Argentina
therefore wishes to focus on cooperation with the Court.

The Government of the Sudan is bound under
resolution 1593 (2005) to cooperate with the Court
and to provide it with all necessary assistance. States
parties to the Rome Statute are obligated to cooperate
under that instrument. The resolution also called on
all other Members of the United Nations and regional
organizations to cooperate with the ICC.

A crucial aspect of cooperation is the execution of
arrest warrants. At the moment, four arrest warrants
issued by the Court since 2007 for counts ofgenocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity remain unexecuted.
Argentina regrets the position of the Government of
the Sudan with regard to the Court, because those who
continue to fall victim to serious violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law are its own
people. It is also regrettable that Chad, a State party to
the Rome Statute, has repeatedly flouted its obligation
to cooperate with the Court. We urge Chad to act in
accordance with the Rome Statute.

The Court is an institution founded on the
common lesson learned that serious crimes must not
go unpunished and that justice and punishment for
those responsible contribute to the prevention of such
crimes We therefore call on all Member States and
regional organizations, including the African Union,
to work together to ensure cooperation with the Court
and that impunity does not prevail. Both the Court
and the President of the Assembly of States Parties to
the Statute have sent letters to the Council regarding
non-cooperation with the Court with regard to the
situation in Darfur. Argentina is in favour of of the
Council addressing the consideration of these letters in
the appropriate forum, which in the view of my country
should be the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals.

My country supports an effective follow-up by
the Council of the referrals made to the Court. The
commitment reflected in S/PRST/2013/2 must be put in
practice as a matter of urgency. Be it in the Working
Group on International Tribunals or in a specific
subsidiary organ for ICC referrals, the Council must
engage in such follow-up because it cannot Shirk its
responsibility for the referrals it makes to the Court.
Moreover, Argentina thanks the Secretary-General
for issuing the guidelines on non-essential contacts
with persons subject to arrest warrants issued by the
ICC. We hope that they will be applied in a strict and
consistent manner.
I should like, as I do every time the Council refers
to the ICC, to make brief reference to two aspects that
are fundamental to Argentina's position.

First is the exemption of the jurisdiction of the
Court of nationals of States non-parties to the Rome
Statute for acts or omissions derived from operations
established or authorized by the Council or related
to them. This clause, included for the first time in
resolution 1593 (2005), contradicts the Rome Statute
and can affect the credibility of the Security Council
and that of the Court itself.

Second is the clause - also included for the first
time in the Darfur referral - providing that the United
Nations shall not defray the costs of the referral. Not
only does this contradict the Rome Statute, but it also
and in practical terms reflects the failure of the United
Nations to address the financing of referrals, which
jeopardizes the activities ofthe Office ofthe Prosecutor
and the long-term viability of the Court.

Argentina wishes to commend the work of the
Prosecutor and her Office in performing their functions
regarding this referral ofthe Security Council, and
thanks her for the permanent disposition to dialogue
with the Council. I should like to reiterate that impunity
leads to more crimes and more victims, and in no way
contributes to peace. The Government and people of
Argentina urge the international community to put an
end to impunity, not only because we are signatories
to the International Criminal Court, but also because
we have the moral right and authority to call on the
international community to fight impunity and
cooperate with the Court. For our country, the fight
against impunity is a State policy, and the perpetrators
of crimes against humanity must be brought to justice
in accordance with due process, tried and sentenced.
They must not enjoy amnesty.

Finally, I wish to once more reaffirm the firm
commitment of Argentina to the International Criminal
Court.

