Mr. Mukongo Ngay (Uganda): Uganda
congratulates you, Madam, for presiding over this very
important open debate in the Security Council on the
subject of children in armed conflict.

My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report on children. We commend the
Security Council for its continued engagement on
issues that concern human security. We pay special
tribute to the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF); to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mr. Olara Otunnu; to the International Committee of
the Red Cross; to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees; to the World Food
Programme; and to numerous non-governmental
organizations for their continued commitment to the
plight of children in armed conflict.
The adoption of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict is one of the
important milestones in the history of the United
Nations. We welcome the provision which stipulates 18
to be the minimum age for participation in armed
conflict. This Protocol, together with Security Council
resolution 1261 (1999), are major advances in the area
of children's rights and welfare.

Notwithstanding these advances, the real world,
in many parts of the globe, is still full of appalling
practices. Children are still used as soldiers with
impunity in many countries. They are used to kill and
to commit untold atrocities. They are frequently
threatened with death, mutilation or injury. Girls are
raped and sold as concubines.

Uganda wishes to seize this opportunity to inform
the Council of the continued and tragic plight of
Ugandan children who have been abducted to the
Sudan. Since 1997, the rebel group based in the Sudan
called the Lord's Resistance Army has abducted an
estimated 10,000 children from northern Uganda.
These abductions are brutal, and many children are
forced to witness the killing of family members and
friends and the destruction of their homes. The Lord's
Resistance Army abducts children to serve the needs of
these brutal men - as child solders, as sexual slaves,
as porters and as cooks.

The ongoing abduction, forced conscription and
killing of children by this rebel group is one of the
worst violations of children's rights anywhere in the
world. It is estimated that over half of the children
abducted by the Lord's Resistance Army are as young
as 8 years of age. These bandits prefer young children
because they are more easily manipulated, intimidated
and indoctrinated than older adolescents and adults.
The abductees are punished for trying to escape. They
are frequently forced to beat and hack to death other
children caught trying to escape. It is estimated today
that as many as 8,000 children are still missing. Their
parents in Uganda do not know their whereabouts.
Some figures indicate that perhaps half of them have
died of disease or hunger or have been killed.

The involvement of children in armed conflicts
has disrupted the cultural behaviour and practices of
our people, because those children are frequently sent
back to their villages and districts and carry out
systematic and atrocious mutilations of people,
including their relatives.
In November last year, an non-governmental
organization called the Leadership Council on Children
in Armed Conflict issued a report on Uganda with the
headline "Our Children Are Still Missing". Yes,
Ugandan children are still missing in the Sudan.

During the past five years, the Government of
Uganda has made many attempts to reach an agreement
with the Sudanese Government. Indeed, agreements
have been signed. One of them was brokered by the
President of Malawi, another by Iran. This morning Mr.
Olara Otunnu urged the Council to lean heavily on
those countries and Governments that wantonly subject
children to armed conflicts. The Government of
Uganda cannot overemphasize the gravity of the failure
by our neighbours to honour agreements which they
have signed.

My delegation urges the Council, at the
conclusion of this debate, to demand an end to the
impunity of the brutal Lord's Resistance Army and to
demand that the Sudan deny territory, cover and
support to that group. The Council is urged to be
unambiguous in its condemnation of the continued
abduction of thousands upon thousands of our children.

Before I end, I would like to express my
delegation's appreciation to the European Union for its
recent resolution which condemned the activities of the
Lord's Resistance Army and demanded that it be
denied cover on Sudanese territory.

