The President (spoke in French): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
France.

I would like to thank Mr. Nambiar and
Mr. Egeland for their statements, which supplement the
Secretary-General's very interesting speech yesterday.

I wish to state that my delegation fully subscribes
to the speech that will be made by the representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union.

France is extremely worried at the escalation of
violence in the Middle East. In Lebanon, Hizbollah
bears responsibility for the unleashing of hostilities,
and we condemn in the strongest terms the continued
firing of rockets on Israeli cities that blindly kill and
wound civilians. But we also condemn the
disproportionate response by Israel, whose military
operations are holding the Lebanese people hostage,
killing large numbers of civilians and causing
substantial material damage in Lebanon.

France solemnly reiterates its call for an
immediate cessation of hostilities to spare people
further suffering and give the search for a diplomatic
solution a chance. For now, the parties must observe
the utmost restraint and refrain from any action that
might put civilians in greater danger. As President
Chirac said, humanitarian corridors in Lebanon itself
and between Lebanon and the outside are immediately
essential in order to guarantee the safety of displaced
persons who are trying to leave Lebanon and to deliver
humanitarian aid.

At the same time, the international community
must urgently tackle the task of finding a solution to
the conflict. We know that in order to be effective and
lasting, the solution will have to include, on the one
hand, the disarmament of Hizbollah or to begin the
neutralization of the threat it poses to Israel, and, on
the other, the extension of control of the Government
and Lebanese army to the south. How is this to be
achieved?
While the purely incentive-based approached we
tried with resolution 1559 (2004) did not produce the
desired effects on this point, we are convinced that
there can be no military solution. Israeli military
operations are undoubtedly weakening Hizbollah's
military capabilities, but they are also fuelling hate,
and they risk reinforcing its audience in Lebanon and
elsewhere. By systematically destroying the country's
infrastructure, strangling its economy and targeting the
Lebanese army, Israel is greatly weakening the
Lebanese State. We must think of the day after, when
we will have the greatest need for a strong Lebanese
State, able to count on a credible army in order to
extend its authority throughout its territory.

The Secretary-General reported yesterday to the
Council on his efforts and those of the mission he sent
to the Middle East. He presented us with parameters
and leads for resolving the crisis. We are pleased to
observe that they are close to the ideas that France has
developed. They provide the basis for developing a
coherent solution to the crisis. The Council must face
up to its responsibilities. It must intensify its efforts
and begin as soon as possible developing a resolution
that will offer the framework for a lasting settlement to
the crisis.

As far as the Palestinian territories are concerned,
France is also extremely concerned at the continued
deterioration in the security and humanitarian situation,
especially in the Gaza Strip. While recognizing Israel's
legitimate right to defend itself against terrorism - in
particular against Qassam rockets, which nothing
justifies - we call on the Israeli Government to
exercise the utmost restraint, particularly to protect
Palestinian civilians. We condemn the recent
disproportionate military operations against Palestinian
towns and refugee camps in the Gaza Strip, which
resulted in a heavy human toll, especially among
civilians, and considerable damage to basic
infrastructure, vital equipment and institutions of the
Palestinian Authority.

The Palestinian Authority, for its part, must
immediately take all necessary measures to stop the
firing of rockets and acts of violence against Israel and
its citizens, and to encourage the release of the
kidnapped Israeli soldier. We reaffirm that the Hamas-
led Government must adhere to the three principles
laid down by the Quartet, namely, renunciation of
violation, recognition of Israel and acceptance of the
agreements that have been signed.

It remains essential to protect the Palestinian
Authority as an institution and forerunner of a State
and to guarantee the possibilities for future dialogue
and negotiation. In this regard, we again call on Israel
to release the members of the Government and of the
Legislative Council and Palestinian political leaders.
The agreement on the crossing points, particularly
those of Rafah and Karni, must be implemented and
respected.

In the longer term, the international community
must not lose sight of the objectives set out in the road
map. France remains deeply concerned about the fact
that, although the International Court of Justice issued
its advisory opinion on the construction of the wall in
the West Bank two years ago, the settlement policy and
the construction of the separation wall within the
occupied Palestinian territory are continuing. Such
practices compromise the future establishment of a
viable Palestinian State.

It is essential that all the parties take urgent
measures to put an end to the hostilities and respect
civilians, who are the main victims of and hostage to
the conflicts in the Middle East. Diplomatic efforts by
the Secretary-General and by a number of countries are
under way with a View to helping to bring about a
resolution of both crises, which is essential for the
future of the region and beyond. France will continue
to work tirelessly to promote a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement, based on the rule of law, so that the
States and peoples of the region will at last be able to
live in peace and security.

I resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

