Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to begin by thanking the Uruguayan presidency for
convening this open debate. I would also like to express
my gratitude to the briefers for their valuable input in
this debate.

I align myself with the statement made earlier
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Attacks against medical workers and facilities and
the humanitarian convoys delivering medical supplies
have increased since the adoption of resolution 2286
(2016). In 2016 alone, attacks on health-care facilities,
health workers, ambulances and patients increased in
23 countries under these conditions. Those attacks are
taking place in various places around the world; but in
terms of frequency and ferocity, they are more prevalent
in the Middle East.

We condemn all the attacks that have taken place
against medical and humanitarian staff, facilities and
means of transport throughout the world, especially in
Palestine, Afghanistan, Yemen and Syria.

It is difficult to understand how it is possible
that, at a time of high-tech and high-precision modern
bombs, so-called mistakes could happen so frequently,
with medical facilities and personnel in areas of armed
conflict being targeted. Hospitals are public facilities.
Their locations are well known by all parties to the
conflict, and necessary protocols are in place to avoid
bombing them. Unfortunately, such incidents keep
occurring, and the perpetrators continue to claim
that they are simply mistakes. Tragedies such as the
bombing of the hospital in Kunduz, Afghanistan in
October 2015 are declared mistakes and end without
any military personnel involved being convicted.

In 2016 alone, the Palestine Red Crescent Society
reported 416 instances of violence or interference with
its ambulances by Israeli forces or settlers, which
resulted in the injury of 162 emergency workers,
damage to 108 ambulances and the denial of access to
health care in 146 cases. That is on top of the illegal
blockade against the Palestinians that has continued for
more than a decade, denying them their basic human
rights, including access to health care, by the Israeli
regime, all unabated.

Since March 2015, the Saudi-led aggression
in Yemen has led to many well-documented war
crimes. They involve the destruction of much civilian
infrastructure, including medical facilities, and that
aggression continues under the watch of the Security
Council. Worse still, that unfortunate misadventure is
enjoying the ever-increasing military, logistical and
training support of the United States and its Air Force.

Greater efforts are needed to document and analyse
every incident that affects the security and the well-
being of health-care workers and facilities and ensure
that impartial, independent and prompt investigations
are carried out, and those found responsible for such
acts be brought to justice. The Council must abandon its
double standards with respect to bombing humanitarian
and health facilities and workers. By highlighting some
attacks and remaining silent on others, the Council
discredits its own resolutions, especially resolution
2286 (2016).

Finally, I would like to conclude by paying tribute
to the valuable work carried out by the many health-care
workers who perform in the context of armed conflicts.

