Mr. Van Den Bogaard (Netherlands): The
Netherlands would like to align itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
takes this opportunity to add a few considerations.

The Netherlands thanks Guatemala for its
involvement in the International Criminal Court (ICC)
and commends it for organizing this important Security
Council debate so soon after its ratification of the Rome
Statute. The Netherlands would welcome a regular
meeting of this nature given the interdependence of
the work of the United Nations and the International
Criminal Court. The Netherlands would encourage the
Security Council to take advantage of the opportunity
to receive periodic briefings from the Court's President
and Prosecutor, as provided for in the Relationship
Agreement between the United Nations and the
International Criminal Court.

The Rome Statute states that atrocities are a threat
to the peace, security and well-being ofthe world. While
States bear the primary responsibility for protecting
their citizens, the international community has an
important role to play in enforcing international law and
in ending impunity. The ICC is a powerful instrument
for achieving those aims. Holding the perpetrators of
atrocities to account is part of prevention. It serves
as a deterrent and, as such, can help prevent future
crimes. Ending impunity is both a beginning and an
end in the responsibility to protect process. It helps to
send the signal that atrocities are unacceptable to the
international community.

Over the past 10 years, the Security Council
has developed a constructive relationship with the
International Criminal Court. The Netherlands
compliments the Security Council on its decisiveness
in referring the situations in the Sudan and Libya to the
ICC. It is important for the Security Council to exercise
consistency when it refers situations to the ICC. The
Netherlands would also welcome a discussion on the
financing ofthe situations that the Security Council has
referred to the ICC.

The Netherlands calls upon the Security Council
to remain actively engaged in the matters that it refers
to the Court. For the ICC to function effectively, it
is essential that States be urged to cooperate in the
investigation and prosecution of the accused.

With regards to Syria, the Netherlands regrets
the persistent disagreement in the Security Council.
That has prevented the United Nations from taking
decisive action. The world needs a strong, united
and determined Security Council. The Netherlands
is in favour of referring the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court. The decision to do so
lies with the Council. The Netherlands would like to
note that a referral of the situation in Syria does not
necessarily exclude the possibility of prosecution at the
national level.

The primary responsibility for an effective
functioning of the International Criminal Court lies
of course with the ICC and its States parties. The
Netherlands calls on all States parties to ratify the
Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute swiftly. The
Netherlands would like to call on all non-State parties
to sign and to ratify the Rome Statute.

The Netherlands is prepared to make an active
contribution to international justice and the work of
the ICC. To promote inter-State cooperation in the
investigation and prosecution of international crimes,
the Netherlands, Belgium and Slovenia are looking
for ways to develop a multilateral instrument that will
fill the gaps in the international legal framework with
regard to extradition and mutual assistance in criminal
matters.

The Rome Statute came into force 10 years ago this
year. The Netherlands applauds the ICC's successes. As
the Court's host country, in cooperation with the ICC
and together with several States parties, it is organizing
a commemorative ceremony, to be held on 13 and
14 November prior to the Assembly of States Parties
session.

In the years to come, the Netherlands will remain
firmly committed to a strong and effective International
Criminal Court and is confident that the Security
Council and the ICC will continue to work together
constructively.

