The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of France.

As I did yesterday on behalf of the presidency of
the Security Council, I should like here, on behalf of
France, to once again express to our American friends
and partners our deep condolences and full solidarity
during this most difficult time.

France welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2292 (2016), which is the result of the joint
initiative of the three members of the European Union
on the Security Council, with the United Kingdom as
penholder. Following the vote and the statements that
have just been made, I believe that there are several
salient points.

First, this document addresses primarily an urgent
security need. As violations of the arms embargo on
Libya are ongoing, fuelling instability in the country
and benefiting Da'esh and other terrorist groups, it
was imperative that the Security Council establish, as
expeditiously as possible, an adequate framework for
action providing the international community with
real and effective means of implementing the embargo
imposed by the Council, without prejudice, of course,
to the capacity of the Government of National Accord
to request exemptions thereto.

The resolution makes it possible to effectively
carry out, on the high seas off the Libyan coast,
inspections of vessels suspected of being engaged in
arms trafficking. This represents a significant step
forward in the implementation of the arms embargo in
Libya. It will contribute to the stability of the country
and to the security of neighbouring States and of the
region as a whole.

The international community must also work
to stem the flow of weapons to Libya by land and by
sea, weapons that, if not authorized by the sanctions
committee, represent a violation of the resolutions
of the Security Council. It is also imperative that all
parties increase their vigilance in this area.

Secondly, the document is well balanced. The
Chapter VII authorization under the resolution is
carefully set out. It would apply in very specific
contexts and does not call into question the law of
the sea, whose guiding principle remains the consent
of the flag State. The resolution also has as a goal the
implementation of the arms embargo, so as to support
the Government of National Accord. It also usefully
recalls that the Government can be the recipient of
legal arms transfers, with a view in particular to
strengthening those who, under full Government
authority, are combating terrorism.

Thirdly and finally, the document will immediately
be followed up with concrete action. As the Council is
aware, the European Union, on 23 May, made known
its intention to contribute to the strengthening of the
arms embargo in Libya by broadening the scope of
the mandate of operation Sophia of the European
Union military operation in the Southern Central
Mediterranean. This commitment on the part of the
European Union and the support provided today by the
Security Council through the adoption of the resolution
bear witness once again to the leading role played by
the European Union in the quest for peace and stability
in Libya, primarily in the interests of the Libyan people
but also with a View to ensuring the security of the
countries neighbouring Libya, of the region and of
Europe. We deem this a most positive development.

I wish to conclude my statement by emphasizing the
success that the adoption of the resolution represents
for the Security Council. It makes clear once again
our capacity to come together to take the measures
necessary so as to effectively ensure international
peace and security for a reconciled and unified Libya.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.
