Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Allow
me to start by thanking Mr. Farid Zarif for his briefing
today. I wish him well in his role as Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. I also wish to
thank his predecessor, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for his
effective work as Special Representative.

I wish to welcome today Mr. Enver Hoxhaj,
Foreign Minister of Kosovo, and Mr. Vuk Jeremie,
Foreign Minister of Serbia, and to thank them for their
statements.

We have witnessed troubled times in Kosovo over
the past month. The United Kingdom was very
seriously concerned by the outbreaks of violence there,
which resulted in the death of one Kosovo policeman
and injuries to many other Kosovo citizens. We
appreciate the role played by KFOR and the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) in
calming the situation and in facilitating agreements
with Kosovo and Serbia to end the tense standoff. We
urge all parties to continue to coordinate with these and
other international actors in Kosovo.

We welcome the fact that there has been no
further violence, and we urge both Kosovo and Serbia
to continue to engage constructively. As Mr. Zarif said,
rhetoric on both sides needs to be constructive, not
confrontational.

Tensions in the north need to be calmed so that
people who live there do not suffer. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/514) notes that in April the
Kosovo authorities conducted a population and housing
census throughout Kosovo, with the exception of
northern Kosovo. It is regrettable that the so-called
parallel structures in the north prevented the United
Nations Office for Project Services - UNOPS - from
conducting the census there. Important data needed to
provide social, economic and health services to the
people in northern Kosovo will be distorted.

That, together with the outbreak of violence in
July, demonstrates how vulnerable the situation is in
northern Kosovo. It also underlines more than ever the
importance of Kosovo-Serbian relations being put on a
more stable track. That is why we actively and fully
support the EU-facilitated dialogue. That dialogue
provides a unique opportunity to build sustainable and
practical cooperation between Kosovo and Serbia and
to move both countries, in a more stable fashion,
towards a secure and prosperous future in the European
Union.

The Secretary-General's report rightly highlights
the progress made during the fifth round of the
dialogue. Agreements were reached that will, if
properly implemented, improve the lives of people in
both Kosovo and Serbia. I urge Ministers Hoxhaj and
Jeremie not to lose sight of that progress, or of our
shared goals. The Governments of Kosovo and Serbia
should be ready to engage constructively at the next
meeting of the dialogue, scheduled to start this Friday.

We are encouraged by the resumption of the
Working Group on Missing Persons, highlighted in the
Secretary-General's report. A continuing commitment
to this process on both sides is fundamental for
providing closure for those families who lost loved
ones in the 19905, and for continuing progress toward
regional reconciliation.

Of continuing concern is the Secretary-General's
assessment that tensions persist between receiving
communities and returnees. The United Kingdom has
long supported the work of the United Nations and the
Government of Kosovo to ensure that returnees feel
able to go home. Over the past several years my
Government has given more than $3 million to support
the work on returns.

Finally, as Foreign Secretary Hague and Foreign
Minister Westerwelle said on 8 August, the countries of
the Western Balkans have made good progress towards
democracy and neighbourly relations in the 17 years
since the break-up of the former Yugoslavia. War crime
suspects have been delivered to face international
justice. Croatia has been invited to join the European
Union. Since we last met, the number of countries
which recognize Kosovo as an independent State has
risen to 81. This shows that Kosovo's progress as a
viable independent States is irreversible.

Kosovo's future belongs in the European Union,
along with Serbia and its other neighbours in the
Western Balkan. The United Kingdom underlines once
more its commitment to work tirelessly towards that
goal.

