Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): Let me begin
by thanking Ms. Ursula Mueller for her briefing on the
humanitarian situation in Syria. We, too, are deeply
concerned about the dire humanitarian situation in
Syria, particularly with regard to the thousands of
civilians who continue to suffer.

While we continue our deliberations here in the
Council, we should not forget those who remain under
the threat ofviolence, in particular those civilians still in
Idlib. South Africa remains deeply disturbed about the
high number ofcivilians, especially women and children,
who have lost their lives, sustained severe injuries or
have been displaced, in some cases multiple times,
since April of this year. In addition to the grave loss of
lives, the destruction of civilian infrastructure - such
as schools, health facilities, markets and water stations,
which are essential to the survival of civilians still
in the area f is particularly concerning and must be
condemned. In that regard, South Africa calls on all
parties to ensure that they respect their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law for the protection of civilians and
civilian infrastructure. We wish to re-emphasize that
health facilities hold a special status under international
law, which must be respected.

The damage and destruction of civilian of civilian
infrastructure and the inability to provide basic
services contribute to the further deterioration of the
humanitarian situation, pushing thousands of civilians
towards Syria's northern border. If no intervention is
made to address the humanitarian situation in Syria, it
will result in further deaths of innocent civilians. An
alternative to war has to be found.

While my delegation acknowledges the threat and
violence committed by terrorist groups, we must also
acknowledge and ensure that no counter-terrorism
actions should be taken at the expense of civilian lives.
We reiterate our position that any such action should be
taken only within the boundaries of international law.

South Africa has noted and welcomes the unilateral
ceasefire declared on 31 August by the Syrian
Government. We hope that it will be but one of many
steps towards long-term peace in Idlib and in Syria as
a whole.

With regard to the humanitarian situation in other
parts of Syria, South Africa wishes to welcome the
recent delivery by the United Nations and the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent of essential humanitarian assistance
to the people in Rukban. That assistance has long been
awaited and is much needed by the people remaining in
Rukban. South Africa maintains its position that while
civilians remain in Rukban, humanitarian assistance,
as needed, should be provided, and also that those wish
to leave should be assisted in doing so.

With regard to my last point on recent political
developments, we note the joint statement of Iran, Turkey
and the Russian Federation regarding the situation in
Syria, following their discussions in Turkey earlier
this week. We welcome their unified commitment to
increasing humanitarian assistance to all Syrians
throughout the country, without preconditions.

With regard to the constitutional committee, we
look forward to receiving an update from the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Geir
Pedersen, at his next briefing to the Council.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that
the situation in Syria can be resolved only through
negotiations and dialogue under the auspices of
resolution 2254 (2015) and under the guidance of
Special Envoy Pedersen, in order to halt the loss of
innocent civilian lives and to restore peace, stability
and security in Syria.

