Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the President for having organized today's
debate. I would also like to thank the briefers and other
speakers. I congratulate the delegation of Luxembourg
on the way it has conducted the chairmanship of the
Working Group, and I reiterate France's support.

The United Nations approach to protecting children
in armed conflict has made it possible to demobilize
tens of thousands of children. Action plans are the
cornerstone of that approach. Thanks to them, in 2012
two States were taken off the list of shame.

Taken together, the approximately 20 action
plans that have been signed are a sign of progress
made in protecting children in armed conflict. The
implementation of those actions plans must be carried
out as soon as possible for them to be fully effective.
In that way, our credibility can be ensured. In order
to do that, the international community and the United
Nations must deploy all the material and human
resources they have at their disposal.

Action plans are based on cooperation between
States, and progress has been made in that area. In that
connection, we are encouraged by the cooperation and
political will shown by Chad to finalize its action plan.

The United Nations approach on the ground has
been strengthened over the years. Let us consider, for
example, the child protection sections in peacekeeping
operations, which play a crucial role and whose
deployment must continue. Nevertheless, countless
violations continue to occur, and each conflict shows
us that reality. Children are the first victims of conflict.

That is the case in Syria, where the regime and the
militias have been responsible for the worst atrocities
against children. Children are tortured and subjected
to sexual violence in detention. They are killed without
pity by elite snipers, who target them by design in
order to terrorize the people. Schools are being bombed
incessantly, to such an extent that only 6 per cent of
children have access to education in the region of
Aleppo. Since the beginning of the crisis, more than
6,500 children have been killed in Syria, and that figure
is probably lower than the actual figures.

Violations against children in Syria must be
condemned, whatever their source. The Syrian
opposition says that it is prepared to open a dialogue
with the United Nations on the issue. We would
therefore encourage the Special Representative to
launch, as soon as possible, discussions for the signing
of an action plan with them.

In Mali, armed groups in the north have mutilated
and tortured children. They have used children as
human shields and recruited them by force. The
situation has improved since the beginning of the year
but remains fragile. The deployment of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali will help to stabilize the country and
provide better protection for children.

In the Central African Republic, Sele'ka armed
groups have been engaged in looting, rape and
summary executions, and they have not hesitated to
attack UNICEF disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration centres in order to re-recruit children who
had recently been demobilized, reversing the progress
achieved last year. The chaos caused by armed groups
has led to the closing of half of the schools in the
country, thus increasing the vulnerability of children
left to their own devices.

In the Kivus in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Mouvement du 23 mars rebels know
where to find children to fuel their war against
Congolese sovereignty. We count on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its strengthened mandate to
protect children and make it possible for them to return
to their families.

While new crises provide new challenges for the
protection of children in armed conflict, the long
list of persistent perpetrators continues to affect the
credibility of our action. It calls upon us to pursue our
efforts. In addition to the States that have already signed
an action plan, which should be our priority, we should
also improve our response to the armed groups that
want to engage in dialogue with the United Nations but
for whom access is impossible. The States concerned
have the responsibility to do everything in their power
to ensure and facilitate access for those groups, because
we are convinced that, in order to ensure the protection
of children trapped in conflict, political considerations
should give way to humanitarian imperatives.

France is also in favour of authorizing the Working
Group to set itself up as an ad hoc sanctions panel to
deal with armed extremists who refuse all dialogue
with the international community and who continue
their violations with full impunity.

Indeed, the fight against impunity should be central
to our action. Recently, the transfer to the International
Criminal Court of Bosco Ntaganda sent out a strong
signal on the criminal consequences of the recruitment
of child soldiers, which is considered to be a war crime.
That is why we are in favour of strengthening dialogue
with the International Criminal Court, which could,
in the first phase, include an invitation to Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, the Prosecutor of the Court, to brief the
Council on the issue.

France is also involved on the ground in improving
the protection and sustainable reinsertion of children
caught in armed conflict. Since 2008, we have led a
programme in the Great Lakes region of Central Africa
that has made it possible to reach 13,000 children, 2,000
of them child soldiers.

We continue to call on all States to endorse the Paris
Principles and Paris Commitments, which complement
the action of the Security Council and provide a
solid framework for the action of the international
community to protect children in armed conflict. We
are going modify the format of the annual meetings,
which will take on a regional and technical slant as we
approach the tenth anniversary of the Paris Principles
in 2017. With our partners from the Secretariat and
from UNICEF, I renew our call to join, without any
further delay, the one hundred States that have already
ratified the Principles. Let us not forget that we are
talking about the lives of children and teenagers who
are at risk.

