Mr. Graf zu Rantzau (Germany): I should like to
take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your
country's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We are privileged indeed to have you preside over
the Council, on whose work the outstanding professional
and human qualities of Ambassador Legwaila have already
left their mark.

I should also like to thank Ambassador Cardenas for
the exemplary manner in which he and his delegation
conducted the proceedings of the Council. Furthermore, it
gives me great pleasure to welcome the ministerial
delegation of the Organization of African Unity, its
Secretary-General and, in particular, the Minister for
External Relations of Angola. I would like to thank them
for their substantial statements, which underline the
importance which the Organization of African Unity
attaches to the situation in Angola and to African solidarity.

The signing of the Lusaka Protocol on
20 November 1994 and the agreement on a cease-fire two
days later are encouraging events in the recent tragic
history of Angola. Since then, despite mutual accusations
by the Angolan Government and by UNITA of cease-fire
violations, the cease-fire has generally been observed.

The decision of the Security Council to restore
UNAVEM. II to its previous level certainly played an
important role in the consolidation of the cease-fire. But
another important factor was the cooperation between the
Government of Angola and UNITA. The meetings of
their Chiefs of Staff and the regular meetings of the Joint
Commission have been important confidence-building
measures. Yet there is one crucial confidence-building
measure still missing: a meeting between President dos
Santos and Mr. Savimbi. Such a meeting must take place
as soon as possible.

We have carefully studied the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the Council establish an enlarged
peace-keeping operation, UNAVEM. III, in Angola. In the
decision of the Council, two aspects have to be
considered. On the one hand, a sizeable United Nations
presence in Angola will certainly assist the peace process
and help to successfully implement the provisions of the
Lusaka Protocol. On the other hand, the situation in
Angola remains fragile. We cannot be absolutely sure
whether the parties will continue to demonstrate the
political determination to abide by the commitments they
undertook in Lusaka.

Another more practical but none the less substantial
aspect of the Council's decision is that, if peace-keepers
are to be deployed, there must be not only a peace to be
kept, but other conditions as well, to lend meaning to the
peace-keepers' task. The timetable agreed upon by the
parties in the Lusaka Protocol has already slipped
considerably. In this respect, the approach outlined in the
report of the Secretary-General and reflected in the draft
resolution to authorize UNAVEM. III immediately but to
deploy the infantry units only gradually seems to us to be
sensible.

I should also like to highlight two other important
elements of the draft resolution: the importance, given the
magnitude of this problem in Angola, of expeditiously
establishing a well coordinated and comprehensive mine-
clearance programme, and the importance of establishing
a United Nations radio station in consultation with the
Government of Angola.

 

As an element for future consideration I should like to
mention the necessity of finding a solution to the problem
of the financing of political parties. This is an important
matter. Experience in Mozambique, where the Government
originally undertook the obligation to provide financial and
other means to RENAMO, has shown this aspect to be
particularly relevant in a peace process.

Let me now return to the underlying question of
authorizing UNAVEM. III. Only the Government of Angola
and UNITA can make UNAVEM. III a success. Only their
willingness to achieve peace and their commitment to
making the Lusaka Protocol work can lead to long-lasting
peace for Angola. If the cooperation required of the
Angolan parties is not forthcoming, the Security Council
will have to reconsider the role of the United Nations in
Angola.

We have carefully considered the various arguments.
There are obvious risks if the international community gets
involved in a new peace-keeping operation in Angola. But
we think that the international community is right to incur
those risks to help achieve a real and lasting peace in
Angola. We shall therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution.

