Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): We appreciate the
comprehensive reports (S/2013/308, S/2013/309, S/2103/310) of the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Tribunals on the work of the Tribunals
during the reporting period, on the status of the cases
before them, as well as on measures undertaken in
the implementation of the completion strategy. The
recent twentieth anniversary of the establishment of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) certainly presents an appropriate
opportunity for a more comprehensive assessment
and stocktaking of past activities, lessons learned and
overall achievements of the Tribunals. In that context,
we thank you, Sir, for having opened this debate up to
the broader membership, albeit not in the format of an
open debate.

It is a well-known fact that Croatia advocated
for the establishment of the ICTY from the very
beginning. We wholeheartedly supported the strong
determination of the international community to
finally, once and for all, put an end to the culture of
impunity that had for so long accompanied wars and
armed conflict. The establishment of the Tribunals
was a clear indication that a new era had arrived - an
era in which it was not important any more how high-
ranking or influential perpetrators of grave breaches
of international humanitarian law were, but what the
record of their actions was. It is not an exaggeration to
say that precisely the establishment of the Tribunals,
whose work we are discussing today, forever changed
the landscape of international criminal justice and
introduced a whole new system with the International
Criminal Court at the head.

With high hopes and expectations at the time
of its creation, Croatia also strongly supported the
main purpose of the ICTY - the prosecution and
punishment of the individuals most responsible for acts
of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity,
as well as delivering justice for the victims of those
crimes. Equally so, Croatia supported the Tribunal's
more global functions aimed at the restoration and
maintenance of peace and stability in the region, as
well as the promotion of justice and reconciliation.
Those are goals and hopes that we have supported and
nourished at the time of the Tribunal's establishment
20 years ago and that we support and nourish even more
today.

Croatia welcomes the results achieved by the ICTY
to date and, in particular, the fact that all those indicted
by the Tribunal have been arrested and transferred to
its custody. It is encouraging to know that a number
of high-level perpetrators of the most heinous crimes
in our region have met their destiny in The Hague
Chambers and are now coping with it in prisons around
the world.

At the same time, it is only fair to say that the
road towards the noble and ambitious goals that the
Tribunal set for itself was neither straightforward
nor easy. Being a pioneer in the interpretation and
application of international humanitarian law, as well
as international criminal law, the Tribunal unavoidably
encountered a number of substantive and procedural
questions, the answers to which were not always clear
or immediate. In that context, let me simply mention
here the oft-criticized very long judicial processes,
which have in some cases seriously undermined their
own purpose. Although late justice is certainly better
than no justice at all, such delays have interfered
with the rightful expectations of the victims, but
equally so with the rights of the accused to a fair and
swift trial. Furthermore, the frequent modifications
of the Tribunal's Rules of Procedure certainly did
not contribute to legal confidence, nor the clarity or
simplicity of the procedures.

Finally, according to article 7 of its Statute, the
main task of the Tribunal is to establish the individual
responsibility of the accused. However, introducing
new and untested concepts as criteria for determining
that responsibility, artificially applied to this legal field
and significantly altering the traditional command
responsibility concept, and also introducing those
new concepts only in the later stage of the Tribunal's
proceedings, resulted, in our opinion, in a weakening
of the Tribunal's authenticity and led the Tribunal to
delve into political and historical assessments and
interpretations with doubtful success.

In that context, and as we stated in our previous
interventions, let me add that Croatia follows with
particular attention the new jurisprudence emerging
from the Tribunals' work and its potential to shape
future criteria for, inter alia, the lawful use of force
and waging legitimate military action, including the
general responsibility of military and political leaders.
There is no doubt that the ensuing legal interpretations
of thatjurisprudence will have a serious impact on any
future conduct of hostilities, as well as on noble efforts
aimed at preserving or fostering international peace
and security.

Let me now turn to the reports of the ICTY's
President and Prosecutor (S/2013/308, annexes I and II), which we have in front of us today. We are pleased
to note that, in paragraph 42 of his report, Prosecutor
Brammertz has once again recognized Croatia's
full and unequivocal cooperation with the Office of
the Prosecutor and stressed that "the Office of the
Prosecutor continues to rely on Croatia's cooperation
to efficiently complete trials and appeals." We will
indeed continue to cooperate as recorded and render
our full support to the Tribunal. It is also a pleasure to
inform you, Mr. President, that Prosecutor Brammertz
visited Croatia between 22 and 24 May for the annual
conference of prosecutors from the former Yugoslavia
held in Brijuni, where they continued their discussions
on issues of mutual relevance.

Croatia is aware that the cooperation of the
States in the region remains crucial for the successful
accomplishment of the Tribunal's mandate and, in
that context, stands ready to lead by example. At the
same time, enhanced regional cooperation in the area
of war crimes and related issues represents one of the
important legacies of the Tribunals. We are ready to
continue mutual cooperation in that important area,
according to the generally accepted principles of
international criminal law and with the full respect of
relevant national jurisdictions and competencies.

Finally, let me conclude by saying that my country,
although not always necessarily pleased with all the
procedures, rulings or decisions of the ICTY, has at
all times cooperated with the Tribunal to the best of
its abilities, fully respecting its decisions and never
challenging them outside the stipulated procedures.
And that is exactly what we are going to do until
the final fulfilment of the ICTY's mandate and that
of International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.

