Ms. Colakovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
debate and for all your efforts as Chair of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We also
thank recently appointed Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Herve' Ladsous, the Executive
Director of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake, and the
President of the International Center for Transitional
Justice, Mr. David Tolbert, for their comprehensive
briefings today.

Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches great importance
to the issue of children in armed conflict, as the most
vulnerable group, and underlines the significance
of keeping it on the Council's agenda. It should be
emphasized that all parties to armed conflict must
strictly comply with their international obligations
and the relevant provisions related to the rights and
protection of children in armed conflict. Member States
should work on their obligations and adopt appropriate
measures in national legislation with regard to the
recruitment of children and their protection from all
forms of violence. If nationaljudicial systems fail to do
so, international justice mechanisms, criminal courts
or tribunals can be valuable tools to bring perpetrators
to justice and put an end to impunity.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/261) highlights the increase in the number
of persistent perpetrators. In light of that fact, the
Security Council should pay more attention to and put
pressure on parties to conflict. Moreover, we believe
that the useful practice of briefing the Security Council
sanctions committees should be continued.

We cannot remain silent about disturbing reports of
armed conflict affecting the lives of children. Attacks
on schools and hospitals are part of the daily life of
children in conflict settings. Therefore, we urge all
parties involved to respect schools and hospitals as
protected areas and zones of peace. We have to send
a strong message, collectively, that not a single child
should be deprived of the chance of having a safe and
secure life and future, including the right to education.

Significant efforts have been made regarding the
signing and implementation of action plans with parties
to conflict. It is also important to increase efforts to
engage the parties in meaningful dialogue in order
to prepare, sign and implement time-bound action
plans. The process should be well coordinated among
different actors in the field, in close consultation with
the host Government, non-governmental organizations
and donors. Therefore, we support all efforts of the
United Nations to enter into dialogue with parties
to armed conflict. Violations of those provisions
should not be tolerated or go unpunished. Allowing
independent access of relevant United Nations actors
is indispensable to monitoring and reporting on grave
violations against children. Specific provisions for the
protection of children need to be included in all relevant
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations
and political and peacebuilding missions, so that the
existing child protection capacity can be strengthened.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that Bosnia
and Herzegovina endorsed the Paris Principles and
Commitments on 26 September 2011 during the fourth
ministerial meeting held in New York. It was an
additional step to show our commitment and make a
modest contribution to the protection of children, and
to demonstrate our support for that agenda.
