Mr. Santos (Mozambique): I join previous
speakers in congratulating you, Madam President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and the brilliant manner in which you have
conducted the Council's affairs during the current
month. It is fitting that you should preside over this
meeting, complementing and reinforcing the excellent
work that you are doing as Chairperson of the
Preparatory Committee for the special session on
children.

I also pay tribute to your predecessor,
Ambassador Jean-David Levitte of France, for the
exemplary manner in which he guided the Council's
work last month.

I wish to take this opportunity to express once
again our profound appreciation to the Secretary-
General, his Special Representative and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) for their relentless efforts and dedication in
bringing the issue of children in armed conflict to the
centre of the Security Council's agenda as a concern of
the entire world.

The adoption of Security Council Resolution
1261 (1999) lent the necessary focus to the question of
children in armed conflict, as an issue with grave
implications for international peace and security,
deserving the unflinching commitment and dedication
of Member States, regional organizations and the
international community as a whole.
I commend the Secretary-General's report, which
is before us as requested by resolution 1261 (1999).
The report presents a lucid and comprehensive
assessment of the present reality and prevailing trends
with regard to children and armed conflict, and makes
concrete recommendations to address the plight of
children, both as victims and as instruments of
violence.

The world continues to be devastated by many
armed conflicts, which claim victims among children,
women and the elderly. The figures in the report depict
clearly the disproportionate effects of armed conflict
on children. It is in recognition of this sad reality that
once again the Security Council, the General Assembly
and indeed the international community as a whole
must extend their support to the cause of children in
armed conflict. We all must join efforts, dedication and
imagination in the search for ways and means to put an
end to the plight of children and prevent the recurrence
of similar situations.

Today's children are tomorrow's women and men.
We cannot have a world of peace and prosperity if we
do not spare our children today from the horrors of
war, which will haunt them for the rest of their lives.

We believe that this third open debate of the
Security Council and the two previous debates, as well
as the work of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative and that of UNICEF, in coordination
with other United Nations organs and relevant
international organizations, are the right steps towards
finding solutions to this global concern.

Mozambique has always expressed its
commitment to the promotion and protection of the
rights of the child. Today we reaffirm that commitment
and pledge to continue our efforts to put an end to the
suffering of millions of children in the world, mostly in
Africa. It was within this context that we hosted last
year a regional meeting on children in armed conflict,
which produced important recommendations.

My own country lived the horrors of a prolonged
war in which children were not spared. Today peace
prevails in Mozambique, but great challenges still lie
ahead as a consequence of the conflict. The
sustainability of peace and of the reconciliation process
required, and still requires, the integrated effort of all
actors of Mozambican society, with the support of the
international community. My Government strongly
believes that success in that task lies largely in the
promotion, protection and education of tomorrow's
women and men - the children.
Considerable progress has been achieved in the
rehabilitation and integration into society of exploited
and traumatized children. However, the existence of
about 2 million landmines planted during the war
continues to be a major impediment to the smooth
resettlement of the population and the development of
productive activities. Children remain in greater
danger, because they are unaware of the threat posed
by anti-personnel landmines. Therefore, awareness
campaigns are as important for children as demining
itself. The plight of the Mozambican children has been
further exacerbated by the recent unprecedented floods
in the southern and central areas of the country.

We are happy to note that the process initiated by
Mrs. Graca Machel, with her landmark report
(A/51/306), is increasingly gaining momentum under
the able guidance of Mr. Olara Otunnu, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict.

After almost a decade of existence, the
Convention on the Rights of the Child is today a
universal legal instrument, offering a solid foundation
for the protection of children both in peacetime and
during armed conflicts. We welcome the adoption of
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child in January this year. This represents an
important step forward in supplementing the legal
foundation for child protection. It is now high time we
all moved to an era of effective implementation of
these and other relevant international legal instruments,
as recommended in the Secretary-General's report. Our
success in the application of all relevant instruments
will indeed make a difference in reducing the gap
between law and practice, shaping the behaviour of
parties to conflicts.

Last week the Security Council held an open
meeting on the prevention of armed conflict. During
that meeting it was emphasized that a continuing
commitment to addressing the prevention of armed
conflict in all regions of the world far outweighed the
human and material costs of addressing a full-fledged
conflict. In this regard, we reiterate our firm belief that
a comprehensive conflict prevention strategy is
ultimately the best course of action to protect children
from war.

Peace is not the mere absence of war. It
encompasses far more than that, requiring the
demonstration of a spirit of tolerance, reconciliation
and constant dialogue as a means of solving problems
or differences, as well as a total rejection of violence.
We believe that promoting a culture of peace today will
be a valuable heritage we can bestow on future
generations. We therefore reaffirm our commitment to
the effective implementation of the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace, adopted
by the General Assembly on 13 September 1999.

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
and the illicit exploitation of, and trade in, natural
resources are among the major causes contributing to
the escalation of conflicts. The cases of UNITA, in
Angola, and of Sierra Leone are vivid examples of such
situations. In this regard, we commend the Security
Council's initiatives, and those taken by several
regional and subregional organizations, to curb the
illicit trade in both small arms and diamonds as
preventive measures.

It is also of vital importance to undertake
effective post-conflict peace-building strategies to
prevent the recurrence of conflicts. In this regard,
appropriate programmes should be developed -
including programmes for the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and rehabilitation of
combatants - with increased focus on the situation of
child soldiers and other children affected by armed
conflict. Special attention should also be given to
demining as a measure to facilitate the return to
normalcy and development and, above all, to spare the
innocent lives of children in many parts of the world.

It is crucial to address the root causes of conflict
worldwide. This daunting task demands from all of
us- Governments, the United Nations system,
international, regional and subregional organizations,
non-governmental organizations and civil society in
general - continued commitment and concerted
action.

The report of the Secretary-General contains
specific recommendations, some of which are already
in practice. In this regard, we commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his
initiative, among others, of introducing a child
protection component into United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We are happy to note that the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
and the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) have
explicitly incorporated that component within their
mandates.

We strongly support the specific
recommendations in the report of the Secretary-
General, and urge all other Member States to support
them. We believe it is now time for all of us to lend our
support and commitment to the effective
implementation of these recommendation and other
initiatives aimed at protecting children in armed
conflict. We in Mozambique reaffirm our commitment
to the cause of children by abiding by all relevant legal
instruments promoting and protecting the rights of the
child. We remain firmly committed to work harder in
our region and subregion with other members of the
Organization of African Unity and the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) in
translating our commitments into practice.

We must act now, and in a decisive manner, to
fulfil our collective responsibilities towards children
and, through them, towards all generations. We cannot
afford to fail in this task, for our failure would be
imposed on present and future generations. Political
will is now required from all of us to face this great
challenge for a better millennium where children come
first in the world's agenda.

