Mr. Akram (Pakistan): The civil war that has
afflicted the Sudan for the larger part of its independent
history is most unfortunate. Its consequences have
been severe for the people of the country and for the
region.

Pakistan welcomes the progress made towards a
negotiated and mutually acceptable settlement of the
conflict. We welcome the engagement of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union and the international community in
helping the parties move forward towards peace.
Pakistan especially welcomes the commitment of the
United Nations to supporting the peace process.

The main objective of the resolution we have just
adopted is to welcome the recent progress in the
Naivasha process and to enable the deployment of a
United Nations advance team in the Sudan to prepare
for the introduction of a United Nations operation
intended to support the implementation of a
comprehensive peace agreement to be signed by the
parties. The cooperation of the parties is and will
remain vital for the implementation of any peace
agreement. It will be important, therefore, to keep the
Government of the Sudan fully and constructively
engaged in the process.

The resolution refers to the problems in the
Darfur and Upper Nile regions of the Sudan. In Darfur,
there is a humanitarian crisis initiated by an armed
rebellion and escalated by the response. What is
important now is for the international community to
respond generously to this humanitarian crisis. This
response has been disappointing so far. Therefore, we
welcome the reference in the resolution to the need for
extensive funding in support of peace in the Sudan.

The Sudan is an important member of the African
Union, the Organization of the Islamic Conference and
the United Nations. As a United Nations Member
State, the Sudan has all the rights and privileges
incumbent under the United Nations Charter, including
to sovereignty, political independence, unity and
territorial integrity - the principles that form the basis
of international relations. Long-term peace and
stability and the unity of the Sudan are in the interests
not only of its own people, but also of the international
community. This should be the central objective of the
Security Council.

Finally, in closing let me say that it should be a
matter of principle that a country concerned in any
issue under discussion by the Security Council or the
subject of a resolution should have the right to
participate and to speak in the Council's meetings. We
have extended that right to other countries and we
should not have denied it in this case.

