Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank the briefers
for updating us following the disturbing news footage
that we all saw last week, showing migrants being sold
into slavery in Libya.

Today, let us stand together as an international
community in our commitment to eliminating the
abhorrent crime of modern slavery and human
trafficking, and to safeguarding the lives and dignity
of those who are most vulnerable. Like many Libyans, I
share the disgust and grave concern at the news footage
from last week. I am deeply concerned that civilians
continue to suffer inexcusably from the conflict in
Libya and that, in the absence of the rule of law, they
can suffer human rights abuses of the worst kind. I
welcome the announcement by the Government of
National Accord of Libya of an immediate investigation
into that matter and its commitment to ensuring that
those involved are brought to justice and that this vile
practice is stopped.

We reaffirm our support, working alongside Libya
and international efforts, to bring to account those
responsible for such crimes, and we encourage all
Member States to continue to work with the Libyan
authorities in pursuing allegations of human rights
abuses to ensure that those individuals responsible are
held to account.

After several debates, the Security Council is well
informed of the challenges that we face in tackling
unmanaged migration, including through Libya. We
are aware of the real vulnerability of migrants to
trafficking and modern slavery. We want migration to
be safe, legal and well managed. We have discussed the
need for a comprehensive approach that addresses the
root causes of migration, as well as its consequences.
With resolutions 2331 (2016) and 2388 (2017), we are
now well equipped to take action.

Instability creates a permissive environment in
which criminal networks exploit civilians and migrants
and operate trafficking networks for their own gains,
including through the illegal detention of migrants.
We will continue to support the Libyan authorities in
improving conditions in the centres currently under
their control, and in establishing oversight over the
remaining ungoverned centres.

The Council has seen recent progress in revitalizing
the Libyan political process and taking steps forward to
stabilizing the country. We are clear that the human
rights situation in Libya can be improved sustainably
only under the stability of a united and representative
Government. A safe, secure and prosperous Libya that
is able to confidently tackle the challenges in the region
is in all our interests, and we continue to support the
United Nations action plan for Libya.

We must all recognize that it is not only the
trafficked individuals and their loved ones who are
directly affected by that horrendous crime. Violent
extremists profit financially from the trade in human
misery and use it to fund terrorist activity that
affects us all. We must integrate our understanding
of trafficking and modern slavery with our efforts to
combat terrorism, and we must eradicate the use of
slavery as a means to resource terrorist groups.

Human-rights monitoring and the capacity-building
of police are central to efforts to build stability and
address trafficking by field missions. More broadly,
we should consider how anti-trafficking is part of the
sustaining peace agenda, which is all about using a
cross section of United Nations tools to prevent conflict
and build peace. It is clear that trafficking itself can be
addressed only through a holistic cross-pillar approach
on the part of the United Nations.

As is always the case with today's frantic news
cycles, the reports from Libya that have so shocked
us all will soon be displaced by other headlines and
eventually drop off the news agenda all together. While
that is to be expected, we should hold ourselves to a
higher standard of responsibility. The fact that slavery
continues in the twenty-first century, despite all the
progress that has been made in defending human rights,
is reprehensible. Let us commit to working together to
preserve our attention on this issue and sustain our
action in order to ensure that this practice does not
continue in Libya or anywhere else; it is only by doing
so that we can hope to succeed in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

If members ofthe Council consider that a statement
would be helpful, we would be happy to work with them
on such a text.

