Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): We appreciate the
presence of President Boris Tadic' of Serbia and thank
him for his speech. We are also very grateful for the
opportunity to listen to the views of Mr. Skender
Hyseni, Foreign Minister of the Republic of Kosovo.
Allow me to also express our deep appreciation for the
work of Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and for his ongoing efforts to
facilitate dialogue among all actors in a period of
change and adaptation. In this regard, we also welcome
the report of the Secretary-General before us today
(S/2009/149).

The meeting of the Council in November last
year paved the way for the reconfiguration of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and an enhanced United Nations
engagement. Since then, we witnessed the successful
deployment of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) throughout Kosovo on
9 December. The first EULEX report before us today
bears witness to this success.

We are content to see that, due in part to the
constructive attitude of Serbia in cooperating with
EULEX, the Mission has already been able to make an
important contribution helping the authorities of
Kosovo in forming a multi-ethnic State based on the
principles of democracy and the rule of law. We are
convinced that the recent establishment of an European
Union (EU) liaison office in Belgrade will further
facilitate and strengthen this cooperation.
09-27620
We believe that Kosovo has made significant
progress over the past year. In continuously
implementing the Ahtisaari proposals and the new
Constitution, the Kosovo authorities have laid the
foundations for a stable, democratic and multi-ethnic
State. We encourage all ethnic groups to actively
participate in the structures of Kosovo and so ensure
that multi-ethnicity becomes an integral part of
everyday life.

Austria has made continuous efforts to foster
peace and stability in the western Balkans by bringing
together all sides in dialogue. In 2005 and 2006, we
organized two seminars that were instrumental in
designing a law on the status and the protection of
religious communities in Kosovo, and we were glad to
host the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the future status process for Kosovo in
Vienna and to actively support its efforts.

Austria also contributes some 650 troops to the
International Security Force in Kosovo (KFOR). Ours
is thus the biggest non-NATO contingent in KFOR, and
we currently exercise command over the KFOR
Multinational Task Force South. Furthermore, we
provide 27 police officers, judges and prison officers to
EULEX. We believe that the core responsibility of the
international community in Kosovo is the protection of
all ethnic groups, in particular minorities.

Austria is concerned about reports of inter-ethnic
violence in the Mitrovica region and warmly welcomes
the agreement of the police commanders of both parts
of Mitrovica to organize joint police patrols. This could
be an essential element in securing peace and stability.
We also deplore the fact that the number of voluntary
minority returns has declined compared to 2006 and
2007, and we express our hope that Kosovo's recently
launched return project and the survey of internally
displaced persons from Kosovo, to be conducted by
Serbia together with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, will prove to be
effective and facilitate returns to Kosovo.

We share the Secretary-General's observation that
the efforts of all sides, with the support of the
international community, need to continue to further
implement the temporary arrangements laid out in his
most recent report. We are convinced that pragmatism
and a sense of responsibility will lead to tangible
results in finding solutions to the outstanding practical
issues. Bridging these differences and coming to a
productive working relationship will benefit all people
in the region.

The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) continues to play a crucial role in
Kosovo, and it has our full support. Under the
leadership of Ambassador Almhofer, the OSCE mission
in Kosovo fulfils an important role in guaranteeing a
democratic and multi-ethnic future for Kosovo, in
particular in building and monitoring Kosovo's
democratic institutions and its support for human rights
and for the preservation of minority rights. The
stability in the Balkans is a goal shared by the United
Nations, the European Union and the OSCE. We are
looking forward to continued OSCE engagement there.

Although it has been said many times before,
allow me to stress that: the future of all the peoples of
the western Balkans, including Serbia and Kosovo, lies
in the European Union. This is a perspective to which
my country has always been committed, and the
realization of this perspective, in our View, offers the
best long- and medium-term chance to find lasting
solutions to many of the problems that we are
discussing today. The European Council has reiterated
this perspective a number of times, and EU member
States fully support it. Austria is convinced that a very
large majority of the inhabitants of Serbia and of
Kosovo clearly see the benefits of European integration
for their futures and the future of their families and
their countries. Austria will continue to strive to
achieve this goal.

