Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): We join other
delegations in thanking the Russian presidency for its
initiative to discuss in the Council measures to
eliminate international terrorism. We also thank the
Legal Counsel, Mr. Hans Corell, for his comprehensive
briefing on the significant developments in
international law that have occurred over the past few
years.

In this connection, an important contribution was
made by the Security Council during the previous
Russian presidency, when it adopted resolution 1269
(1999), in which it unequivocally condemned all acts,
methods and practices of terrorism as criminal and
unjustifiable, regardless of their motivation, in all their
forms and manifestations, wherever and by whomever
committed, in particular those which could threaten
international peace and security.

It is our view that the General Assembly must
remain the principal United Nations platform for
initiating efforts to combat international terrorism. The
12 United Nations terrorism conventions elaborated in
the General Assembly represent a major achievement
of that body. On the other hand, the Security Council
has its role to play in special cases. The Security
Council's involvement in the Lockerbie affair is a case
in point.

The Netherlands is currently in the process of
ratifying the last two of the 12 United Nations
terrorism conventions: the Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings and the Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism.

The sectoral approach in negotiating terrorism
conventions has proved to be an effective track to
achieving a legal framework. The Indian draft
comprehensive convention that is currently under
consideration in the Sixth Committee should, in our
View, complement rather than replace the existing
instruments so as to ensure that every single act of
terrorism is adequately criminalized.

The existing Conventions have already attracted a
large number of signatories and ratifications, and this
possible new instrument should therefore not imperil
the support these Conventions have already obtained.

S/PV.4242

 
International legal instruments alone do not
suffice. Enhanced cooperation among States, both at
the United Nations level and regionally, is essential for
effective combating of terrorism.

The Netherlands continues to stand ready to fight
terrorists. We acknowledge that the struggle against
increasingly sophisticated terrorists may require
increasingly harsher means. We wish to reiterate,
however, that in cases where official use of violence is
necessary, the response must be proportionate and
limited to the requirements of the maintenance of
public order. States have a special responsibility to
observe international humanitarian and human rights
law.

