Mr. Heusgen (Germany) (spoke in French): It is a
great pleasure to see High Representative Mogherini
here at the Security Council. None of my remarks run
counter to what she has just said. I wish only to repeat
that the European Union and the United Nations have
the same foundational principles. I think that is quite
powerful. We share the same values. I endorse her
position at the end of her statement concerning human
rights - that the United Nations and the European
Union both represent multilateralism, and it is the
cooperation that she described that makes the two
organizations more robust and lend them credibility.

I do not want to repeat what she said, but it was
striking to see that the European Union is also active in
similar ways on all the issues under consideration here.
With regard to Syria, for example, she indicated that she
supported resolution 2254 (2015) and is participating in
the Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of
Syria and the Region. She mentioned that she supported
the efforts of Mr. Griffiths in Yemen. There was a
similar overlap with regard to Afghanistan, Venezuela
and the Middle East. For example, the European Union
also supports the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East at a
time of crisis for the Agency. That support is very
important in enabling young Palestinians to attend
school. The same is true of what she said about North
Korea - that the European Union and the United
Nations are working together multilaterally to set up
negotiations with North Korea. That would not be
possible without multilateralism, as there would be no
discussions with North Korea.
Of course, I would also like to highlight European
Union actions with regard to Africa, which is a crucial
issue. High Representative Mogherini mentioned
that she attended the African Union summit, which
the Secretary-General also attended. I think that is
symbolic of the trilateral cooperation - among the
European Union, the United Nations and the African
Union - that can contribute to resolving issues.

As Ms. Mogherini has just said, there must be
regional African solutions for African issues. Working
together is also important. She also mentioned
something that is very important to us, that is to say,
inclusive solutions for issues, in which civil society,
in particular women, is involved and participates.
That is not only because there is the Commission on
the Status of Women but it is a very clear German
position on the participation of women in negotiations,
mediation and conflict resolution. Yesterday we talked
about Afghanistan, where it is vital that women truly
participate in the talks in Doha (see S/PV.8481).

I do not want to speak for any longer but I would
just say that for Germany and France, through ourjoint
presidencies, one of our aims is as part of our European
Union support, thereby highlighting the shared values
of France, Germany and the European Union.

The second to last point is just to underline what
the High Representative said about the disarmament
architecture. I think that it is important that we
remain engaged on that agenda. There are too many
losses, starting with the Budapest Memorandum at
the beginning of the crisis in Ukraine and the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, in which the High
Representative herself was greatly involved - she did
a great deal towards achieving that agreement, which
is a true masterpiece of diplomacy - as well as with
regard to what she said about the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces Treaty. She has our full support.

I would like to ask a question about something that
is very important to us, namely, conflict prevention.
Could the High Representative perhaps indicate where
she sees issues or projects where the European Union
and the United Nations can perhaps work more closely
together to truly preventing conflicts?

