Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): We thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the Director of the Coordination Division of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, for the information that they provided to us today. My delegation would like to address the following two points in our statement today, namely, the political situation and the humanitarian situation. With regard to the political situation, South Africa wishes to welcome the ongoing talks between the Houthis and Saudi Arabia. We urge all parties to the conflict to continue efforts aimed at undertaking dialogue and confidence-building measures that will contribute to a comprehensive political solution for Yemen. South Africa remains firm in the belief that sustainable peace in Yemen will come only through assertive efforts at dialogue, instead of continued armed conflict, which has led only to devastation and a profound humanitarian crisis in the country. In addition, South Africa calls for the speedy implementation of the Riyadh agreement between the Yemeni Government and the Southern Transitional Council. We call on the Yemeni Government and the Council to agree on forming a joint delegation as called for by the Riyadh agreement. South Africa also wishes to reiterate its call for the full implementation of the December 2018 Stockholm Agreement, including demilitarizing the port of Al-Hudaydah, and for all parties to carry out their respective obligations in accordance with responsibilities under the Stockholm Agreement. We welcome the efforts already undertaken to adhere to the Hodeidah Agreement, which we believe could be built on in order to create trust and instil confidence in fulfilling other aspects of the Stockholm Agreement. Similarly, South Africa welcomes the exchange of prisoners that has taken place betweenthe Saudi-led coalition and the Houthis since October 2019. These confidence-building measures are to be commended and should continue to receive the sustained support of the Security Council and the broader international community. Secondly, with respect to the humanitarian situation, South Africa remains extremely concerned about the serious crisis in Yemen. The unprecedented humanitarian crisis in the country is a strong indicator of the human toll of continued military action and conflict that requires an urgent commitment to a ceasefire and the pursuit of a negotiated peaceful and inclusive solution to the crisis. In this regard, South Africa wishes to call on all parties to the conflict to allow the free, regular and unimpeded passage of food and other humanitarian relief and not to take actions that will deprive civilians of their right to food and health. In this context, South Africa welcomes the initiative of the coalition, in cooperation with the World Health Organization, that medical flights be permitted from Sana'a airport, which has been closed to civilian air traffic since August 2016. South Africa also emphasizes that all necessary measures should be taken to respect the Geneva Conventions. More broadly, we reiterate our call on all parties to abide by their obligations under international law, including international humanitarian law and international human rights law. We wish to reiterate that the only sustainable solution to this conflict is a negotiated, Yemeni- led political settlement that is inclusive and fair and puts the interests and well-being of all the citizens of Yemen first.
