Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I wish to thank the President and the Prosecutor of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone for their very informative
briefings on the achievements of the Court, its ongoing
work and progress in the completion strategy of the
Court and on the establishment of the Residual Special
Court.

I also thank the Minister from Sierra Leone for her
briefing.

We welcome the fact that the Special Court for
Sierra Leone has been able to overcome at least two
features that could have been considered as defects that
would generate doubt regarding its ability to execute its
mandate satisfactorily.

First, there were the uncertainties related to the
financing of a hybrid or internationalized jurisdiction
based on an agreement between the United Nations
and the Government of Sierra Leone. It is therefore
unlike the two ad hoc tribunals, namely, the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) - which are subsidiary bodies to
the Security Council and thus benefit from guaranteed
United Nations financing.

Secondly, it was also the first time that such a
jurisdiction had been located in the territory of a
country that was the theatre of the acts that were to be
the subject of prosecution, where the socio-political
trauma and resentment risked generating insecurity and
compromising the country's position in terms of proper
implementation of the mandate.

Despite those features that were part of its creation,
there is remarkable proof today that the Special Court
has contributed to strengthened stability in Sierra Leone
and in the West African subregion, while working to put
an end to the culture of impunity.

It is also recognized that the Court has fostered
unexpected progress in the area of international criminal
justice and notable enrichment of international criminal
law. In that connection, Togo welcomes the work of the
Special Court, which has enable it to bring to conclusion
numerous key trials, among which we would include the
trial of Charles Taylor, which is currently on appeal and
is slated for completion on 30 September 2013.

It goes without saying that elements of jurisprudence
from the Special Court will continue to contribute to
enriching debates aimed at promoting progress in
international judicial systems, both nationally and
internationally, in areas including forced marriage as a
crime against humanity and sexual violence in times of
war and terrorism, among others.

My delegation also welcomes the fact that the
Special Court has been able to tackle one of the major
challenges facing jurisdictions of its nature, in reaching
an agreement with the Government of Rwanda to

ensure the execution of sentences handed down to those
convicted.

Moreover, my country's delegation believes that
the commitments made by the Special Court to ensure
the lasting effect of its achievements in the fight against
impunity, through the conservation of its archives, as
well as awareness-raising and dissemination of its
results, are notable signs of progress.

In particular, Togo would like to support the
idea of preserving memory on the part of the Special
Court, which it pursues under its mandate by creating
museums and mausoleums in order to shape and fix
images that are aimed at informing the collective
awareness so that those acts are never committed again.
However, given the fact that imagery can sometimes
surprise, and therefore produce results opposite to those
anticipated, my delegation hopes that the Court will be
able to take steps to accompany those images with the
teaching activities necessary to quell perverse effects
that could - contrary to our desire - inspire and incite
repeated atrocities.

As in the case of the two ad hoc tribunals for
Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, the Special Court's
completion strategy should not in any way open doors
to hasty trials or impunity. We welcome the fact that the
work of the Special Court for Sierra Leone is to continue
after it has closed, through the implementation of the
mandate of the Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone,
to fight against impunity and bring to account those who
are still fugitives from the law, ensuring the execution
of sentences and promoting the protection of witnesses.
It is therefore important that the Special Court work
relentlessly to respect the timetables and forecasts for
the completion strategy and for the closing of the cases
that are still pending.

My delegation remains convinced that the Special
Court's success has been made possible partly thanks
to active cooperation among States, and that that
cooperation is also crucial not merely at the current
critical phase as the mandate draws to a close, but also
as the Court seeks to ensure the launching and success
of the Residual Special Court.

That is why Togo calls upon all States to continue
to cooperate with the Special Court in contributing to
its budget, on the one hand, and, on the other, to extend
equal support with regard to cooperation and financial
support to the Residual Special Court.

