The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

I thank Mr. Egeland for his important statement.

I should like to begin by saying that I fully
associate myself with the statement to be made by the
representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union.

These twice yearly debates remain essential, in
my view, because several factors are making the
protection of civilians in armed conflict more difficult
than ever before. Those factors are well known: the
internal nature of today's conflicts and the increasing
fragility of international law. I would add that
heightened global awareness is causing some situations
to be perceived as totally unacceptable.

What has happened since our last debate, in
December 2004? On the ground, as Mr. Egeland said,
the situation of civilian populations remains very
precarious and is often intolerable. That is particularly
the case in the Congo and in the Sudan. Sexual
violence is becoming commonplace. Forced
displacement is used as a tactic of war. Humanitarian
personnel are harassed and attacked. The kidnapping in
Ituri of two members of the non-governmental
organization Doctors without Borders is a recent

example. And the emergence of new crises - in
Nepal, for example - is another new cause for
concern.

How do we respond to that situation?
Mr. Egeland has provided some ideas on how to
strengthen the protection framework. I imagine he will
develop those ideas in his next report to the Council.

For my part, I should like to comment on three
points.

First of all, there is, of course, a problem of
resources. We must ensure that there is a correlation
between the mandate to protect, assigned to
peacekeeping operations, and the resources provided
for the execution of that mandate. That is particularly
important when it comes to the physical protection of
the most vulnerable. Mr. Egeland rightly emphasized
that point. We must give further thought to realistic and
effective solutions, taking account of past experience,
especially that of the United Nations Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

When acute crises occur in the matter of
protection characterized by mass violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law, we must be
able to apply the principle of the responsibility to
protect. That principle reaffirms the primary
responsibility of States to protect civilians on their
territory; hence there is no interference. In the event
that the State concerned fails to act, the international
community has a duty to do so, including through the
Security Council. I am convinced that heads of State or
Government, meeting in New York in September, will
be able to reach agreement on that principle.

We must also deal with the vicious cultural circle
of violence. Given a certain level of chaos and
lawlessness, even those who are normally victims
become executioners. That can be seen today in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where not only
combatants, but also civilians themselves, commit acts
of sexual violence. In the face of such intolerable
aberrations, the fight against impunity is an absolute
imperative. The obligation to punish and the obligation
to protect are the primary responsibilities of States, and
it is at that level that impunity must be combated first
and foremost. However, when a State fails to act,
international justice - specifically, the International
Criminal Court - is an essential recourse for States, as
well as for the Council.

Since the most recent resolution - adopted by
the Council in 2000 - on the protection of civilians,
and, more broadly, since the first mandates for
peacekeeping operations that included a protection
component, the context has changed a great deal. I
believe that the time has come to consider adopting a
new resolution, taking account of such developments
and offering guidance for the future.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

In order to ensure that we manage our time
properly, and with a View to enabling as many
delegations to take the floor as possible, I shall not
invite individual speakers to take a seat at the Council
table. When a representative takes the floor, the
Conference Officer will seat the following speaker at
the table.

The next speaker is the representative of Peru, on
whom I now call.

