Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my thanks to the Italian
presidency for convening this important briefing.
I would also like to thank all the briefers for their
valuable presentations.

The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters is one
of the most dangerous aspects of the unprecedented
terrorist threat facing our world today, and has
increased in scope over the past several years. The
ability and capability of such terrorists to spread in
Syria, Iraq and other countries and regions throughout
the world - whether in Africa, Asia or Europe - have
also increased, demonstrating that the phenomenon
is linked to many problems and factors that must be
addressed effectively if we seriously desire to halt it.
I will touch upon several specific points in connection
with those problems, while sharing our View on how we
believe that they should be addressed.

First, the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters has highlighted the success of terrorist
organizations - especially that of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh) and Al-Qaida - in
recruiting many individuals, including men and women
of various age groups and social, educational and
professional backgrounds and countries, to join the
ranks of their terrorist groups. In that regard, we believe
it necessary to counter all political and socioeconomic
conditions that might lure such people to terrorism. In
addition, we must effectively combat terrorist ideologies
and messages whereby terrorists apply takfiri thought
and falsely interpret religions. Aware of that danger,
Egypt has adopted a comprehensive international
framework to counter the terrorist narrative, pursuant
to resolution 2354 (2017).
Second, various reports have come to the firm
conclusion that the Internet and other social media
are among the most important tools used by terrorist
groups to recruit and direct foreign terrorist fighters.
Accordingly, although we have encountered difficulty
in reaching an international framework to ban the use
of the Internet and social media when they are used
for purposes of terrorism - owing to differences in
Constitutions and domestic laws in various countries - it
is nevertheless important to find common ground and
strengthen international cooperation to prevent the use
of the Internet and social media for terrorist ends. We
must also promote cooperation with the private sector
and relevant enterprises, as well as civil society.

Third, foreign terrorist fighters require financing
to travel and reside in their countries of destination.
Such financing might originate from individual
sources, terrorist organizations or certain States that
provide funding for political purposes. In that regard,
we reaffirm the need to block all forms of terrorist
financing in general, and that of foreign terrorist
fighters in particular. It is important to implement the
many relevant resolutions, especially resolution 2368
(2016), as well as other relevant international norms.

Fourth, it is vital to screen foreign terrorist fighters
who travel to Syria and Iraq and track their movement
towards other countries in Africa, Asia and Europe. It is
necessary to take all measures to stop them, given that
the status quo is a violation of resolution 2178 (2014),
which, simply put, means preventing foreign terrorist
fighters from reaching various countries throughout
the world.

Fifth, the effort to address the issue of foreign
terrorist fighters has revealed many legal gaps that
must be addressed. At the national level, countries must
criminalize the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon
and terrorists' travel to conflict zones for the purposes
of terrorism. They must also criminalize any act that
supports or incites foreign terrorist fighters. At the
international level, we must consider how to legally deal
with foreign terrorist fighters leaving conflict zones
who, as yet, have not been served with arrest warrants
or who have become stateless. We believe that the best-
case scenario should end with either their prosecution
in the countries in which they were arrested or their
extradition to the countries of origin before they left
for the conflict zones in question. Furthermore, we do
not agree with the trend of refraining from prosecuting
foreign terrorist fighters and attempting instead only
to rehabilitate them and reintegrate them into society.
Any person considered a foreign terrorist fighter must
be held accountable if we are to uphold the principles of
justice and accountability and ensure deterrence.

Sixth, it is crucial that we exchange information
on the issue. In that regard, we stress the importance
of making use of the INTERPOL database of foreign
terrorist fighters. We urge INTERPOL to scale up its
interaction with countries so that they are aware of
the potentially helpful data it has available. Where
application programming interfaces and similar
systems are concerned, we can see that the number of
countries that apply such systems is very limited. We
should therefore investigate the reasons why States
have reservations about implementing them and try to
address them.

Seventh, we emphasize how important it is to
promote international cooperation in law enforcement
and justice when addressing the issue of foreign
terrorist fighters, as well as to encourage mutual legal
assistance to promote international legal cooperation
and abide actively by the principles of extradition
and accountability.

Last but not least, the United Nations must play a
concrete role on the ground by helping States to build
their capabilities so that they can fulfil their obligation
to counter the problem of foreign terrorist fighters.
We expect the Office of Counter-Terrorism to play a
vital role in this area, taking into consideration the
priorities defined by the States concerned and the
recommendations of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
following the assessment visits conducted by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
In that regard, we emphasize the importance of ensuring
that States respect the relevant Council resolutions and
that the Security Council follows up the implementation
of its resolutions in earnest, Without turning a blind eye
to any violation by any country, whether for political
reasons or other considerations. That lesson should
not be forgotten when we consider the draft resolution
renewing resolution 2178 (2014).

