Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian Federation has noted with
satisfaction the partial stabilization in the situation in
Rwanda that has occurred. We are pleased that the
Rwandan people, after enduring the horrors of a genocide
unprecedented in contemporary history, are gradually
returning to normal life. In this regard, we pay due tribute
to the efforts of the Government of Rwanda, which,

 

despite the most difficult conditions, has been able to
achieve a number of positive results.

However, many problems have yet to be solved. The
most acute of these is the problem of almost 2 million
displaced persons and refugees, who, as the Secretary-
General points out in his report, constitute one of the
highest concentrations of refugees in the world. And as a
result, there is still a potential threat of destabilization.

Obviously, this complex, large-scale problem can
scarcely be properly resolved without the active cooperation
of the international community. We therefore consider it
appropriate to maintain a limited United Nations presence
in Rwanda even after the final expiry today of the mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda
(UNAMIR). We attach importance to the decision to
establish, in agreement with the Government of Rwanda, a
United Nations political office in that country to support the
Rwandan Government's efforts to promote national
reconciliation, strengthen the judicial system, facilitate the
return of refugees and rehabilitate the country's
infrastructure. It is also important that the maintenance of
a United Nations presence should be a major factor in
strengthening confidence and stability. It would also ensure
that the United Nations would be able to keep abreast of
developments in the situation and learn in good time of any
risk of a deterioration.

We expect that the withdrawal of the major
components of UNAMIR will be carried out according to
schedule. We trust in this regard that the safety of the
personnel of the International Tribunal, the specialized
agencies and other international organizations and that of
human rights observers - all of whose activities are of
great significance in assisting the Rwandan Government's
efforts to cope with the aftermath of genocide and civil
war - will be assured.

On the whole, the Russian delegation believes that the
draft resolution before the Security Council is adequate to
the situation in Rwanda and to the requirements of a
substantively new phase in the relationship between the
Government of that country and the international
community. We shall therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution.

