Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Mr. Minister, we are pleased to welcome you
as President of the Security Council and to
congratulate you on Belgium's successful presidency
of the Council this month.

In regions of crisis, particularly in States in which
the proper mechanisms for regulating of the use of
natural resources are insufficiently developed,
problems arising from illegal operations can lead to
armed confrontation and the escalation of conflict.
Combating the illicit use of natural resources is, first
and foremost, the prerogative and obligation of the
Government of the State concerned.

The way to tackle the problem, we believe, is to
strengthen State structures, including through reform of
the security sector, development of the judicial system
and of border and customs control, and the eradication
of crime and corruption. The primary role of the United
Nations in this process should be to help States, at their
request, by providing political and advisory support.
The sanction mechanisms of the Security Council and
their expert groups contribute in that context, in those
cases where the relevant crisis situations are before the
Council. We should be guided in that by the Charter
principles of non-interference in internal affairs,
sovereignty, territorial integrity and the political
independence of States.

It is important to maintain a balance between the
efforts of the international community to prevent the
fuelling of armed conflicts through the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, and the strict
observance of the sovereign right of States to use their
natural resources and to their own national policy on
the use of natural resources. A positive example of that
is the adoption by the States of the Great Lakes region
of the Pact on Security, Stability and Development in
the Great Lakes Region and the protocol on combating
the illicit exploitation of natural resources within it.

A substantial role in the settlement and resolution
of the armed conflicts in Sierra Leone, Liberia and
Cote d'Ivoire has been played by sanctions regimes
introduced by the Security Council regulating the
export of diamonds and valuable timber by those
States. At the same time, in the sanctions practice of
the United Nations it is important that we continue to
be guided by criteria for the lifting of sanctions and for
the consideration of the humanitarian consequences.

Today's theme is broad and goes beyond the
competence of the Security Council. Its further
consideration should involve the relevant specialized
bodies of the United Nations system, including the
Commission on Sustainable Development and the
Second Committee of the General Assembly.
Establishing productive interaction between those
bodies will favour an effective solution to the problems
we are considering.

