Mr. Chutikul (Thailand): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the members of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), comprising
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao
People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar,
the Philippines, Singapore, Viet Nam and my own
country, Thailand.
I wish to express ASEAN's appreciation to the
French presidency for organizing today's open debate
on the topic of the protection of civilians in the context
of peacekeeping operations and to all the briefers for
their informative presentations.

As stated in your concept note (S/2016/503, annex),
Mr. President, civilians remain the target ofunacceptable
Violence in situations of armed conflict. The report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(S/2015/446) describes the protection of civilians in
armed conflict as a core principle of international
humanitarian law and a moral responsibility for the
United Nations. In carrying out this responsibility, the
majority of United Nations peacekeeping operations
are now rightly mandated to protect civilians in their
areas of deployment and within their capabilities.

Before responding to some ofthe questions raised in
your concept note, ASEAN believes it is important to set
the context and parameters. First, the host country has
the primary responsibility to protect its own civilians.
Secondly, United Nations peacekeepers' mandate to
protect civilians is derived from resolutions of the
Security Council. Finally, the three basic principles of
United Nations peacekeeping constitute the framework
within which the protection of civilians in the context
of peacekeeping operations is carried out.

How can we achieve better protection of civilians?
One of the key findings of the High-level Panel's report
on the protection of civilians is that expectation and
capability must converge. In this regard, ASEAN wishes
to offer the following observations and suggestions.

First, as stressed by the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, we need to strengthen the
triangular cooperation among the Security Council,
troop- and police-contributing countries and the
Secretariat. Each has a distinct and crucial, yet
complementary and mutually reinforcing role. The
Security Council has the responsibility to ensure that
the protection mandate is well defined, achievable and
backed with adequate resources. It should be prepared
to review and adjust the mandate, taking into account
the evolving situation and the views of the troop- and
police-contributing countries.

Given the realities on the ground and the
complexities of the issue, it is difficult for peacekeepers
to fully understand the extent of their protection of
civilians obligations and the required actions they need
to take to implement it. Clear policy and implementation

guidelines developed by the Secretariat are therefore
instrumental in dispelling such uncertainties. In
addition, the protection of civilians is not only the task
of uniformed personnel. Mission leadership is also
responsible for ensuring coherence and coordination
among military, police and civilian components of the
mission, in order to deliver a comprehensive approach
to the protection of civilians.

Troop- and police-contributing countries, for
their part, must undertake to train and prepare their
peacekeepers to meet the standards of readiness,
integrity and conduct required by the United Nations.
ASEAN troop- and police-contributing countries
reaffirm their commitment to properly train and
equip their peacekeepers to effectively discharge the
protection of civilians mandate.

Secondly, the protection of civilians does not
necessarily mean the use of force. ASEAN underlines
the relevance of unarmed strategies to protect civilians
in the context of peacekeeping operations. We wish to
highlight two aspects, namely, the early warning of
potential risks to civilians and capacity-building for
host State security institutions.

Having relevant, accurate and timely information,
such as on incidents of human rights Violations, allows
peacekeeping operations to address imminent threats
to civilians before they can actually harm them.
Effective early warning can be achieved through
human intelligence gathering and the appropriate use of
technology. We emphasize the importance ofinteracting
and developing positive relationships with the local
population. The presence of female peacekeepers has
proven time and again to be crucial to operational
effectiveness in that regard.

Building a legitimate and effective State security
sector, in particular the armed forces and police, is
fundamental to the long-term prospects of creating a
safe and secure environment for civilians. Therefore,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities and
capacity-building should be an integral part of the
approach to the protection of civilians in the context
of peacekeeping operations. The Security Council,
in mandating such tasks, should give due regard to
national priorities and conditions, in order to instil a
sense of genuine ownership of the process.

In conclusion, ASEAN pays tribute to the men and
women who have admirably dedicated their lives to
protecting the lives of others. We honour their sacrifices

and pledge to continue to work to strengthen United
Nations peacekeeping, to better protect civilians and to
ensure that peace will be secured and sustained.
