Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): Let me join the other
speakers in commending the President for convening
this timely and important debate.

Sri Lanka associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. I wish to make
this statement in my national capacity.

Conflicts in Syria and Yemen, an unprecedented
refugee crisis and a humanitarian situation of epic
proportions in various areas - including the the surge
in violent extremism and terrorism 4 have contributed
to the growing instability across the Middle East. The
unabated shelling and airstrikes, such as in Aleppo, have
caused untold suffering, and the images oflittle children
caught in the crossfire are more than humankind should
have to bear. Sri Lanka calls upon the parties concerned
to find a peace deal in Syria without delay. Sri Lanka
welcomes the plenary meeting of the General Assembly
to be held tomorrow on the situation in Syria. We are
deeply conscious of the dire need on the part of the
international community to address the overwhelming
humanitarian needs of Syrians and to halt all attacks
against civilian targets.

In that context, the question of Palestine takes
on additional importance. Sri Lanka reaffirms its
steadfast support of the Palestinian cause. This debate
reminds us once again of the urgency of finding a just
solution to the question of Palestine and addressing
the plight of Palestinian people. The world must not
forget the dire humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories - especially in Gaza, were the
conditions are intolerable - especially at this time of
unprecedented unrest in the Middle East, when we are
focused on the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
the demanding refugee crisis in Syria.

Sri Lanka supports the work of United Nations
agencies in occupied Palestinian territories, including
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which keep
the majority of people in Gaza supplied with the bare
necessities, including education.

As Chair of the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied
Territories, Sri Lanka is particularly concerned about
the escalating violence and the number of civilian
casualties, which include infants.

The international community has repeatedly called
for a freeze to Israel's settlement activities. Both parties
to the conflict must create the necessary environment
to facilitate peace. There is an urgent need for mutual
confidence-building measures in support of efforts to
resume dialogue and substantive negotiations. Israel
must protect the Palestinian civilian population in the
occupied territories and desist from actions that run
contrary to the established rules of international law
and practice.

We recognize the security needs of Israel.
Indiscriminate attacks against Israeli civilians will lead
to a counterproductive cycle of violence. We urge both
parties to respect international humanitarian law and
exercise the utmost restraint for the sake of the safety
of civilians.

It is important to stay engaged in finding ajust and
durable solution to the situation in the Middle East.
Sri Lanka supports the implementation of the General
Assembly resolution regarding the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian to statehood.

We are encouraged that, in spite of decades of
disappointment, the people of Palestine have resolutely
sustained their spirit and strength of purpose to gain
their legitimate rights. They have prevailed over the
considerable challenges facing them. We hope that
the Palestinian people will work together to preserve
national unity, which is imperative for the creation of a
fully sovereign, independent Palestine.

