Mr. Corr (Ireland): Like others, I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Oshima for his briefing
on the progress in the three areas outlined.

As a general point, I would say that Ireland, like
the representative of Norway and others who have
spoken, very much regards the protection of civilians
in armed conflict as one of the more important issues
on the Council's agenda. Therefore the approach we
take to this issue in terms of institutional detail on
making progress is one part of it. The other part, as
Singapore quite rightly said, are the wider issues of the
spirit and the sense of urgency in which we approach
this. As the Under-Secretary-General said at the outset,
it is hard to think of issues that are more important -
including in the context of Afghanistan - in terms of
humanitarian access, camps for internally displaced
persons, engagement with armed groups, delivery of
aid and so on.

I would like to speak briefly about the three
issues. On the question of the re-organization of the
recommendations into different groups, the workshops
that have been held have clearly been a very useful
idea. As Colombia has said, this is, I think, an issue
where Council members could possibly participate. We
would hope that even before the comprehensive report
is issued in November 2002, it will be possible to come
back to the Council with progress on the matrix and on
the state of play, given the clear importance that this
has in terms of the institutional structures within the
United Nations on how to make progress in terms of
the different issues there.

On the draft aide-memoire, the proposal for a
half-day discussion - perhaps early next year -
seems a very good one. As members of the Council, we
would fully support that. We would also feel that the
value of the aide-memoire should be in its relative
simplicity. It should essentially be a checklist without
too much complexity. We would therefore support its
being developed very rapidly after the half-day
discussion. Equally, we look forward to the strategy
paper prepared by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the Department for
Peacekeeping Operations.

If I might, I would like to take up two questions.
One arises from yesterday's meeting, which clearly
showed significant linkages between the area of child
protection and the issues we are considering here. I
believe that Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guehenno indicated in the Preparatory Committee for
the special session of the General Assembly devoted to
children that an informal inter-agency working group
on the integration of child protection concerns into
peace negotiations was being established and that this
would take into account operational procedures being
developed by OCHA in relation to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. There is a clear
complementarity here, so I wonder how that working
group is proceeding and developing in terms of those
linkages.

The second point, which is a more indirect one, is
the issue of access negotiations with parties to armed
conflict. In his second report, the Secretary-General
mentioned that he had requested the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee to develop a manual for access
negotiations and strategies, including benchmarks for
the engagement and disengagement of aid agencies,
and so on. Again, I would be interested to hear what
progress has been made on that.

The final question, which is perhaps more
abstract at this stage, is the recommendation about the
media made by the Secretary-General in his report,
which also relates to paragraph 18 of resolution 1296
(2000), on a mass-media component to peacekeeping
operations. The Secretary-General's report of course
noted that no peacekeeping or peace-enforcement
mission had yet been authorized in terms of, for
example, closing down the assets of hate media. I
wonder how the Under-Secretary-General sees the
possibility for progress in that general area, given its
importance.
