Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The unanimous adoption of this resolution by
the Security Council, reflects support by the
international community for the process of a peace
settlement in southern Sudan, which has now entered a
crucial stage. We welcome the steady movement
towards a settlement, a prerequisite for which is
preservation of the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of the country. Progress in the Naivasha
negotiations after the demonstration of political will by
both sides also depends, to a large extent, on support
by the international community, primarily IGAD and
its Partners Forum.

We hope that the Government of Sudan and the
leadership of SPLM/A will speedily complete the
negotiations, so that, as soon as possible, probably by
the end of the year, they will be able to sign a
comprehensive peace agreement. We believe that such
an agreement will have a positive impact on the
situation in the country as a whole, including Darfur.

The experience of the Naivasha negotiating
process has been unique, and we believe it can be
useful in the context of the Abuja negotiations on a
Darfur settlement. It is important we make clear to the
Sudanese that international support will be there for
them in their efforts to consolidate a political
settlement and rebuild the country after the signing of
the comprehensive peace agreement. This resolution
we have just adopted does indeed send exactly such a
signal to the Sudanese. Now the parties must
implement all of their commitments and the
international community must allocate sufficient
resources to support actual implementation of the
future peace agreement.

Recent progress in the Abuja negotiations,
primarily the signing of the protocols on humanitarian
and security issues, are grounds for hoping and
expecting that the Sudanese Government and the rebels
will indeed demonstrate the necessary political will and
continue the negotiations in a constructive spirit in
order to achieve a lasting settlement in Darfur. An
important part of stabilizing the situation in that part of
Sudan is to be played by the recently expanded and
deployed African Union Monitoring Mission, which
must be appropriately supported and helped. Its
presence will be particularly important in restoring a
climate of trust between Khartoum and the rebels. We
welcome the willingness of the Sudanese leadership to
cooperate constructively with the African Union
Mission, and we call on the other side to adopt a
similar stance.

The Security Council must continue providing
political assistance in the efforts to normalize the
situation in Darfur and ensure implementation of
agreements between Sudan and the United Nations. It
is necessary to redouble the efforts to establish security
in the region and to ensure the unhindered access of
humanitarian assistance.

All parties must scrupulously abide by their
commitments and comply with the norms of
international humanitarian law.

