Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): Let me at the outset
congratulate you, Sir, for assuming the presidency of
the Council for this month. With your usual open-
mindedness and sensitivity to conflict situations before
this body, coupled with your vast experience, we are
indeed in good, steady hands. May I also express our
gratitude to your predecessor, Ambassador Adolfo
Aguilar Zinser of Mexico, for steering the deliberations
of the Council last month to a successful conclusion.

May I also extend a warm word of welcome to
the new Foreign Minster of Somalia, Mr. Yusuf Hassan
Ibrahim, who is in our midst today. My delegation is
very pleased with the appointment of Mr. Winston
Tubman as the new head of the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia. We value his extensive
and multifaceted career, which is undoubtedly a rare
asset in the understanding and appreciation of the
Somali conflict and its ramifications. We congratulate
him and wish him well. We also wish to pay a deserved
tribute to his predecessor, Mr. David Stephen, for his
sterling performance in the conduct of his duties. We
found him a fine, genuine and reliable professional, as
well as a good friend.

The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Somalia highlights several critical issues in
the search for a comprehensive peace and stability in
Somalia. The report cites the fact that the Security
Council had noted that the Arta peace process is the
most viable basis for peace and national reconciliation
in Somalia.

In the same vein, the European Union, in its
statement of last August, exhorted the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and its member States to enhance their efforts towards
encouraging the process of reconciliation in Somalia,
on the basis of the achievements of the Arta conference
so as to assist the Somalis to achieve peace and
national reconciliation.

The report also underscores the view that there is
a need to bring into line others that opted to stay
outside the process. But of great significance is what
the report describes as a divergence of views among
IGAD member States regarding national reconciliation
in Somalia.

From a regional perspective, therefore, the
question is whether this divergence is compounding
Somalia's woes, further complicating the reconciliation
efforts, despite the Somali people's keen desire for
peace. Will the countries in the region come to terms
with the reality that the Somali people have had
sufficient squabbles and divisions of their own for too
long that they hardly need to be mired by different
regional interests?

The longer and the deeper that instability and
insecurity are allowed to fester and persist in Somalia,
the greater the risk of engendering warfare in the
region. The international community has turned a blind
eye to brutality and bloodshed in that country for too
long; it is now grappling with the lessons of its past
mistakes.

If not brought to an end sooner rather than later,
continued instability in Somalia will exacerbate
conditions that make the Horn of Africa one of the
most impoverished regions in the world. No one
doubts, therefore, that Somalia's difficulties have
regional dimensions, represent a menace to regional
peace and complicate efforts to find a lasting peace in
this part of Africa.

My country endured unquantifiable sacrifice in
initiating the Somalia National Peace Conference in the
first half of 2000, following the historic statement of
my President in the General Assembly in 1999. Against
the background of unending despair and political
paralysis in Somalia, Djibouti sponsored a reconfigured
conference favouring the civilian population, which for
years suffered violent bloodshed, destruction, neglect
and marginalization at the hands of armed groups. The
process was designed to be comprehensive, inclusive,
transparent, and representative, and therefore not to
exclude any individual, group or region nor favour or
accord special status to any individual, group or region.

All issues, problems or accommodations were left
open for discussion in the conference. No prior
conditions were accepted from any of the participants.
With the notable exception of some who were
apparently threatened by the democratic nature of the
process, which was led and driven by the civil society,
the overwhelming majority of Somalis attended the
conference, which produced the first national
framework in a decade.

Djibouti persevered in the face of massive
campaigns designed to undermine, destabilize, distort
and denigrate the conference. In its statement of 29
June 2000 (S/PRST/2000/22), the Council warned
these elements "to desist from obstructing and
undermining efforts to achieve peace". The Council
expressed its readiness to take appropriate steps against
those engaged in such activities and urged all States to
stop providing these individuals with the means to
carry on their destructive activities. In a nutshell, that
was the conference, what it was all about and the
challenges it faced.

Both in January and February this year, IGAD
member countries met to consider extensively the
conflict in Somalia. It is hoped that the follow-up
conference that will bring together the Government and
other parties ranged against it will take place next
month in Nairobi. One of the major achievements of
these latest IGAD meetings was the recognition that
countries in the Horn of Africa, particularly the
frontline States, must coordinate their efforts toward
national reconciliation in Somalia.

We cannot truly speak of reconciliation in
Somalia, however, as long as IGAD member countries
are pursuing varying, indeed, opposing goals both with
regard to what it takes to achieve peace and
reconciliation in Somalia and what the final outcome
would look like. Under these circumstances, one
wonders whether we are looking for the same kind of
Somalia. The clearest testimony yet to the region's
contradictory and self-defeating policies regarding
Somalia has been the relentless equivocation and
systematic negation of the outcome of the Arta process,
so that it, too, suffers the same misfortune as the
preceding reconciliation efforts. This is a cause of
much concern to all those who care about the plight
and future destiny of the Somali people.

The Transitional National Government is a
fledgling, nascent administration that inherited nothing
but chaos, destruction and empty coffers. As such,
countries in its own region owed it every bit of
compassion and material and moral support with no
strings attached.

To a great extent, everything depended on the
unambiguous, clear and shared vision of the region. In
the absence of a coherent and supportive policy from
our own region, however, it was highly unlikely that
the donor community, the United Nations and
international organizations would become involved in
our backyard for reasons other than humanitarian ones.
That is precisely what happened before and what has
been happening since the establishment of the
Transitional National Government.

It is the inaction, rivalry, jealousies, mixed
signals and inconsistency of our own region that are
seriously hampering the full realization of the gains
achieved by the people of Somalia at Arta. If only we,
the countries of the region, had put our acts together in
a rational, responsible and reassuring way; if only we
had galvanized support and mobilized resources for
this worthy cause; if only we had shunned apathy
towards the Transitional National Government and
rather checked the re-emergence of warlordism,
factionalism and secessionist tendencies; if only we
had refrained from rhetoric, sabre-rattling and
deliberate and provocative threats; if only we had
refrained from accentuating the weaknesses of the
Transitional National Government; if only we had
heeded the passionate cry of the Somali people, we
would perhaps be here today addressing Somalia in a
totally different context.

Needless to say, the Somali people and its leaders
bear full responsibility for reconciling and negotiating
an end to the conflict. Equally important, however, no
amount of goodwill, support or assistance on the part
of the international community can bring about peace
in Somalia unless the countries of the region bury their
differences and demonstrate the ability to rise above
their national interests and to put the interest of the
people of Somalia first and foremost.

Such squabbles over Somalia's destiny are taking
place with little, if any, criticism from the international
community. What is prevailing in the region goes far
beyond mere honest differences. It is deeper, divisive
and simply unwarranted. It goes to the heart of the
matter, negating the will of the Somali people and thus
posing a defiant challenge to peace and security in the
region. That is why Djibouti is not keen to qualify the
conclusions of the Secretary-General in the absence of
coherent policy approaches on the part of the countries
in the region.

Let us not forget that the decade-long wars in
Liberia and Sierra Leone were among the most brutal
of modern times. Thanks, however, to the
determination, sacrifices and perseverance of the
countries members of the Economic Community of
West African States, peace was restored. Sierra Leone
has turned an important corner, a far cry from the chaos
and hopelessness of only a year ago. The contribution
of the neighbouring countries has been immense.
Without their military support and cohesive policies,
the deployment of troops from the United Nations and
the United Kingdom could not have been possible.
These are good examples of what other regions in
Africa have done by coalescing around particular
conflict situations to forge a common, united position
and approach to corrective action. We are also well
aware of the series of ministerial delegations that have
visited the United Nations over the years to take part in
debates and to lobby for international support in such
conflict situations as those in Angola, Liberia, Sierra
Leone or the Central African Republic, to name just a
few.

The day we see a similar demonstration of
commitment from the countries of IGAD, peace will
dawn in Somalia. Let us hope this will happen, and that
it will happen sooner rather than later.

Throughout this tragedy, admiration must be
expressed for the valiant humanitarian efforts and
genuine concern exhibited by the United Nations
agencies and volunteer non-governmental
organizations. Without these efforts, it would be
difficult to comprehend the condition of the people of
Somalia. We certainly join with the Secretary-General
in recognizing the exemplary work they have
performed, often at great personal risk and sacrifice.
They are doing all they can in the wake of failing
interest and support. One individual who stands out in
objectively and courageously highlighting the
humanitarian situation in Somalia is Mr. Randolph
Kent, the United Nations Development Programme
Resident Representative in Somalia based in Nairobi.
He has been the real advocate for Somalia. He recently
said:

"Somalia is a country in transition. The strength
of a society is never put to a greater test than
when it is confronted with the task of recreating
itself."

Finally, Djibouti believes that the time has come
for the Horn of Africa region to accept responsibility
for the lack of resolution in the Somali conflict. This
conflict has been with us for too long. It is
unsustainable; it is untenable. There remains an
opportunity to harmonize our actions, minimize our
differences and show care and compassion for the dire
situation of the people. If we fail in this, history will
not judge countries of the region too kindly nor will the
Somali people forgive us for not rallying around the
only entity, the Transitional National Government, that
symbolizes their determination, sacrifices and
compromises. Somalia needs extensive repair work in
human, material and moral terms. It hardly needs any
interference or divisiveness; rather, it seeks
cooperation, help, understanding and nation-building.
For the international community, it is perhaps
appropriate to quote Nicholas Kristof, who, writing in
his column in The New York Times on 5 February 2002,
opined:

"It is not even necessary to wrestle with the
humanitarian argument for helping tottering
countries. A number of countries, including
Somalia, demonstrate the realpolitik merit of
solving messes as they happen: If we leave
countries to rot, eventually the rot spreads and
comes back to infect us."

