Mexico thanks Estonia for the invitation to contribute to this debate on the working methods of the Security Council, which is being held at a historic moment for humankind and, therefore, the United Nations. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic represents one of the greatest challenges our Organization has ever faced and is testing its effectiveness - so much so that the topic before us, which has regrettably been treated as a matter of procedure, has now assumed vital importance. We appreciate the measures adopted under the presidencies of China, the Dominican Republic and Estonia to adapt the working methods of the Security Council to the new circumstances imposed by the pandemic and thereby largely maintain the Council's level of effectiveness, efficiency and transparency. We hope that the lessons learned will drive future discussions on the changes required to working methods. However, 75 years after the founding of the United Nations, and despite the profound transformations the international community has undergone, the Security Council has failed to make progress on an issue crucial to the fulfilment of its mandate. There has been little progress in restricting the use of a prerogative set out in the Charter, which has allowed the Council to stand idly by while mass atrocities and war crimes are committed. Today we are again witnessing the Council's inability to take a clear position on a crisis that is paralysing our peoples and our economies and calls into question our very way of life. The outdated working methods of the Security Council are no excuse for its failure to meet the responsibility entrusted to it by the Charter of the United Nations. The Council has not only a legal but a moral obligation to act on behalf of the entire international community against threats to international peace and security. Among the changes we view as necessary, Mexico supports all initiatives aimed at restricting the use of the veto, reiterating that this prerogative is a responsibility and not a right. In this regard, the initiative promoted by Mexico and France, whereby the five permanent members would voluntarily commit to refraining from using the veto in mass-atrocity cases, is intended precisely to ensure that the Council can comply with its obligations. We are encouraged that 105 States - more than half of the membership - have supported this proposal. We also support initiatives seeking to ensure greater accountability to the General Assembly when the veto is used. We stress the importance that the Council's annual reports to the General Assembly be submitted on time and, above all, contain analytical information on its deliberations. Notwithstanding the foregoing, we acknowledge the progress made by the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Matters, which, under the chairmanship of Kuwait over the past two years, led to the adoption of several presidential notes, including one on the participation of the newly elected members of the Security Council. As a candidate for the Security Council for the 2021-2022 term, Mexico is of the view that the measures contained in that note will help ensure future members are best prepared. We firmly believe that, under the very capable leadership of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, the Working Group will be able to continue making progress on other issues, including improving the distribution of penholderships for Council resolutions. Tasks and responsibilities should be distributed more equitably among all Council members. Likewise, we reiterate the need for greater transparency when it comes to reports addressed to the Security Council invoking self-defence under Article 51 of the Charter. Notifying the Council of such actions is an obligation, and it is in the interests of the entire membership to so informed, especially with respect to the use of force. Mexico has formally submitted a proposal for the consideration of this matter to the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization. However, this does not replace the need for greater transparency and effectiveness on the part of the Council. This issue is becoming even more relevant in the light of the recent increase in invocations of Article 51 relating to actions against non-State actors, in particular terrorists in a third State. The Council must ensure that the lawful order established by the Charter of the United Nations is upheld at all times. The current situation calls on us to break with inertia and inaction. The United Nations must reclaim its role in saving future generations from untold suffering, and to do so it is absolutely crucial that the Security Council rise to the occasion.
