Mr. Munoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to thank Mr. Tuliameni Kalomoh for his
introduction to the Secretary-General's report on the
Security Council mission to Central Africa.

My delegation considers this exercise to be
timely and necessary because the Council's missions
have become a fundamental instrument in its decision-
making process and a clear demonstration of our
interest in the processes under way in the countries we
visit. In the case of Central Africa, the mission that was
headed by Ambassador de La Sabliere in June 2003
was the fourth since the Security Council resumed in
1999 its practice of sending missions to the field.

As some of the preceding speakers have already
indicated, since the dispatch of the mission to Central
Africa there have been encouraging signs of progress
in the region. We welcome the progress made in the
process of establishing the transitional Government in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Striking
advances have also been made in the establishment of
good-neighbourly relations and in the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement process
for the armed Ugandan, Rwandan and Burundian
elements in the territory of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

In spite ofthe progress made at the national level,
as we know, the situation in the Ituri district and in the
Kivus has been characterized by instability and by
ongoing grave abuses of human rights committed by
various rebel movements. As has been noted here, the
recent murder in Ituri of a Kenyan staff member of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo reminds us that
instability and violence still prevail in the north-eastern
part of the country. My country vigorously condemns
acts of violence, murder and other such crimes
perpetrated in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
in particular against the civilian population. Such acts
must not go unpunished and the perpetrators must
sooner or later answer for them. This is a challenge to
the entire international community, but more
fundamentally to the Congolese themselves and
especially to the transitional Government.

We support the report's conclusions regarding the
need for the transitional Government to establish clear
priorities in order to ensure the political transition. In
this context, the reform of the security sector, the
consolidation of the rule of law, respect for human
rights and the preparation for future general elections
are priority objectives.

The situation in Burundi, for its part, has also
seen important progress and the prospects for lasting
peace have improved. Since the Council mission's visit
to Bujumbura, we have witnessed the incorporation of
the rebel movements Conseil national pour la defense
de la democratie-Forces nationales pour la defense de
la democratie, headed by Pierre Nkurunziza, into the
institutions of the provisional Government. It is our
hope that the statement recently made by Agathon
Rwasa, the leader of the Palipehutu-Forces nationales
de liberation movement, that he would enter into
negotiations with the Government of President
Ndayizeye will lead to the prompt incorporation of that
movement into the Arusha peace process.

The challenges of Burundi's transition process
continue to require the full attention and support of the
Security Council and the rest of the international
community. In that connection, the recommendations
made by the mission remain fully valid - particularly
the appeal to donor countries to honour the pledges
made at the Paris and Geneva conferences. That is all
the more necessary since there is a serious risk that the
signs of peace that we are seeing on the horizon could
recede if they are not accompanied by an improvement
in the living conditions of Burundi's population.

The significant progress of the peace processes in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Burundi
provides an important impetus for the idea of holding
an international conference on the Great Lakes region.
We note with satisfaction the progress made over the
past six months in designing and elaborating a process
to promote substantive dialogue among the countries
central to such a conference, the United Nations, the
African Union and the donor community. The
commencement of the preparatory process for a
conference has led to an increase in the activities of the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes Region - an office that
unfortunately has neither the staff nor the budget
necessary to meet the tasks that lie ahead. That requires
that the Council analyse in detail the mandates of the
various offices and missions in Central Africa in the
light of the new scenario before us and that it
determine whether adjustments are needed to improve
their efficiency.

A firm and lasting peace in the region is today an
inescapable imperative. An African continent that has
economic stability and that invests in the development
of its people would be a major contribution by the
United Nations system. In the context of the United
Nations, Chile has always supported solutions and
initiatives aimed at promoting the interests of the
African continent, first by promoting the
decolonization process, later through the bodies created
in the United Nations towards that end and, more
recently, by providing troops from our country's armed
forces for peace efforts in the region.
I take this opportunity to reaffirm the need to take
the integrated approach with respect to Africa
promoted by the Secretary-General. In that context, my
country believes that the Security Council should
consider in the coming months the possibility of
organizing another mission to the Central African
region. The objective of such a mission would be to
assess on the ground the most urgent needs of the
provisional Governments of Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo with respect to
security sector reform, the establishment of the rule of
law and the preparations for general elections at the
end of 2004, at the beginning of 2005 and in June
2005.

Finally, we trust that the progress we have seen
will be consolidated and improved upon with the full
cooperation ofthe Organization.

