I wish to start by thanking Ambassador King, Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, for her capable leadership of the work of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions. I also wish to take this opportunity to express our appreciation to Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi, Permanent Representative of the State of Kuwait to the United Nations and former Chair of the Informal Working Group, for his great contribution in the past two years. I also thank Ms. Landgren and Mr. Luck for their thought-provoking briefings. The Security Council bears the primary responsibility for maintaining international peace and security. The international community expects the Council to play its due role and appropriately address prominent issues concerning international peace and security. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has brought unprecedented challenges to the functioning of the Council. Improving the efficiency, effectiveness and transparency of the Council's work is what Member States strongly expect. It is also necessary for tackling extraordinary situations like the pandemic. China attaches great importance to the role of the Security Council. China advocates fairness, transparency, efficiency and pragmatism in the Council's work so that it could effectively fulfil the responsibilities entrusted to it by the Charter of the United Nations. I wish to share the following views on the work of the Council. First, we should strengthen unity and mutual trust and engage in constructive cooperation. This year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations. More than ever, we need multilateralism, a strong United Nations, a robust Security Council, and solidarity and cooperation among Member States. Council members should take the lead in upholding the purposes and principles of the Charter, the international system, with the United Nations at its core, and the international order underpinned by international law. Strengthening communication and cooperation among Council members is the basis for the Council to promote the political settlement of hotspot issues. It is fundamental to improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the Council's work. China calls on all Council members to take a responsible and constructive attitude, commit to consultation on an equal footing, increase mutual trust, dispel misgivings, seek common ground and resolve differences. On major issues concerning international peace and security, Council members should build broad consensuses, accommodate the concerns of all parties, prevent politicization and ensure that the Council plays a crucial role at critical moments. Secondly, we should focus on the responsibilities of the Council to address prominent and pressing issues that threaten international peace and security. The world today faces many problems that are related to peace and security in one way or another. The Council should be focused on its priorities, results-oriented, keep to the right direction and not become a grocery store that tries to offer everything. The Council should concentrate on regional and international hotspot issues, promote the political settlement of disputes and continue to keep Africa as its priority. We must be committed to addressing the root causes of conflict together with other bodies, ensuring development through peace and promoting peace through development. With regard to thematic issues that go beyond its mandate, the Council should work in close coordination with other United Nations bodies, such as the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. At present, it is imperative to conduct international cooperation against COVID-19, support the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire and immediately lift unilateral sanctions. Bearing in mind the expectation of the international community, the Council should adopt a responsible and constructive approach, prevent politicization and take actions in addressing the negative impact on maintaining the international peace and security. Thirdly, we should adhere to impartiality and transparency, and enhance communication and coordination with relevant parties and bodies. The Security Council belongs to all Member States and discharges its mandate on their behalf. We should heed the views and recommendations of Member States, especially the countries concerned, and increase their engagement. We should strengthen coordination and communication with other United Nations bodies, in particular the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, and other specialized agencies so as to create synergy in our cooperation. We should work closely with the Secretariat, counting on its professional support and meanwhile providing necessary political guidance. The President of the Security Council plays a leading role in that regard. During its Council presidency in March, China reached out to the countries concerned and regional organizations for their views before the Council meetings on relevant issues. China maintained close coordination with the President of the General Assembly, the President of the Economic and Social Council and the Secretary-General. Such practices proved conducive to the Council's work, and would be helpful if continued. We encourage the presidencies for different months to better coordinate with each other so as to enhance integrity and synergy and avoid duplication. Fourthly, we should strengthen capacity-building to be better prepared in handling emergencies. The Council's work is crucial to the peace and security of the world. All actions of the Council must be based on rules and have a solid legal basis. Meanwhile, China supports the Council in improving itself on the basis of observing the United Nations Charter and its provisional rules of procedure so as to better address the new circumstances and challenges in discharging its mandate. COVID-19 is posing a formidable challenge to the work of the Council. The good thing is the Council keeps working and never stops. In March, with the joint efforts of all Council members, including China, we devised new working modalities for emergencies. For the first time, the Council held video-teleconferences and adopted resolutions through written procedures. These practices have enriched the Council's working methods and improved its working mechanism, enabling it to deliver tangible results at a difficult time. We need to further explore ways to strengthen the capacity-building of the Council and increase its preparedness for emergencies in the future. Further efforts should be made to provide stable technical support and sufficient conference service. The world looks to the Security Council whenever international peace and security comes under threat. This is pressure indeed, but it is also a driving force. China will work with other Council members to build on the good practices and improve the Council's working methods. Together, we can ensure the Council's ability to safeguard peace and security for the world with concrete actions.
