Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): | take this opportunity to thank you, Sir, and the Socialist Republic of Vietnam for the invitation to participate this open debate. I also welcome the new non-permanent members of the Security Council and wish them good luck. Our participation is part of Argentina's firm commitment to the Charter of the United Nations and to full respect for international law. The theme chosen by Viet Nam could not have been more topical. This debate takes place in a context of particular sensitivity for the international community. This week's crisis in the Middle East requires us to understand that full compliance with the responsibility of the Security Council and respect for the Charter are more indispensable than ever. It is imperative today to use the tools of the Charter with full determination because international peace and security are currently in a situation of precarious equilibrium that in recent days has become even more unstable. It is in this context that the Argentine Republic issued a statement on 4 January, stating: "The Argentine Republic expresses its concern over the recent events in the Middle East. Violent acts in a global and hyperconnected world have the potential to have direct consequences worldwide. The Argentine people can testify to this, having suffered international terrorist acts at least twice in our recent past. "In the face of this reality and based on our own experience, the Argentine Government urges the conflicting parties to take steps to ease tensions and to work towards a peaceful and negotiated solution to prevent an escalation that may jeopardize international security. "The Argentine Republic, as always, endorses negotiation and diplomacy as the pathway to settle disputes. Accordingly, Argentina calls on the international community to play a constructive role and urges multilateral organizations to assume the responsibilities conferred upon them, especially with regard to peace and international security." Argentina, as a founding Member of the United Nations, has always maintained that there is an imperative need to preserve dialogue and _ build consensus to resolve any conflict. We support the role of the Charter as an instrument for the prohibition of war in the policies of States. The collective security system gives the Council the primary responsibility for maintaining peace and security, and it is the organ that we have legitimized through the Charter for that purpose, in accordance with which the Member States duly agree to accept and comply with Council decisions. The Charter provides for a delicate balance in authorizing the use of force, and in that regard the members of the Security Council have a fundamental responsibility that the other Member States have entrusted to them. Argentina has contributed from the very beginning of the life of the United Nations in efforts to improve the decision-making process in the Council. This position is a natural reflection of the fact that the actions of this organ have been frustrated on many very serious occasions. Reality has highlighted the need for the Security Council to be more democratic, transparent, efficient, representative and accountable to the international community in order to fulfil its mission. Its performance is essential, as the events of this week prove. In that context, the debate on the reform process is a critical element, aimed at responding to sudden and unpredictable events that occur in a globalized and volatile world. Today, more than ever, consolidating multilateralism is essential and the articulation of a global framework that channels these tensions is not feasible without a Council able to respond to the international community. Among the peaceful means available to the Organization and its Member States, the Charter favours negotiation, investigation, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, recourse to regional arrangements or agreements or other peaceful means of its choosing. In reaffirming its commitment to the Charter, Argentina reiterates the cardinal importance of the principle of the peaceful resolution of international disputes and argues that any method of peaceful settlement is equally valid for resolving conflicts and achieving fair solutions. Negotiation is the primary and fundamental means for the resolution of disputes, and the parties must fulfil in good faith calls to negotiate that have been made by the organs of the Organization, including the General Assembly. The parties have the obligation to behave in such a way that the negotiations have meaning and to refrain from behaviour that could frustrate the negotiation. States outside a dispute must in turn refrain from acting in any way that may thwart efforts to find a peaceful solution. In the context of the decolonization process, the obligation to negotiate is strengthened by the duty to end colonialism, as established in resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2625 (XXV) of the General Assembly. The end of colonialism, the international system for the promotion and protection of human rights, progress on environmental issues, women's rights and the 2030 Agenda represent progressive developments arising from the Charter that together contribute to achieving the fundamental objectives of the Organization, reinforcing the ultimate goal of contributing to and maintaining international peace and security. In sum, in the face of this week's events, the defence of the purposes and principles of the Charter is more today more critical than ever. We encourage the States Members of the United Nations to actively trust and support the path of negotiation and diplomacy. This multilateral Organization par excellence and the Security Council in particular must act to fulfil the responsibilities assigned to them by the Charter. This is required by international peace and security, and the forthcoming debate of the Security Council, scheduled for 21 January, will be another opportunity to issue a clear signal in this process.
