Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome Prime Minister Soumeylou
Maiga of Mali to today's meeting and thank Secretary-
General Guterres for his briefing.

At the outset, we would like to express our
condolences to the Government and the people of
Mali regarding the horrific tragedy in the village of
Ogossagou, where more than 160 peaceful residents
were killed as a result of an inter-ethnic clash on
23 March. We wish all the wounded a speedy recovery
and hope that those responsible for what happened will
be found and duly punished. This tragic event, which
occurred while the Security Council mission was
visiting the country, demonstrated once again the size
and gravity of the threats facing the country and the
region, as well as their vulnerability to the proliferation
of destabilizing forces represented by terrorists,
organized criminals and ideological extremists.

In general, we share the views that the Secretary-
General expressed today and in his two reports for
March on the situation in Mali (S/2019/207 and S/2019/262). We welcome the efforts of Bamako,
Malian political stakeholders and the Platform coalition
and Coordination des mouvements de l'Azawad
signatory groups to implement the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. We hope that the existing
positive momentum in implementing its key provisions
with regard to the reconstitution of Mali's security
forces, administrative and territorial reforms and
the preparations for a constitutional referendum will
continue. Ensuring that the parliamentary elections
scheduled for June are held on time would be an
important step towards strengthening Mali's internal
dialogue. The international community should prioritize
those issues in providing assistance to the country.

While recognizing the obvious positive
developments in Mali's peace process, we cannot
ignore other trends there that are unfortunately less
encouraging. In a situation where there is no Government
control in large parts of the country, it should be no
surprise that those areas are becoming ideal breeding
grounds for extremist activities. We have seen that the
number of terrorist attacks on both military personnel
and civilians has increased in recent months. There
are human rights violations everywhere. In central
Mali inter-ethnic and intercommunal conflicts are
not just simmering but increasingly often are full-on
erupting. It seems that the issue here is not merely the
centuries-old differences between herders and farmers.
Militants are intentionally trying to gain the support
of local residents by providing protection and basic
services and by skilfully playing on existing disputes.
If those challenges are to be dealt with, the presence of
State authority must be restored. However, we should
not fail to point to the results that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali has achieved in reconciling the warring parties.

The worsening humanitarian situation is extremely
worrying. The numbers of those in need of assistance
are growing. We urge all external donors to fund the
humanitarian appeal as quickly as possible. We all
know that when the situation seems hopeless, Mali's
young people have no option but to join the ranks of
terrorist, extremist or criminal groups. In that regard,
it will be crucial to ensure that the efforts to stimulate
economic activity and restore social services in the
central and northern areas do not let up.

The situation in Mali is an important factor in
African security as a whole. However, it is very unlikely
that peace can be achieved there without normalizing
the situation in the region. The Libya factor continues
to play a negative role in this. The links between the
terrorists operating in Mali and in the region as a
whole are becoming increasingly clear. In that regard,
we support the concrete steps that the countries of the
Group of Five for the Sahel have been taking to form
a joint force to combat terrorism and organized crime,
and we hope that their role in ensuring regional security
will increase.

