Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): We would like to thank the briefers and to welcome Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Colombia, to this meeting. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis has highlighted the systemic vulnerabilities and inequalities in implementing the Final Peace Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. We stress the importance of ensuring that the people of Colombia have equal access to basic services, including education and health care. We welcome the efforts undertaken by the Government of Colombia to combat the pandemic and to establish, together with the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comtn, a COVID-19 working group within the National Reintegration Council. It is important that all armed groups cease hostilities in Colombia during this critical period in accordance with the resolution adopted regarding COVID-19 (resolution 2532 (2020)). Lasting peace cannot be achieved without justice. The killings of former combatants, social leaders and human rights defenders have continued during the pandemic, underlining the urgency of immediate and concrete action to address this problem. We welcome the progress made by the Special Investigation Unit of the Office of the Attorney General in investigating these crimes. We are also deeply worried that the pandemic has triggered an increase in sexual and gender- based violence, with an even worse effect on female activists and social leaders. Violence against ethnic and indigenous groups has also remained high during the pandemic and continues to be a serious concern. We encourage the Government of Colombia to make a continuous and consistent effort to prevent attacks on people defending fundamental rights. It is important to investigate and prosecute those responsible for the violations. The vicious cycle of violence and impunity must stop. Victims and their families have a right to justice, truth and reparations. The special protection needs of witnesses and victims, especially children, must be fully addressed in the framework of transitional justice. In that regard, the work of the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition is essential. It is important to guarantee the independent functioning of all transitional justice mechanisms. We condemn the continued recruitment and use of children by illegal armed groups and criminal organizations. The recruitment and use of children must end. We urge the Government of Colombia to regularly convene the National Commission on _ Security Guarantees. There is also a need for a more effective response to the early warnings of the Ombudsman's Office through the intersectoral commission. We reiterate the urgent need to move forward with the implementation of the final peace agreement to ensure progress despite the challenging circumstances. Finally, we encourage all parties to continue cooperation in a constructive spirit in order to achieve lasting peace. We would like to express Estonia's strong support for the comprehensive implementation of the final peace agreement.
