The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Equatorial Guinea.

First of all, I would like to thank Ms. Bintou Keita
for her excellent briefing on the situation in Darfur and
for her trip to the area. We also welcome the presence
of the representative of the Government of the Sudan at
today's meeting.

From Ms. Keita's briefing, it should be noted that
the overall situation in Darfur has stabilized quite a
bit over the past few months. We continue to closely
follow the evolution of the situation on the ground and
are encouraged by the fact that progress is being made
in terms of stability and the positive steps under way.
The area has been free of serious violence for several
months now, which is further evidence of the advances
made with regard to Darfur.

However, as stated previously, we remain concerned
about the violence that continues to negatively affect
the population of Jebel Marra. Indeed, the Government
of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea is concerned
about the still precarious humanitarian situation and
the difficulties faced by displaced persons returning to
their lands, as well as the persistence of sexual violence.
In this context, my country encourages all parties to
the conflict to recommit themselves to the political
process on the basis of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur, and to cease and desist from engaging in deadly
clashes, as they continue to cause unnecessary deaths
and displacement of civilians.

We also call on the countries that host the armed
movements to commit to the peaceful pursuit to a
lasting solution in the Darfur region. In that regard,
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that in
order to successfully address the root causes of the
crisis that continue to lead to acts of violence related
to land disputes, mediation and reconciliation efforts
are needed with a View to ending the conflict and
preventing its recurrence.
We note that bringing peace to Darfur would be
a firm step towards achieving the shared African
aspiration of silencing the guns by 2020. We commend
the Government of the Sudan for its support of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and for the efforts it has made in its
weapon collection programme. The full implementation
of that programme is key both to sustaining the peace
currently prevailing in Darfur and to restoring lasting
peace to the region. This important programme is now
being carried out in the Jebel Marra area.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea urges the
Government of the Sudan to improve the security
environment in the political framework through the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur with a view to achieving a definitive ceasefire.
To that effect, broader support must be given to the
political process led by the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel. In that regard, we welcome the
signing in December of the pre-negotiation agreement
in Germany.

In conclusion, my delegation congratulates the
Sudanese Government, Mr. Mamabolo, Joint Special
Representative and Head of UNAMID, and all
UNAMID personnel, and calls on them to continue their
work to improve the living conditions for the people of
Darfur. We must ensure that the possible withdrawal
of UNAMID does not leave behind a power vacuum
that could reactivate the conflict. It is important that
the zone remain peaceful in order for post-conflict
reconstruction to be effective.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.

