Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): On behalf of the Chairperson
of the African Union (AU), I would like to congratulate
you, Madam President, and your Government on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of April. I also commend you for organizing
today's debate on the theme "Prevention of conflicts in
Africa: addressing the root causes".

Allow me to also take this opportunity to express
our appreciation to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
being always mindful of the special situation of Africa
and for acting accordingly. I would also like to express
appreciation to His Excellency the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Togo for being here at this important meeting.

Your excellent concept paper (S/2013/204, annex),
Madam President, has proposed that we focus on the
structural dimension of the prevention of conflicts in
Africa, which is obviously most germane to looking at
the root causes of conflicts on our continent.

On the topic of the root causes of conflicts in
Africa, there is perhaps no better starting point than the
comprehensive report (S/1998/318) submitted in 1998
by the former Secretary-General to both the General
Assembly and the Security Council on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa. That was a seminal
contribution, which rightly brought up Africa's colonial
history, the post-Second-World-War ideological rivalry,
various external factors and internal governance
issues and other matters that are specific to particular
situations as having had a major impact as sources of
conflict on the continent. Development is therefore,
according to the report, central to the prospects for
reducing conflict in Africa. Accordingly, the report
underlines the vital role that international cooperation
for the development of Africa plays in addressing the
challenges of conflict. While mentioning the deficits
in that area, the report nonetheless makes it clear that
Africa has the primary responsibility for preserving
its own peace and stability. Today more than ever, the
report states, Africa must look to itself.

That is precisely what Africa has done over the
past decade or so. Today's Africa is emphatically not
the Africa of the 1980s or the 19905. Many things have
changed, including with respect to Africa's readiness
to take the lead in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts in the various subregions of the continent.
Two examples will suffice in that regard. The progress
made in Somalia, despite the occasional hiccups, would
have been inconceivable without the lead role played
by African troops, together with the Somali security
forces, to keep extremists, including foreign ones, at
bay. The wisdom and prudence that was brought to bear
on the complex situation between the Sudan and South
Sudan also has a decisive African component.

All those factors do not diminish the role of the
international community, most of all the United
Nations, both with respect to Somalia and the
Sudan, as well as other parts of the continent, as the
latest developments in Mali have made so obvious.
However, it is necessary that Africa's contribution to
the maintenance of international peace and security
be given due recognition. The point is that much has
changed in Africa over the past decade or so.

The change that we have witnessed in Africa over
the past decade is also evident in institution-building,
including in the area of peace and security. The
African Union Peace and Security Architecture, with
its Continental Early Warning System, the Panel of the
Wise and the African Standby Force, with the Peace
and Security Council at the helm, has transformed
Africa's capacity to contribute to peace and stability
on the continent. Africa has come a long way in that
respect, the process having begun in 1993 in Cairo with
the establishment of the AU Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution.

On the other hand, no event demonstrates the
feebleness of Africa of that period better than the
genocide in Rwanda only nine months later. It is
doubtful that the Africa of the current period would
allow that to happen. At the minimum, it would raise
its voice in time and not sit idly by.
Also in that connection, the Constitutive Act of
the African Union shows that Africa has come a long
way when, in paragraph (h) of article 4, member States
agreed that

"The right ofthe Union to intervene in a member
State pursuant to a decision of the Assembly
in respect of grave circumstances, namely, war
crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity".

Paragraph (j) of the same article confers the right
on member States "to request intervention from the
Union in order to restore peace and security". How
much progress that represents in Africa's resolve to
address the challenges of peace and security can be
fully appreciated only when one considers how strongly
the 1963 Organization of African Unity (OAU) Charter
was opposed to any initiative even remotely suggestive
of what is allowed under article 4 of the Constitutive
Act of the African Union, to which I have just referred.

No doubt, everything I have mentioned is a
manifestation ofthe trust that Africans have managed to
build in one another and of their readiness to strengthen
their unity, including with the view to addressing the
challenge of peace and security in Africa. I wanted to
bring up the question of trust because of the undeniable
fact that it has not been present in abundance, as
witnessed in paragraph 5 of article III of the Charter of
the OAU under "Principles", when member States felt it
necessary to agree: that

"Unreserved condemnation, in all its forms,
of political assassination, as well as of subversive
activities, on the part of neighbouring States or any
other States".

While much remains to be done, although much of
Africa's good work continues to be called into question
by some, we have also made great strides in developing
the conditions for good governance. The African Union
has, for instance, gone on record as not being ready to
countenance unconstitutional changes of Government.

All that is to say that, more than at any time
in the past, Africa is ready to play its part for peace
and stability on the continent. It has the wherewithal
to be a good partner to the United Nations and the
Security Council for the realization of that objective.
We are pleased to note that the partnership between the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union is already gradually growing. No
one can deny that, despite the progress made, Africa
still requires the strong support of the United Nations,
including the Security Council, as well as that of other
partners. It is our hope, in that regard, that the United
Nations Office to the AU will play its proper role with
a view to strengthening the cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union. Let me add that
the subregional organizations of the continent also play
a vital role in peace and stability. It does not help to
understate the added value that they bring and how
critical they are in that regard.

However, consultations and cooperation between
the United Nations and the AU need to develop further.
Their nature and content in terms of quality should
be commensurate with the vital role that the African
Union plays in the peace and security in the region.
There is much room for improvement in that regard.
The principles of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations should be adhered to. Africa is second
to none in that regard. However, such adherence should
not be conceived as disallowing a genuine partnership
based on taking advantage of each other's strength.

I would like to conclude by emphasizing one
crucial point. That relates to how much the lack of
institution-building, including the consolidation of
State institutions, is understated as one of the major
root causes of conflict on our continent. It appears that
it is sometimes taken for granted that the weaker the
State, the greater the space and the opportunity for
democracy to blossom. That is perhaps not always true.
In any event, the way to proceed might be to maintain the
proper balance. Lessons need to be drawn from recent
experiences, including that of Mali. In that connection,
tearing down those that have embarked upon building
successful institutions may be good neither for conflict
prevention nor for putting in place a robust foundation
for good governance.

That, in a nutshell, is the message that I was asked
by the current Chairperson of the AU to deliver to the
Security Council at this meeting.

