Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I thank the Togolese
presidency for giving us another opportunity to further
our understanding of the phenomenon of piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea, and to discuss what we can
collectively do to deal with that threat to regional
peace and stability. I also thank Under-Secretary-
General Pascoe for his presentation and for
highlighting the main findings of the assessment
mission report (see S/2012/45). I also welcome the
representatives of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission and thank them for their statements.

Portugal sees the problem of piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea as a ramification of the wider threat of
transnational organized crime in West Africa, which we
had the opportunity to discuss last week (see S/PV.6717). As we mentioned then, piracy is linked to
other forms of organized crime and benefits from
existing criminal networks and their resources.

As the report highlights, piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea is not a new phenomenon, but has in recent years
become more frequent, more sophisticated in its
techniques and more violent. Its effects are felt much
beyond the purely security realm, as it disrupts trade and
economic activities vital to coastal States. West African
economies have reportedly lost about $2 billion of
annual revenue as a result of piracy. Benin in particular
has seen its shipping activities decline by 70 per cent
as a result of attacks in the past two years. Most
importantly, piracy affects countries with very different
levels of institutional capacity to deal with the
problem, and cannot be solved through isolated
measures by each individual State. Therefore, we fully
share the central recommendation of the report,
namely, the need for a region-wide strategy to fight
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, based first and foremost
on the efforts of regional bodies. The political will
expressed by the leaders of ECOWAS to work together
with the Gulf of Guinea Commission countries and to
harmonize their anti-piracy policies is a very
encouraging sign. We look forward to the outcome of
the planned summit to bring together all the States of
the Gulf of Guinea.

Let me add a few thoughts on the role of the
international community, and of the United Nations in
particular, in contributing to regional efforts.

It is very positive that a number of regional
organizations, including ECOWAS and the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), as
well as the Gulf of Guinea Commission and the
Maritime Organization for West and Central Africa, are
paying attention to and addressing the problem of
piracy. To be effective, those different efforts must be
coordinated, while fully respecting each organization's
particular area of competence. The United Nations can
play a central role in ensuring the coherence and
overall coordination of those initiatives, as well as in
mobilizing international assistance to build the
capacity of regional organizations in crucial areas such
as surveillance, patrolling and information sharing.

We should also try to make good use of existing
mechanisms. For example, the ECOWAS Regional
Action Plan on drug trafficking, organized crime and
drug abuse is a reference framework for initiatives in
that area, and it could be enlarged in order to include
the threat of piracy. The West Africa Coast Initiative,
which encourages the pooling of national knowledge
and resources, could also add the issue of piracy to its
areas of activity. The same applies to the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Regional
Programme for West Africa. Best practices from
individual countries and bilateral assistance
programmes already in place should be shared with
regional partners.

International assistance can also be instrumental
in helping individual countries and regional
organizations to adapt their legal frameworks to enable
them to deal more effectively with the changing nature
of the threats to security and stability. The creation of
regional judicial institutions to deal with the issue of

piracy, as mentioned in the report, is an interesting
recommendation that, in our View, could be explored
by the relevant regional organizations.

As we have learned from the situation in the
Indian Ocean, piracy is a complex phenomenon that
requires our regular and close attention. Encouraging
better capacities, better knowledge and better
coordination among the actors in the fight against
piracy will prove to be a decisive contribution of the
Security Council to regional stability and development.

