Mr. Al-Allaf (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Permit
me at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for your
swift favourable response to the request of the group of
five small States - the Small Five group - that this
meeting be held to consider the Security Council's
working methods. My delegation wishes to associate
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Small Five group.

I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for your
concept paper for this meeting (S/2008/528, annex),
which presents a forward-looking vision that forms the
basis for our open debate. At the time of its
publication, we recognized the importance of the note
by the President of the Security Council (S/2006/507)
and of the Council's implementation of the
recommendations it sets out. We must also recognize
the fact that there continue to be many areas in which

no progress has been made. That gives additional
importance to our work today and opens the way for
new vision and new ideas regarding ways to improve
the Council's working methods.

Today, the scope of Security Council resolutions
is unlimited. Their impact has been expanded over the
past few years to affect the entire membership of the
Organization on a large number of issues, including,
inter alia, counter-terrorism, weapons of mass
destruction, sanctions, human rights, peacekeeping
operations and children and armed conflict. In that
connection, the breadth of their impact should be
matched with comprehensive engagement. That would
not only enable us to enhance the transparency and
effectiveness of the Council's work in implementing its
resolutions, but would also ensure commitment, a swift
and positive response and superior performance on the
part of all States in attaining the Council's ultimate
objective of maintaining international peace and
security.

Since my country, Jordan, is among the largest
contributors of troops to peacekeeping operations, I
shall focus on improving the Council's working
methods in the area of peacekeeping operations, in
particular enhancing the interaction between Security
Council members and troop-contributing countries and
promoting consultation between them.

In recent decades, the international security
environment has undergone drastic changes that have
transformed the nature of peacekeeping operations and
the ways in which they are planned, managed and
implemented. Those drastic changes require new and
effective kinds of responses on the part of the
international community. By necessity, the response of
the troop-contributing countries, including Jordan, to
current challenges to international peace and security is
part and parcel of the response of the international
community. The troop-contributing countries continue
to be seen as an asset - a source of forces for
peacekeeping missions. Jordan considers that troop-
contributing countries should be dealt with on the basis
of a true partnership in an international response to
crisis. The only way to bring about such a strategic
change is to improve the working methods of the
Security Council.

Considerations that are of great interest to the troop-
contributing countries - and their motivations -
include the following. First is the safety and security of
troops and equipment and the question of whether
security conditions are conducive to carrying out the
tasks to be accomplished under Council resolutions.
Consultations with troop-contributing countries are
vital not only to establish an appropriate security
environment before the deployment of forces, but also
to facilitate the decisions taken by the Governments
concerned.

Secondly, participation by the Permanent
Missions of troop-contributing countries in the
strategic evaluation of the situation in a conflict area,
even if it is being carried out under the direction of the
Security Council, would enable us to develop strategic
options that are more comprehensive and not limited to
the current tasks of the mission, but to include future
phases of the force deployment and the United Nations
presence in the host country.

Thirdly, risk assessment is very important. Such
assessments are undertaken by the Secretariat under the
direction of the Council and aim at achieving
coordination and harmonization between the mandate
imposed by the Council and the resources provided by
the troop-contributing countries. The credibility of the
national forces of those troop-contributing countries
and their ability to implement the task is based, to a
large extent, on that coordination. The Permanent
Missions of the troop-contributing countries could, at
this stage, contribute greatly to providing and
evaluating credible alternatives.

Fourthly, early consultations on the impact of
making adjustments to the mission with a View to
achieving a specific goal, whether by increasing or
decreasing troop levels, amending the mission,
amending the tools or means at its disposal, or ending
its mandate because of political or emergency
developments, would help countries to deal with the
impact of those changes and adapt to them.

From my previous experience as a military
observer in peacekeeping operations and as one of the
former planners of Jordanian participation in
peacekeeping operations, I must state here that we in
Jordan consider the resolution adopted by the Council
concerning any given peacekeeping operation as the
fundamental, principal reference point for preparing
our forces to join and engage in peacekeeping
operations. The main point here is that the resolution is
the final result of a long planning process undertaken
under the direction of this Council and mostly in

isolation from any effective, methodical or effective
contribution of troop-contributing countries. That is a
result of the fact that the priorities and evaluations of
those troop-contributing countries are taken into
account at a later stage, after the adoption of a
resolution by the Council. We therefore call for the
promotion of consultations between Council members
and troop-contributing countries in the formulation of
Council resolutions and presidential statements
concerning those operations. We urge the members of
this Council to provide troop-contributing countries
with the draft texts of such resolutions or presidential
statements at an early stage, if the sponsor of the
resolution believes that is possible. Such a contribution
to the process will promote the transparency called for
in the work of the Council and help us to explain those
resolutions to our Governments.

We believe that the burden of making full use of
the opportunity to interact with the Council within its
regular consultations and meetings falls on the troop-
contributing countries. The current nature of such
meetings restricts our effective and active participation
and does not lead to the results that we all look forward
to. It would be better for the Council to encourage
discussions with troop-contributing countries in
accordance with resolution 1353 (2001), and we
encourage the presence of military and political experts
in the participating missions at the earliest stage,
before the consideration of those matters.

We hope that the Council will continue to
encourage the representatives of the Secretary-General
to attend those meetings, provide briefings and interact
with troop-contributing countries. We attach special
importance to the timing of those meetings, so that
they can be announced at an early stage as often as
possible and not on the eve of the adoption of a
resolution or at a later period, after its adoption.
Consultations with troop-contributing countries are an
essential matter in helping the Governments of those
States to take the decision to participate in
peacekeeping missions.

Because we welcome the holding of this meeting,
we hope that this open debate will not be a single and
isolated event, that the Council will continue to engage
positively and interact with the wider membership of
the United Nations, and that, at the end of this
dialogue, we will continue to make progress on the
working methods of the Council. We hope that the
measures presented by the representative of
Switzerland in that respect will be followed up on and
accorded special attention.

My delegation sincerely urges the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions to take into account the results of
this open debate in its upcoming meetings. I welcome
this open debate and emphasize the fact that Jordan is
08-49188
committed to positively participating in peacekeeping
operations in service of international peace and
security.

