Mr. Ndong Mangue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): This month violence escalated between
Hamas militias and the Israeli army, claiming many
lives and resulting in injuries and extensive material
damage. Such events once again confirm that Gaza
is the hot spot in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Equatorial Guinea strongly condemns those events and
expresses its condolences to the bereaved families.

We welcome Her Excellency the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Indonesia back to the Council today.
We congratulate your delegation, Madam President, on
its successful conduct of our work since your country's
presidency began.

We thank the team led by Mr. Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
detailed briefing. We also thank Mr. Pierre Krahenbiihl
for his valuable contribution.

To get back to our monthly meeting on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea would like to express
its concern about the continuing aggressive exchanges
that have dominated the long-running Palestinian-
Israeli conflict. We believe that the escalation of
violence has merely exacerbated the hostility between
the parties, which has had a very negative effect on the
socioeconomic development of the Palestinian people.
It has created a sense of insecurity for both peoples
and led to the abandonment of arrangements regarding
issues that had been agreed on for decades.

The current plight of women, children and all who
live in Gaza as it has evolved over the past decade is a
clear example of how the tension between the parties
affects the Palestinian population. Reliable and recent
reports indicate that more than half its people of working
age are unemployed and that their prospects of finding
work remain poor. A regular supply of electricity
and drinking water has still not been restored, while
hospital care is inadequate and schools are damaged.

The ongoing situation in Gaza affects the
development capacity of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), which is currently experiencing funding
difficulties. We are grateful to UNRWA, which, despite
its situation, continues to meet the needs of all those
benefiting from its humanitarian aid. In that regard,
we reiterate our call to the international community
to continue providing voluntary funding to the
Agency, which plays a very important role in assisting
Palestinian refugees from Gaza and other parts of the
Middle East.

We must bear in mind that violence is the cause
of the suffering of the people of Gaza. Our delegation
therefore urges Hamas and its militias to refrain from
any provocative actions against Israel. We also call on
the Israeli army to be measured in its responses and do
everything it can to prevent the suffering of innocent
civilians. However, a political settlement is essential
if the blockade of Gaza is to be lifted, and it requires
reconciliation between the Palestinian factions.

Now that we have lost the valuable contribution,
lasting more than two decades, of the Temporary
International Presence in Hebron, which worked to
prevent conflict and protect the Palestinians there, we
are concerned about the future coexistence of Israelis
and Palestinians there. In that regard, we hope that the
Israeli Government and the Palestinian Authority will
take care to avoid provoking the parties unnecessarily.
On the subject of the situation in Hebron, we would
like to point out that the issues of coexistence that
arise in the various occupied Palestinian territories
where Israeli settlers and Palestinians cohabit must be
addressed while taking into account the fact that errors
can be made on both sides, since they are both human,
obviously. In that regard, the Israeli occupation forces
should act fairly and without bias regarding the origins
of those involved.

Finally, Equatorial Guinea's position on the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict has always been unequivocal and is
based on the international instruments in force. In the
same way that we defend Israel's right to exist in peace
and security, we therefore also support the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination and
the right of Palestine to exist as a free and independent
State. That is also the position of the African Union,
whose decision we have a responsibility to respect. In
short, Equatorial Guinea fully supports a two-State
solution, with two States coexisting in conditions
of peace and security and in harmony with the other
States of the region.

