Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I am
pleased, Sir, to congratulate you and your friendly
country on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this moonth. We also welcome the
good work done by Ambassador Peter Kolby of
Norway and his delegation during his presidency of the
Council last month.

This is the second meeting held by the Security
Council in less than five days to consider the critical
situation, which is daily deteriorating, in the various
Palestinian territories. These territories are witnessing
a dangerous escalation of the situation. Israel, the
occupying Power, is continuing to massacre and
commit war crimes and genocide against the
defenceless Palestinian people. This is taking place in
full view of, and with the knowledge of, the entire
world, which is witnessing on its television screens the
excessive use of force; organized killings of innocent
citizens; the isolation of Palestinian cities and towns by
tanks and military vehicles; the occupation of the
headquarters of the Palestinian Authority - the
headquarters of Chairman Yasser Arafat, who is
surrounded and in a single room there; and the cutting
off of water and electricity - an immoral, inhuman
and unprecedented measure.

I should be grateful here if we could have a list of
all the human rights Violations perpetrated by Israel.
The world has witnessed Israeli acts of aggression
perpetrated at holy sites, mosques and churches, as
well as attacks on ambulances, which have been shot at
while transporting the wounded. Furthermore, Israel
has not allowed the burying of the dead. The Ramallah
hospital has been forced to bury the dead in a common
grave in its courtyard; this was also witnessed on
television screens worldwide.

The eyes of the entire world are now turned to the
Council, waiting for its reaction and waiting to see if
its resolutions are implemented, given the aggression
that is taking place in flagrant violation of the Charter
of the United Nations, of international humanitarian
conventions and of the Fourth Geneva Convention.

Since Israel is continuing to flout the will of the
international community, it is up to the Security
Council to act immediately to oppose Israel, which has
exceeded all limits with its acts of aggression. As we
sit here now, Israel is trying to occupy the city of
Nablus - an extension of such aggression - in contempt
for all international resolutions.

The Council bears a moral responsibility first and
foremost - one laid down by its responsibilities under
the Charter of the United Nations - to stop violence
and the arbitrary use of force by the Israeli occupying
forces against innocent, defenceless Palestinian
civilians. The Council has a moral responsibility to
provide emergency protection by sending an
international force to monitor the Israeli withdrawal
demanded by Council resolution 1402 (2002).

We have seen the Council hold numerous
meetings and adopt resolutions and presidential
statements regarding the protection of civilians. Many
States have pleaded for the respect of human rights and
the protection of civilians in conflict areas and have
made this a priority in their foreign policy. Why are
those States now silent? Why do we not hear their
voices now? Some are even justifying Israel's actions,
which are tantamount to genocide.

Here we are faced with a clear case in which
civilians - in particular women, children and the
elderly - are enduring the worst kind of abuse and
repression. This requires that the Council act in
accordance with the will expressed by numerous
States: that rapid action be taken in the form of the
provision of protection to civilians in Palestine. If the
Security Council does not act rapidly and discharge its
responsibilities, it will in effect be refusing to abide by
its Charter obligations.

The war criminal Ariel Sharon rebuffed Security
Council resolution 1402 (2002) through his declaration
of war on the Palestinians and by considering
Chairman Arafat, the legitimate Chairman of the
Palestinian Authority, to be an enemy - and this after
the most recent Arab summit in Beirut showed, by
adopting the initiative of Crown Prince Abdallah Bin
Abdul Aziz, that the Arabs are in favour of peace.

Israel said simply that the Arabs did not desire
peace, and it demanded security and the recognition of
its State. But its real intentions - bloodshed - have
been revealed. Israel used a policy of repression and
killing against the defenceless Palestinian people and
once again occupied Palestinian cities and isolated
them by declaring them military zones, in a clear
attempt to push the region towards a total conflagration
whose consequences, though as yet unknown, would
definitely threaten international peace and security.

The security that Israel is seeking through
violence will never be guaranteed as long as it
continues to pursue its policy of aggression and
expansion, the occupation of Palestinian cities, the
perpetration of massacres and the daily killing of
Palestinian people. Violence spawns Violence. The
erroneous justifications presented by Israel, alleging
that its criminal campaign aims to combat terrorism or
provide self-defence, are unacceptable. It is the
Palestinian people who are fighting Israel's State
terrorism in order to end the Israeli occupation.

Who among us here would accept occupation and
colonialism without offering resistance? The histories
of the peoples of all States present here show a struggle
against occupation and colonialism. What would truly
guarantee Israeli security is full withdrawal from all
Palestinian and Arab territories, the Syrian Golan and
the rest of Lebanese territory in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and allowing the Palestinian people to establish
their State with Al-Quds as their capital. Then, and
only then, will peace reign in the region.

From this rostrum we call on the international
community, in particular the United States of America,
the European Union and peace-loving States, to adopt a
firm position to make the Israeli Government refrain
from the continuation of a policy of confrontation,
killing and suppression. That policy does not justify
what is unacceptable. It does not mean that those who
have rights will, in fact, have to give up those rights.

Finally, we reaffirm that the Sudan supports the
Palestinian people, who are heroically defending their
legitimate - I reiterate, their legitimate right - to
recover their land and to have their place among
nations restored, given the injustice and acts of
aggression which continue to violate all international
laws and norms, as well as revealed religions and
human morality.
