Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Like
my colleagues before me, I congratulate you, Madam
President, on organizing this open debate, and thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his informative briefing.
I again reiterate Uruguay's full support for his work.

The Middle East remains the epicentre of numerous
armed conflicts of extreme complexity, including
sectarian and inter-faith elements. Participants in those
conflicts include not only regional and other States,
but also various non-State entities, such as militias
and armed groups, that claim supposed religious
affiliations based on intolerance and fundamentalism
that violate the population's most basic human rights
and fundamental freedoms. We have also witnessed
the rapid growth of terrorist groups such as Al-Qaida,
Jabhat Fath al-Sham - better known as the Al-Nusra
Front - and Da'esh, all of which have exploited the
institutional vacuum in various countries of the region.
Such absence of State power in many cases stems from
foreign military interventions that were not authorized
by the Charter of the United Nations or by the Council
and that in recent years have led to chaos and death for
the civilian population.

Of course, this is not the only cause of terrorism,
which also feeds on the deep religious, sectarian, ethnic
and tribal divisions that have dominated the region for
centuries, as well as the evolution of these societies, in
which we sometimes see a lack of political freedom as
well as the excessive repression that fuels radicalization.

Nor can we overlook another evident reality that
explains how these extremist groups have managed
to survive, despite their savage acts and their total
contempt for human life, as an ongoing presence in the
contemporary history of the Middle East. This reality is
the military, logistical, financial and political support
of some States of the region as well as outside of the
region, which use them as tools in order to pursue their
own agendas and interests, as they do with the armed
militias and groups that I have mentioned.

Several of these groups, which try to hide behind
the label of "moderate opposition", have perpetrated
acts that are just as, or even more, reprehensible as
those committed by the terrorists themselves, with
whom they sometimes ally themselves, depending on
the circumstances.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict, owing to its
duration and its spillover into the rest of the region,
remains the most relevant of all of the situations that
affect the Middle East. Uruguay reaffirms once again,
as we have been doing since 1947, its unwavering
support for the right of Israel and of Palestine to live
in peace, within secure and recognized borders, in a
framework of renewed cooperation and free of any
threat or action that would breach that peace.

Likewise, we reiterate our support for a solution
involving two independent States, convinced that this is
the only option that will allow the peaceful coexistence
of Israel and Palestine, and in this respect we call once
again for the resumption of negotiations between the
parties, which is a crucial step towards achieving that
goal. To achieve that goal, we must reverse the current
trends on the ground identified in the most recent
report of the Quartet, failing which it will be difficult
for Palestine to strengthen its State.

The adoption of resolution 2334 (2016) was a Clear
sign of the importance that the international community
attaches to the peaceful and successful conclusion of
this process. The announcements made in the past three
months by Israel on the expansion of its settlement
policy violates the provisions of that resolution and of
resolution 242 (1967), which states that the acquisition
of territory by force is inadmissible.

These measures, as well as the recent episodes of
violence and terrorist attacks, the incitation thereto
and their glorification, do not help in the least to move
towards peace together and also risk endangering the
possibility of a two-State solution.

Uruguay welcomes all international initiatives
that would allow us to move forward in the quest for
solutions in the framework of the Middle East peace
process, in order to achieve a peaceful, just, negotiated
and lasting solution, in accordance with international
law, that takes into account the legitimate aspirations
of both parties.

Throughout the open debates on the Middle
East in which we have taken part, we have reiterated
the vital need to protect civilians. Humanitarian
assistance is critical in order to enable them to survive
in the situations in which they find themselves; this
is particularly crucial for the most vulnerable groups,
such as women and children.

Also particularly pressing are the situations
in Yemen, Iraq and Libya, where we are seeing a
combination of political, security, economic and
humanitarian crises, with the potential of giving
rise to truly disastrous situations if we do not take
action immediately.

In Yemen, whose humanitarian crisis could become
even worse than the one in Syria, is on the verge of
famine, and the population continues to be the target
of indiscriminate attacks against hospitals, schools
and markets.

Finally, I should like to mention once again the
conflict in Syria, the worst crisis of our time and one
that requires greater efforts in order for it to be resolved
peacefully. Well into the twenty-first century, we are
still seeing chemical attacks, sieges, famines, the use
of civilians as human shields, brutal public executions,
forced displacement of the population, attacks against
schools and hospitals, the recruitment of minors as
soldiers and the destruction of the historical and cultural
heritage of humankind, all of this met with frustrating
inaction on the part of the Security Council.

We vigorously condemn the chemical attack that
took place on 4 April in Khan Shaykun, and we trust
that a complete, impartial and independent investigation
can be carried out to identify those responsible for this
war crime, so that its perpetrators can be brought to
justice. We call upon all actors in this conflict to remain
calm and not take any unilateral action outside of the
United Nations that could endanger the possibility of
reaching a peaceful solution to the crisis and stability
in the region.

The most recent chapter in this string of horrors
was written last Saturday, when, during the evacuation
of Fo'ah and Kafraya, a brutal attack killed almost
130 people, half of them children. They were innocent
civilians who, after suffering siege and hunger for many
years, had hoped to begin a new life. In their memory
and in that of the hundreds of thousands of people who
have died in Syria and the millions of victims who
have fled the conflicts in the Middle East, we reiterate
that only a political negotiation can make it possible
to reach the agreements necessary to ensure that, in
the not-too-distant future, the region will no longer be
synonymous with war, grief and devastation, but will
gradually begin to see a more promising future.

