Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I express appreciation
to the Italian presidency for convening this important
briefing, and thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir
Voronkov and Under-Secretary-General Yury Fedotov.
I also thank the Director-General of UNESCO,
Ms. Audrey Azoulay and congratulate her on assuming
her responsible new position, the Secretary-General
of INTERPOL, Mr. Jiirgen Stock, and Mr. Alessandro
Bianchi, Project Leader of Cultural Heritage Protection
of the Italian Ministry of Culture, for their insightful
briefings. We commend all oftheir efforts to protect and
restore the common cultural heritage of humankind.

We therefore welcome the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/ 969) on the implementation of resolution
2347 (2017), as it enables us to comprehensively
examine the problem and assess its gravity and scale.
In order to execute global action, it is necessary that
all States realize the importance of preserving and
regenerating the cultural and historical heritage of
individual countries and for the world as a whole.
Heritage bears in itself the cultural and civilizational
codes ofa nation. The destruction ofheritage inevitably
leads to a society losing its very psyche, ethos and roots,
and thereby its very identity and integrity. We therefore
believe that protecting cultural heritage and fostering
pluralism is essential to fostering peace, security and
sustainable development.

Kazakhstan commends the outstanding role
of UNESCO in the protection and recovery of
cultural heritage worldwide. We strongly endorse
the implementation of UNESCO'S action for the
protection of culture and the promotion of cultural
pluralism in the event of armed conflict. Likewise,
we fully support other commendable initiatives, such
as the Unite4Heritage campaign, and call for greater
contributions to UNESCO's Heritage Emergency Fund.
In that regard, we specially acknowledge the appeal to
protect culture and promote cultural pluralism as the
key to lasting peace, which was initiated by Italy and
for which all Member States should jointly cooperate.

In order for our global measures to be strong
and effective, we propose that all multilateral legal
instruments related to cultural heritage be ratified and
harmonized by all States parties, as the smuggling
of artifacts is transnational. All Member States
also need to accede to the 1954 Convention for the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conflict. Likewise, they should also accede to the 1970
Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing
the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of
Cultural Property.

We agree with the briefers that in order to ensure
effective implementation, each country must strengthen
its institutions and mechanisms with specialized units
and adequate tools and training for customs, border
control, law enforcement and judicial authorities. In
addition, sanctions regimes should be rigourously
enforced with the stringent criminalization of illicit
trafficking in cultural property. We cannot but agree
with the briefers that we need to work closely with
business associations, antiquities markets and private
dealers, and to have an inventory and documentation of
artifacts and heritage sites. Our efforts will yield results
only if we also have community awareness, education
and wider public support to end the scourge.

We thank UNESCO for the assistance to Member
States in implementing resolution 2347 (2017) at the
national, regional and subregional levels. We express
gratitude in particular for the organization, in Almaty
in June, the subregional conference on the improvement
of measures on the protection of cultural heritage in
Central Asia. That conference helped to develop better
mechanisms and cooperation at the subregional level
to address related challenges in implementing existing
international legal standards.

We would like to note the indispensable work of
INTERPOL and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime in facilitating international cooperation to
prevent the deliberate destruction of cultural heritage
and ensure accountability for such crimes. Our country
shares the opinion of the Secretary-General that the
main challenge facing law enforcement is the lack of
priority given to the crime by Member States - an
opinion that we must heed. We support INTERPOL's
efforts, as described by Mr. Iurgen Stock, to create
specialized units and dedicated national databases to
combat the illicit trafficking of cultural property, as
well as the publication of brochures with statistics on
crimes against them. That will allow INTERPOL to
enhance its operations at the regional level and share
sensitive information about the channels used for
the illicit export of stolen objects. We also support
the recommendations of the Analytical Support and
Monitoring Team to Member States to actively exchange
information on seized antiquities via INTERPOL's
database on stolen works of art and information on
seizures and investigations via the ARCHEO platform
of the World Customs Organization.

As a member of the Convention Concerning the
Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage
and the aforementioned Conventions of 1954 and 1970,
Kazakhstan will continue to support the efforts of
the international community aimed at protecting and
preserving cultural and natural heritage, which is the
rich legacy of all humankind.

