Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): Mr. President,
Viet Nam welcomes the organization by the Council,
under your presidency, of this open debate - the
second this year - on the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. That reflects the Council's
increased engagement on the issue, which, as assessed
by the Secretary-General in his report before us today
(5/2007/643), constitutes a positive development.

We note with appreciation the progress achieved
in recent years in this regard. We welcome the efforts
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) in conducting a study on integrating
measures into the mandates of peacekeeping missions
to protect civilians, as elaborated in Council
resolutions 1674 (2006) and 1738 (2006), and the
impact of such measures on the ground. We expect the
findings and conclusions of that study to be brought to
the attention of Member States for further analysis.

During the Council's debate on the same topic
last June, many Member States highlighted the role and
contributions that regional organizations should and
could make in the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. We welcome the fact that representatives of
several regional organizations attended the meeting
organized by OCHA in Dakar in April 2007 to facilitate
the formulation of policies on the protection of
civilians and to promote regional support for such
policies. At the national level, the efforts undertaken by
many Member States to establish criminal jurisdiction
over war crimes and crimes against humanity are
meaningful steps forward.
My delegation joins others in commending the
work of United Nations agencies in the field, in
particular OCHA, in providing humanitarian assistance
to civilians. My delegation, however, shares the
observation of the Secretary-General, contained in his
report, that considerable challenges remain. We are
deeply concerned by the fact that, in many parts of the
world where armed conflicts are raging, tens of
millions of civilians are being killed, injured,
assaulted, humiliated, ignored or in other ways treated
inhumanely. The Deliberate targeting of civilians has
become more widespread. The notion of permissible
civilian casualties on the part of any warring party is
unacceptable and must be rejected in clear terms.

In spite of the international community's strong
condemnation of sexual violence, particularly in the
context of armed conflicts, the situation on the ground
is grave. While international humanitarian law and
human rights law are being violated, the Violators are
not being or cannot be punished. Millions of civilians
continue to be excluded from access to life-saving
assistance.

We support the efforts to carry out a more in-
depth analysis of the causes and consequences of
access constraints and the further engagement of
parties to conflicts in providing for and protecting
humanitarian operations and channels. In that
connection, it should be pointed out that, for access to
be accrued, it must not be abused or exploited by any
party in order to carry out acts of interference or
violation of the sovereignty of States.

Another challenge mentioned in the report that
should attract our attention is posed by cluster
munitions, which continue to kill, injure or affect in
different ways the lives of civilians, especially
children, even long after armed conflicts have ended.
In order to address the humanitarian impact of cluster
munitions, it is important to raise awareness among
conflict-afflicted populations and to help the States
concerned to build capacity to deal with the problem.

Last but not least, the hiring by States of private
military and security companies to perform functions,
including those of interrogating prisoners and
participating in combat, poses many legal questions
relating to measures to ensure their compliance with
international humanitarian law and human rights law
and the responsibilities of the hiring States for these
groups' violations of those laws. We support

intergovernmental discussions on the issue, including
those proposed by the Government of Switzerland, in
cooperation with the International Committee of the
Red Cross.

While supporting their humanitarian objectives,
we are of the view that the actions proposed by the
Secretary-General relating to the conduct of hostilities,
sexual violence, access, housing and land and property
rights should be further studied in detail to ensure their
conformity with the fundamental principles of the
Charter and international law and to ensure that no
complications will arise in the process of their
implementation. We wish to reaffirm our position that,
in situations where they do exist, States bear the
primary responsibility within their jurisdiction for the
protection of their own populations. The proposal to
establish a Security Council working group on the
protection of civilians should also be examined
carefully, taking into account the work being done by
other United Nations bodies with a view to avoiding
overlapping.

