Mr. Adamu (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important briefing to examine how
the United Nations system can work concertedly to
give greater effect to the sanctions decisions made by
the Security Council. My delegation appreciates the
excellent concept note you have provided to guide our
discussions today (S/2014/793, annex). I also thank
our briefers, Under-Secretary-General Feltman and
Mr. Jiirgen Stock, for their valuable and informative
insights.

Sanctions are a useful conflict-management tool
and play an important role in ensuring compliance with
our collective security architecture, as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. The evolving landscape
in the approach to the maintenance of international
peace and security has necessitated a commensurate
modification of the imposition of measures to
discourage the perpetration of conflict. The 15 United
Nations sanctions regimes currently in place are
designed to effectively achieve conflict resolution,
non-proliferation, counter-terrorism, democratization
and the protection of civilians. On their own, however,
they have been assessed as insufficient to induce
compliance with Security Council resolutions.

As sanctions regimes have become more targeted
within the context of intra-State conflicts, the adverse
humanitarian impacts of broad sanctions and a lack
of precision has been, in our opinion, successfully
surmounted. By focusing on spoilers, targeted sanctions
have contributed to the avoidance of unintended
adverse side effects of broad sanctions on the most
vulnerable segments of targeted countries. That effort
to avoid collective punishment has enabled the Council
to demonstrate its responsiveness to the human rights
and humanitarian dimensions of its decisions.

To ensure that sanctions remain an effective
component of the Council's toolkit to promote post-
conflict stabilization, it is imperative that all actors
involved in their implementation continue to adapt
to the intricacies of the new threats to international
peace and security. That implies that new partnerships
and, in some cases, new strategies may be required
to ensure effectiveness. We acknowledge the positive
contributions of the Governments of Australia, Finland,
Germany, Greece and Sweden in facilitating the review
of United Nations integration and coordination of
sanctions to achieve that objective. We are confident
that the assessment undertaken of current sanctions
practices will provide a springboard for the development
of practical, policy-oriented options that will enhance
their implementation.

It is clear that a one-size-fits-all approach will not be
effective, and that sanctions regimes must be tailored to
address specific situations. The Council must therefore,
through the various panels of experts, assess the
situation on the ground with a View to identifying ways
to engender compliance. In certain situations, sanctions
not involving the use of force, such as asset freezes
and travel bans, can be a useful tool for the Security
Council. Experience shows that they have indeed been
instrumental in helping to fulfil mandates. There are
also situations where sanctions have not quite achieved
their purpose. A case in point is Guinea-Bissau. The
sanctions regime in that case should be given more
impetus, for example by appointing a panel of experts
to monitor and report on the sanctions' effectiveness.

From a cost-benefit perspective, sanctions are a
relatively low-cost option when considered against
deploying peacekeeping operations. However, their
effectiveness is compromised when regimes are not
complied with. It is therefore essential that the Council
ensure strict compliance with such regimes at all times.
That is crucial to safeguard the Council's credibility and
helping to maintain its important role in the promotion
and maintenance of international peace and security.

