Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): We thank the French
presidency for organizing today's open debate and for
providing the concept note (S/2017/892, annex). We also
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/821)
and his Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict for her briefing.

As a country that has endorsed the Safe School
Declaration, Armenia aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Norway earlier today,
and we call on other countries that have not yet done so
to endorse the Safe School Declaration.

The international community needs to accelerate
actions aimed at implementing target 16.2 of the
Sustainable Development Goals, which calls for ending
all forms of violence against children. The report of
the Secretary-General on children in armed conflict
once again reminds us of the tragic impact of conflicts
upon children living in affected areas and the daily
risks that they face. We strongly condemn violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, particularly the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, and the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
its additional protocols, including, and in particular,
when they concern the rights and the lives of children.
Systematic and gross violations of human rights, the
use of force and economic coercion, and the lack of
international protection are among the main factors
increasing the risks leading to the displacement of
children and heavily affecting their right to life.

In our region, in a clear violation of humanitarian
law, Azerbaijan has been placing military installations
in civilian settlements and is using them as a launchpad
for shelling along the line of contact with Nagorno
Karabakh . The large-scale military offensive unleashed
by Azerbaijan against Nagorno Karabakh in early
April 2016 not only violated the ceasefire agreement,
signed in 1994, and the 1995 trilateral agreement on
the consolidation of the ceasefire, but also incurred
gross violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. The vicious
armed aggression has resulted in the loss of many
lives, including civilians, among whom are children
and women.

As a result of the aggression of Azerbaijan against
Nagorno Karabakh, civilian infrastructure and the
civilian population, including children and the elderly,
have become intentional and indiscriminate targets.
The first civilian victims included a 12-year-old boy,
who was killed, and two other schoolchildren, who were
wounded, in the town of Martuni on their way to school.
The indiscriminate shelling of civilian settlements,
leading to the death of a schoolboy, and an incursion
into a village characterized by despicable, barbaric acts
against the civilian and service personnel - the footage
of which has since been released on social media - are
reminiscent of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and Al-Qaida. The masterminds and perpetrators of the
atrocities amounting to war crimes and crimes against
humanity must be identified and brought to justice.

In the context of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict, we
have been observing deliberate attempts by Azerbaijan
to derail the peace process by ongoing regular ceasefire
violations and incursions across the border. It is also
very troubling that Azerbaijan constantly deviates
from previous agreements aimed at de-escalating
the situation on the line of contact and establishing a
mechanism of investigation of ceasefire violations that
will help save the lives of civilians, including those
of Children.

