Allow me to thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for her briefing to the Security Council, and the Director General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for his eighty-third report (S/2020/871, annex). I would like to begin by reiterating South Africa's position, which condemns any use of chemical weapons. No cause can ever justify the use of any weapon of mass destruction by any actor under any circumstances. South Africa remains committed to its international obligations as a State party to the Chemical Weapons Convention and as a member of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. South Africa strongly supports multilateralism and the international rule of law, which includes the non-discriminatory and consistent application of the provisions of relevant multilateral instruments, and the preservation of the international norms against weapons of mass destruction, including chemical weapons. The use of chemical weapons undermines the international norms against the production, use and stockpiling of such weapons, established under the Chemical Weapons Convention. In South Africa's view, the alleged use of chemical weapons by a State party to the Chemical Weapons Convention is a very serious matter that would constitute a material breach of obligations under the Convention. In order to ensure that States parties adhere to their obligations, it is imperative that they have full faith and confidence in the work and processes of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. As the only technically competent international authority in this area, there can be no political interference in its work. States parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention should therefore unite in preserving the international norm against chemical weapons and the provisions of the Convention, along with its consistent and non-discriminatory implementation. As indicated on a number of occasions, South Africa will continue to work for the depoliticization of the relevant management and decision-making structures established under the Chemical Weapons Convention, and also towards ensuring that States parties are held accountable for any violations of their obligations, based on credible and irrefutable evidence. South Africa has taken note of the decision by the Executive Council of the OPCW regarding the use of chemical weapons in Syria. South Africa reiterates its position that this decision is premature and blurs the important distinction between the investigation process by the Investigation and Identification Team and decision- making by the Executive Council on the findings of the report. It therefore represents a missed opportunity to ensure both procedural and substantive fairness in dealing with this important matter. However, we welcome further discussions on this matter in November at the Conference of the States Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction. In conclusion, South Africa firmly believes that the only sustainable solution to the Syrian question remains the achievement of a political solution through an inclusive Syrian-led dialogue aimed at a political resolution reflective of the will of the people of Syria. We should endeavour to approach the situation in Syria in a holistic manner wherein the political, humanitarian and chemical-weapon tracks all converge in a single unified path to long-term peace, security and stability for Syria.
