Mr. Kawamura (Japan): First of all, I would like
to congratulate the Egyptian delegation for assuming
the presidency of the Council for the month of August.
We would also like to thank China for its excellent
stewardship of the Council throughout July. We also
would like to extend our welcome to the new Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation, Ambassador
Vassily Nebenzya. Japan looks forward to working
with him.

We are witnessing an ever larger number of terrorist
attacks around the world. Access to weapons increases
the number of civilian casualties. Resolution 2370
(2017), which we have adopted today, calls upon Member
States to enhance measures to prevent terrorists from
acquiring weapons. As the resolution prescribes, it is
important not only to strengthen our own capabilities,
but also to support efforts in other countries.

Allow me to provide a few examples that may be
useful. Japan has been supporting capacity-building in
Asia, as well as in the Middle East and Africa. We are
working with the World Customs Organization (WCO),
the International Criminal Police Organization,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
other organizations to help South and South-East
Asia enhance their ability to counter improvised
explosive devices (IEDs), as well as small arms and
light weapons. In March, Japan provided $3.5 million
to the WCO to help customs authorities in South and
South-East Asia, as well as the Pacific Islands. Those
funds will help them, at their land and sea borders,
strengthen their investigative capabilities against the
illicit trafficking in precursors to IEDs. We have also
provided $1.5 million to prevent the illicit trafficking
in small arms and light weapons through air cargo and
postal services. In relation to today's resolution, we
emphasize that the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), which
seeks to counter the illicit trade in conventional arms,
provides an effective means of preventing terrorists from
acquiring weapons. Japan was one of the co-authors of
the resolution that led to the establishment of the ATT
(General Assembly resolution 67/234B). We believe
strongly in its implementation and universalization.
While the ATT was not incorporated in today's Council
resolution, we call upon countries who have not yet
done so, particularly major arms-trade States, to ratify
the ATT as soon as possible.
