Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): I wish to express our
gratitude and appreciation to your delegation, Sir, for
convening this important meeting.

As Ukraine's principled position on Timor-Leste
has already been stated in the Council on numerous
occasions, I shall confine myself to making a few short
remarks in connection with today's discussion.

We are happy to ascertain that the Government of
Timor-Leste has already taken office and that its
national institutions have assumed responsibility for
the management of its affairs. The Parliament has
adopted its first pieces of legislation on a number of
important issues. The country has become a member of
the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank and the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries. It has
established diplomatic relations with nearly all States
members of the Association of South-East Asian
Nations. On 27 September 2002, Timor-Leste was
admitted as the l9lst State Member of the United
Nations. We believe that all this also reflects the results
of the work done by the United Nations, and
specifically by the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET), led by Ambassador
Kamalesh Sharma.

Security Council resolution 1410 (2002), which
established UNMISET, marked the launching of a new
phase of partnership between the United Nations and
Timor-Leste, in which steadfast cooperation and
support in many critical areas has brought tangible
results.
UNMISET and the United Nations relief agencies
have helped the country to achieve steady progress for
the past sixth months in restoring essential services and
in reaching its development targets. The United
Nations relief, rehabilitation and development
programmes in Timor-Leste have managed to make
progress in rebuilding various components of the
country's infrastructure. Significant progress has been
made in the rehabilitation of physical and social
infrastructure and in the provision of social services,
especially in health and education. We believe that
continued international support is needed for the
strengthening of the capacity of national institutions.
We welcome, in this regard, the support being provided
to the Government of Timor-Leste by Indonesia,
Australia and other countries.

Despite the considerable efforts made over the
past six months, a number of critical elements of the
State remain fragile. One of the sensitive points of the
State-building strategy for Timor-Leste is the
administrative and governmental system. Building
Timorese public services remains one of the most
difficult aspects of UNMISET's mandate. There is still
a grave shortage of qualified and experienced Timorese
across all areas of government activity, particularly in
the justice sector. In this regard, we welcome
UNMISET's civilian support programme of advisers
aimed at promoting a broad-based, self-sustaining and
self-reliant administration of Timor Leste. In our view,
international advisers should continue to assist to
ensure that capacity-building can be maintained by
Timorese nationals and their institutions with minimal
external support.

The resolution of the refugee problem remains
another crucial issue and a prerequisite to ensuring
stability in the country. We welcome the efforts of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the International Organization for Migration to help
refugees to return to Timor-Leste by the end of this
year, hopefully. The complete return of refugees from
West Timor should remain a firm priority in order to
guarantee security on both sides of the border. We
stress the need to preserve the refugee status of the
Timorese who, under certain circumstances, may stay
in West Timor after December 2002.

The issue of the accountability of those
responsible for serious crimes committed in 1999
continues to represent a serious concern for the
international community. We urge both Timor-Leste
and Indonesia to cooperate closely in bringing to
justice all violators of human rights.
As a member of the Security Council, Ukraine
took part in the history-making United Nations mission
to East Timor in November 2000. My country is proud
to have taken an active part in the international nation-
building efforts there. We have contributed a number of
officers to the UNMISET civilian police component
since its inception, thus assisting in the establishment
of an effective Timorese Police Service and promoting
its capability.

In conclusion, let me emphasize that UNMISET
has succeeded so far in the fulfilment of its mandate
and I should like to reiterate Ukraine's continued
support for the strenuous efforts of the United Nations
and UNMISET in Timor-Leste, as well as Ukraine's
readiness to provide all necessary assistance.

