Mr. J enie (Indonesia): I would like to express the
appreciation of my delegation to the members of the
Security Council for convening this public meeting for
an assessment of the oral remarks made by the
Chairman of the sanctions Committee. Before I go
further, tribute is due to the Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), as well as to its members and the experts
involved, for their dedication and hard work.

The Government of Indonesia has consistently
been of the view that we need global cooperation, with
the United Nations at its centre, and the involvement of
all civilizations and religions to effectively combat
international terrorism. It is to the United Nations that
Member States must turn to ensure that instruments to
eradicate this menace are multidimensional in nature,
involving political, legal, economic, financial, military
and security approaches. Indonesia believes that, in the
absence of such multi-track approaches, solutions can
only be short-term and limited in nature. It is inevitable
that these approaches will be successful only if carried
out through multilateralism, which involves dialogue
among civilizations and religions. Without such
approaches, efforts to effectively deal with this evil
will only fall short of their fundamental objectives.

Long before the terrorist attacks in September
2001, we ourselves were the unfortunate victims of acts
of terrorism. We know very well the pain, suffering and
devastating impact that such terrorist acts have brought
upon societies. As a result, Indonesia has begun to
enforce various measures to mitigate that menace
nationally, bilaterally, regionally and internationally.

At the national level, a series of decisions and
steps have been taken not only to uncover the
perpetrators of terrorism, but also successfully to
prosecute them. Those measures, which have enhanced
the awareness of our people of the consequences of
such attacks, are carried out strictly within the
framework of law, democratic processes and non-
discriminatory norms and have thereby gained the
confidence of the public. Considering that the networks
and activities of terrorists go beyond national
boundaries, Indonesia has been cooperating with the
Association of South-East Asian Nations, as well as
with other countries and groups of States, including
Australia, Japan, the United States and the European
Union. Further success in dealing with terrorism will
require, as my delegation has already indicated,
sustained international efforts, along with increased
cooperation on a global scale, information-sharing and
coordination. Such a strategy will also require that all
countries willing to participate have the financial and
technical means to do so.

We have learned that international cooperation
between the Indonesian police and police forces from
other countries in the Bali bombing was able not only
to result in the arrest of more than 44 persons, but also
to further uncover the network and lead to the arrest of
other key terrorist figures who, apparently, have been
involved in many other acts of terrorism, particularly
bombings in Indonesia, over the past five years. Such
an investigative process therefore underlines the
importance of strengthening international cooperation.
Its success will be limited only if not accompanied by
the next crucial steps, including the legal process and
bringing the terrorists to justice. It is in pursuing this
approach that Indonesia has been able to consolidate
the democratization processes that began in 1998.

While further legal measures are being pursued
for those involved in terrorist activities, my delegation
is pleased that, on 10 December 2003, Indonesia
submitted its national report in compliance with
resolution 1455 (2003). That report was formulated in
accordance with the guidelines established by the
Committee and I am confident that it demonstrates the
readiness of my delegation to cooperate further and
fully with the Committee. In the preparation of the
report, I should acknowledge the useful visit by you,
Sir, as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999), to Indonesia in October last
year

Permit me now to turn to the recommendations in
the Chairman's assessment pursuant to paragraph 14 of
resolution 1455 (2003). We would like to welcome
those recommendations, in particular the commitment
to maintain open channels of communications with all
Member States, as well as with regional and technical
organizations. We hope that this will further strengthen
the basic principles of international cooperation and
transparency and the spirit of dialogue, which are
essential prerequisites to effectively combating
terrorism.

As part of those efforts, I am pleased to inform
the Council of an initiative of the Government of
Indonesia, in cooperation with the Government of
Australia, to hold the Asia-Pacific Regional Ministerial
Meeting on Countering Terrorism from 4 to 5 February
2004 in Bali, Indonesia. Its theme will be
"Strengthening coordination and cooperation in
combating terrorism in the Asia-Pacific region". It is
hoped that this meeting will be able to impart added
momentum to the already vigorous efforts to counter
terrorism in that region by focusing on practical and
operational goals, identifying new ways of enhancing
cooperation and encouraging more effective
collaboration among the region's law enforcement and
intelligence agencies.

The second initiative supported by the
Government of Indonesia is that of a non-governmental
organization, Nahdlatul Ulama, one of the biggest
Muslim organizations in Indonesia, which in February
will hold an international conference of Islamic
scholars in Jakarta to deliberate on better ways of
presenting and projecting to the outside world the
image of Islam as rahmatan lil alamin, or "blessing to
the whole world", rather than as it is being portrayed
now by certain quarters. This will be one contribution
to further understanding among civilizations.

Finally, I would like to stress again the conviction
of Indonesia that terrorism is the problem of many
nations and that we can best fight and vanquish this
menace through multidimensional and multilateral
approaches, which should be based on international
cooperation and collaboration and on a spirit of
dialogue among all States, civilizations and religions.
Indonesia is one such party, and, as we have in the past,
we stand ready to take the necessary measures and to
work with other States and organizations to ensure that
terrorism is defeated once and forever.
