The Deputy Secretary-General (spoke in French):
At the outset, allow me to convey the greetings of
the Secretary-General, who is currently attending
the Non-Aligned Movement Summit in Tehran. I am
speaking today on his behalf.

I will essentially speak about the humanitarian
and security situation in Syria, as the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Guterres, will
address the worsening of the crisis caused by the waves
of Syrian refugees to neighbouring countries.

(spoke in English)

More than 2.5 million people, including refugees
from Palestine and Iraq, are now in grave need of
assistance and protection inside Syria. This is more
than double the number that Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs Valerie Amos reported to the
Security Council in March. The most pressing needs
include water and sanitation, food and shelter, blankets
and health care. Less than half of primary health-care
facilities and hospitals in Syria are now fully functional.
The destruction of pharmaceutical plants and storage
facilities is making drugs and equipment scarce. At the
same time, the number of people in need of medical
care is increasing.

Access to health facilities has become difficult or
impossible in some areas due to violence, checkpoints
and fuel shortages. Food prices have tripled in some
areas.

A great number of Syrians are internally displaced
and are being supported by family or friends; more
than 1.2 million others have sought refuge in public
buildings such as schools and mosques, which lack
adequate water and sanitation.

In response, despite ongoing fighting and
intensifying violence, United Nations agencies, the
Red Cross, the Red Crescent Movement and their
non-governmental organization partners have managed
to reach more people in more places every month. In
July, World Food Programme food distribution through
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and its local partners
reached 820,000 people throughout Syria, as compared
to 250,000 in April. We are reaching ever more
people with non-food items, health kits and water and
sanitation services. But - and this is a big "but" - as
the conflict intensifies the number of people in need
is clearly exceeding our capacity to assist. We are now
revising the humanitarian response plan to be able to
assist up to 2.5 million people.

Both the Government and the opposition have
chosen the path of armed confrontation, with no
immediate prospect of an end to the fighting or a
resolution of the conflict.

Defections from the army and the Government
continue as the brutality of the Government's military
response alienates ever more sections of the population.
Arms flows from outside appear to be reaching
both sides. Military operations have intensified,
encompassing all major cities. Indiscriminate shelling
with heavy weapons, tanks and air assets has increased.

Civilians and non-combatants, including women
and children, face systematic slaughter. There are almost
daily reports of atrocities, most recently in Darayya.
Those recent accounts of possible war crimes are
deeply troubling, and should give us all further impetus
to work to end this nightmare. Those responsible in the
Government and the military forces, as well as armed
opposition groups, must be held accountable for gross
human rights violations, war crimes and crimes against
humanity.

The withdrawal of the United Nations Supervision
Mission in Syria and its observers is now almost
complete. Throughout its deployment, the Mission
provided clear and verified information and was in
contact with all parties, under difficult circumstances.
I commend those who served under complex and
dangerous conditions.

As conditions deteriorate, we see dangerous
repercussions for Syria's neighbours. We view with
great concern, indeed alarm, the political, social and
economic consequences of the movement of large
numbers of refugees from Syria to its neighbours.
Those consequences must be identified and addressed.
The affected Governments, which have generously
opened their borders and accepted their responsibility
to shelter those who have sought refuge, need urgent
support.

There are now more than 220,000 Syrian refugees
in Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey. That weighs
heavily on local authorities and communities and risks
having serious destabilizing effects. The spillover
of conflict and violence into neighbouring countries
must be prevented. We urge all parties in Syria and
neighbouring countries to refrain from cross-border
actions that will escalate tensions. In that context, on
behalf of the Secretary-General, I call for the release of
all who have been kidnapped or are being held hostage,
in Syria and elsewhere.

That is the difficult environment in which the Joint
Special Representative of the United Nations and the
League of Arab States, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, begins
his work. We welcome his presence here today and are
grateful that he has accepted this important and heavy
responsibility. It is essential that the international
community, and the Security Council in particular,
unite behind him and his efforts. Separate diplomatic
tracks will only prolong the violence, the human rights
abuses and the humanitarian crisis.

To meet the increasing humanitarian pressure,
we need to urgently address two main issues. The
first is humanitarian access. The Syrian Arab Red
Crescent has done remarkable work, but it is clearly
overstretched. We need the Government to authorize
more international non-governmental organizations to
operate in the country. And United Nations agencies
will need to expand their presence.

At the same time, security has to be improved. Our
response is shackled by obstacles, both conflict-related
ones and others linked to the increase in criminality,
kidnapping and attacks on vehicles. I urge Member
States to emphasize to the Government and opposition
groups the urgency of guaranteeing the security of aid
agencies operating in areas under their control to allow
for safe access to civilians and for evacuation.

The second issue is funding. As of yesterday, the
$180 million humanitarian response plan was only
half-funded. Some critical sectors have received almost
no funding at all. Donors should urgently rise to this
humanitarian imperative. Hundreds of thousands of
lives are at stake.

As the conflict continues, Syria risks undermining
its State institutions and losing its cultural and
historical heritage. The cohesion of its diverse society
is in danger. That will have profound implications for
the Syrian people, for the countries of the region and
for the world. The massive destruction, the human
tragedies and the abuses we are witnessing are the
direct consequence of the increased and irresponsible
militarization of the conflict. Syrians need fewer
weapons, not more. Those who supply the Government
or the armed opposition with weapons, equipment or
money are creating a vicious circle of violence and are
paving the way for more suffering and chaos. Member
States with influence on the Syrian Government or the
opposition forces have an obligation to end the killing
and promote a peaceful resolution of the conflict.

Finally, we note recent calls to establish
humanitarian corridors or buffer zones inside Syria
where civilians could, it is argued, find relief from the
violence. Such proposals raise serious questions and
require careful and critical consideration.

(spoke in French)

The Syrian people need humanitarian assistance.
Ultimately, however, the current crisis will not be
resolved in the absence of a credible political process.
Such a process should be supported by an unified
international community, allowing for an end to the
violence and making possible a political transition
carried out by Syrians themselves. It is time for all the
parties in Syria and abroad the put the interests, dignity
and human rights ofthe people of Syria first. The Syrian
people are today the victims of suffering, devastation
and divisiveness; while all the while they aspire only
to live in peace and to enjoy the rights and freedoms
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.

