Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General. That presence illustrates the gravity
of the situation that we are discussing today and of
which the Security Council is quite rightly seized. I
should also like to thank Professor Gambari for his
briefing on his mission to Burma at a most critical
time. Today's meeting is an opportunity to stress the
Council's full support for his good-offices efforts.

The size of the demonstrations in Burma has
shown the degree to which the absence of dialogue has
proved untenable over the long term. Indeed, the
movement of monks and of the population, which we
have witnessed since 19 August, has been unique in
terms of its scale and its extent throughout the country.
My delegation condemns the brutal repression of those
non-violent demonstrations. Moreover, Belgium is
particularly concerned at the many arrests that have
occurred in recent weeks and strongly urges the
Government of Myanmar to release persons who have
done nothing more than exercise their fundamental
right to freedom of expression and of assembly.

The Council is no doubt aware of the European
Union's decision to extend the targeted sanctions
regime, following the grave events witnessed by the
international community. Belgium supports those
sanctions and wishes to make it clear that repression of
fundamental rights can in no way be tolerated.
Moreover, we hope that progress in democratization
and in respect for human rights will enable us to
I'CVCI'SC the course Of events.

In that context, the role of the countries in the
region, particularly the neighbouring countries, is
essential. Belgium welcomes the 27 September
statement made by the presidency of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), whose presence in
the Council today we welcome.

My delegation will listen closely to the statement
to be made by the representative of Burma. In View of
recent developments, Belgium's expectations can be
summarized as follows: first, immediately launch an
inclusive political dialogue; secondly, open the way for
real democratization, with total respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms; and, finally,
immediately and unconditionally release those arrested
during the recent repression as well as all political
prisoners, primarily Daw Aung San Suu Kyi.

