Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths, Under-
Secretary-General Lowcock and Executive Director
Beasley for their briefings. China supports the efforts of
Special Envoy Griffiths to advance the political process
in Yemen and commends the United Nations and the
World Food Programme (WFP) for their unremitting
efforts to improve the humanitarian situation in
that country.

The Stockholm Agreement - an important
step towards the political settlement of the Yemeni
issue - should be implemented in earnest. With the
efforts of the international community and the Yemeni
parties, the ceasefire is largely holding in Al-Hudaydah
and the redeployment is making headway. Just recently,
the Yemeni parties participated in the first face-to-face
meeting of the Redeployment Coordination Committee
(RCC) since February and agreed on a mechanism
and new measures to reinforce the ceasefire and
de-escalation in Al-Hudaydah.

Under the good offices of the United Nations, the
Yemeni parties should continue to conduct dialogue and
consultations with a view to resolving such outstanding
issues as local security forces, relevant port revenues
and prisoner exchanges. The Special Envoy of the

Secretary-General, the United Nations Mission to
Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) and the
RCC should strengthen dialogue and collaboration with
a view to forging synergies to promote the resolution of
the aforementioned issues.

The Council should continue to maintain unity
and provide support for the political process in Yemen.
China supports the adoption of resolution 2481 (2019),
which renewed the mandate of UNMHA for six months.
Since the deployment of the Mission, violent incidents
have decreased in Al-Hudaydah and the Mission's
operations have been effective on the whole.

Given the complexity of the environment in
Al-Hudaydah, the Mission has to overcome security,
administrative and logistical difficulties. The Yemeni
parties should strengthen cooperation with the
United Nations to provide assistance and facilitate
the deployment of the Mission and its mandate
implementation. China supports UNMHA in continuing
to oversee the ceasefire and advance the redeployment
of forces and mine action operations, and commends
the work of the Mission and the dedication of its staff.

China support the Yemeni parties on the basis of
relevant Council resolutions, such as resolution 2216
(2015), the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
its Implementation Mechanism and the outcome of
the comprehensive National Dialogue Conference
in returning to the track of dialogue for a political
settlement of the Yemeni issue. The sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Yemen
must be safeguarded.

Since countries of the region play an important role
on the Yemeni issue, China supports their enhanced
dialogue and cooperation with the United Nations to
create favourable conditions for the Yemeni parties
to ease tensions, enhance mutual trust and advance
the political process. China condemns all attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure.

Since the outbreak of the war in Yemen, the
Yemeni people have suffered from violence, hunger,
disease and displacement, among other threats. China
is deeply concerned about the humanitarian situation in
Yemen. The international community should increase
its assistance, provide tailored support in cash and in
kind and honour its pledges in a timely manner. All
parties concerned should ensure humanitarian access
in Yemen so that humanitarian supplies can reach all
the people and areas in need of assistance.

China is closely following the food crisis in Yemen
and supports the work of the WFP to improve the
living conditions of the Yemeni people. China has also
provided multiple batches of humanitarian aid, such
as food and medicine, to Yemen through bilateral and
multilateral channels, and will continue to do its utmost
to help the Yemeni people address their shortages of
basic necessities, such as clothing, food, medicine and
health care.

