Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank and support Mr. Salame
and his team. We also thank Ambassador Schulz for
his briefing.

The Dominican Republic demands an immediate
ceasefire and a return to political dialogue. For us, it is
essential that the violence and abuses against civilians
stop. Over the past four months, more than 1,100 people
have died. The Council must listen when we say that it
must stop. Enough is enough.

We are appalled by the reckless and indiscriminate
attacks on hospitals, airports, residential areas, relief
vehicles and migrant centres. The cowardly attack on
a hospital two days ago killed doctors and seriously
injured rescue personnel and civilians. We call on the
aggressor forces to commit to protecting civilians and
civilian infrastructure and to allowing humanitarian
access to the areas affected by the conflict, without
discrimination. We demand respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights.

The plight of migrants and refugees is equally
discouraging. The recent and regrettable shipwreck
in the Mediterranean that claimed the lives of dozens
of people and the most recent bombardment of the
Tajoura detention centre underscore the vulnerability
of those groups and the need for dignified responses
to them. We welcome the promising solidarity plan put
forward in Europe by France and Germany to relocate
arbitrarily detained migrants and refugees. We hope
that a greater number of European countries will be
committed to the cause, in particular those close to the
crisis. We also hope for the definitive closure in Libya
of all centres where thousands of migrants still live. In
addition, we urge the Libyan authorities to cooperate
with the International Criminal Court and the Office of
the Prosecutor, Ms. Bensouda, so as to bring to justice
those involved in atrocity crimes committed against the
Libyan people in the recent past.

The shameless transgression of the provisions of
the arms embargo established by the Security Council
is a matter that we will not allow to go unnoticed. It
continues to fuel tensions and perpetuate conflict.
Despite the limited resources available to the parties
only a few months ago, we have recently seen a
considerable increase in their capabilities, in particular
those that allow them to conduct air strikes. The flagrant
involvement of third parties in Libya is blatant. The
use of increasingly sophisticated and lethal weaponry
is boldly promoted. Artillery drones, precision-guided
missiles, portable anti-attack weapons, armoured
personnel carriers, war tanks, helicopters and rocket
launchers are flaunted in the media and on social
networks. It is clear that the only outcome for those who
are determined to follow a perverse path of destruction
and death will be to make fools of themselves and,
subsequently, be tried for war crimes.

Lastly, the past has left wounds that shape the
way in which the Council views and approaches the
situation in Libya. However, it appears that the time
has come for us to reconsider some of the provisions of
resolution 1973 (2011) in order to protect civilians and
areas inhabited by civilians, reduce the war-making
capabilities of the parties and bring them back to the
negotiating table, maintain Libya's unity and ensure
genuine reconciliation.

I would like to conclude by reminding the Libyan
people of Mr. Salame's words:
(spoke in English)
Libyans are now fighting the wars of others.

