Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset to welcome the new High Representative and
to thank him for his statement this morning. We fully
agree with his analysis of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I wish also to welcome Mr. Nikola
Spirie, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We take careful note of his
reaffirmed intention to carry out the necessary reforms,
and we encourage him to continue and step up his
endeavours to that end.

The representative of the Czech Republic will
soon make a statement on behalf of the European
Union, and France naturally associates itself with that
statement. I should like, however, to make some
supplementary remarks in my national capacity.
Over the past 14 years, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
with the support of the European Union, has carried
out reforms that are essential for its stability and
prosperity. In June 2008 it reached an important
milestone by signing a Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the European Union, which reasserted
its commitment to joining the Union. Some

encouraging progress has been achieved in recent
months, notably the adoption of the constitutional
amendment on Brcko District and the adoption of the
War Crimes Strategy and the implementation action
plan for justice sector reform. This progress was made
possible by the spirit of compromise and dialogue that
was initiated last November at Prud. From the outset,
the European Union and France have supported the
Prud process, which should continue and indeed be
extended. We urge all Bosnian political actors to
become part of the process and to participate fully.

At the same time, the High Representative has
drawn our attention to some worrying developments.
The increase in nationalist rhetoric, and actions and
statements challenging the underlying structure of the
State - whether directed against the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina or
against the existence of the Republika Srpska - are
matters of grave concern. The political situation
continues to be marked by a continuing lack of trust
among the leaders of the three constituent peoples,
which gives rise to tension and hampers progress in the
country. We therefore call on the Bosnia and
Herzegovina leadership to cease opposition to change
and to work towards compromise on the main issues.
Only a constructive attitude on the part of all Bosnian
political actors will make it possible to move forward
on reforms that will open the way for an evolving
international presence, along with reforms that arise
from European partnership.

I wish to assure the High Representative of our
confidence in him and of our full support as he works
to ensure respect for the Dayton-Paris accords, to
promote the reforms that the country needs and to
complete the transition from the Office of the High
Representative to a European Union special representative
with a strengthened mandate.

It is time to open a new chapter in the country's
history, which requires that the objectives and
conditions established by the Peace Implementation
Council for the transition be fully met. Important
progress remains to be accomplished to achieve that
crucial stage. Notwithstanding the measures that still
have to be taken, I would especially like to emphasize
the urgency of overcoming the delay in the inventory
and apportionment of State property. That is an
essential point upon which we await progress over the
coming weeks.

France supports the aspiration of the Bosnian
people to rejoin the European Union. The future of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and that of all the countries of
the Western Balkans lies in Europe; that is the key to
the stability of the region, to anchoring democracy in
the region and bringing about its future prosperity, as
the President of the French Republic, Nicolas Sarkozy,
has stressed on several occasions in recent months. The
High Representative referred to the joint meeting of the
Czech, Swedish and French Foreign Ministers in April
and to the visit of Javier Solana a few days ago,
confirming the constancy of European Union
commitment towards Bosnia and Herzegovina and its
confidence with regard to its European future. Europe
remains committed through the EUFOR-Altea
operation and the European Union's police mission.

The course set is clear, but the tempo of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's rapprochement with Europe
depends on the country itself. The international
community can help the Bosnian leaders to achieve
that, and that is something towards which the High
Representative is working energetically, but it cannot
substitute for the efforts of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Bernard Kouchner has emphasized that there is no
magic wand. It is for the Bosnians and their leaders,
first and foremost, to be the actors in the reforms the
country needs. That is work for a united Bosnia and
Herzegovina that can be thoroughly integrated into the
European Union.

