Mr. Sahovic' (Federal Republic of Yugoslavia):
At the outset, I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General, Mr. Annabi, for his detailed briefing.

My Government considers the 17 November
elections in Kosovo and Metohija a very important
event in the process of implementation of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999), which will lead the
province to a multi-ethnic society in which equal rights
will be enjoyed by all. We are satisfied that the
elections, in spite of the prevailing grave situation,
took place in a manner that can be generally
characterized as peaceful and orderly. The clear signals
of the international community that violence would not
be tolerated as a method for achieving political goals,
together with the engagement of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and KFOR, contributed to such an outcome.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, for its part,
has made a significant contribution to the satisfactory
conclusion of the electoral process, both in the
preparatory phase, including registration, and during
the actual elections. As a result, the Serbian community
in Kosovo and Metohija and the internally displaced
persons accepted the call of President Kostunica and
the Yugoslav and Serbian Governments to vote.
Members of the Council are well aware that this was
not a simple call to make. The decision of the members
of the Serbian community from the province to
participate was not easy either.

Such a decision would not have been possible
without the common document signed by the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and UNMIK on 5 November
this year. This document is important not only as a
comprehensive catalogue of the problems that need to
be addressed through permanent and intensive dialogue
among all concerned but, perhaps even more, as a
framework of future concrete cooperation between the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and UNMIK.

Now, in the aftermath of the elections, we should
not forget the extremely difficult conditions that Serbs
and other non-Albanians have been facing over the past
years and that, regrettably, they continue to face as we
speak. As the Council has repeatedly confirmed, the
security situation of non-Albanians in Kosovo and
Metohija is highly unsatisfactory. Violence and
intimidation continue. Just a few days ago, on 22
November, we witnessed yet another terrorist attack on
Serbs in the village Obilie. An innocent elderly woman
was killed instantaneously. Her husband was seriously
wounded. Throughout Kosovo and Metohija, there is
still little or no freedom of movement for Serbs. Fewer
than 100 of 250,000 internally displaced persons have
been able to return in the two and a half years since the
arrival of UNMIK and KFOR. The fate of more than
1,300 missing persons is still unknown. There is
discrimination against minorities in the judiciary.
Property is continuously being usurped.

In spite of all these adverse conditions and the
many dilemmas stemming from them, the Serbian
community has shown its willingness to participate in
the intricate process of articulating the future of
Kosovo and Metohija through the provisional
institutions of self-government. Joint efforts by and
equitable treatment of representatives of all ethnic
communities in these institutions should provide a
basis to address and begin to gradually resolve the
numerous problems the province is currently
experiencing. That would be the best way to
demonstrate that peace, democracy, freedom and
orientation towards Europe are realistic objectives for
all ethnic groups and their political representatives in
Kosovo and Metohija.

We are all aware that the November elections
represent the beginning of a new phase in creating a
future for Kosovo and Metohija - a phase, we hope,
that will be characterized by constructive efforts on all
sides to bring, first, security and political stability and,
then, democracy and prosperity to the province. It is
clear that these were not elections meant to solve the
final status of Kosovo and Metohija. The Security
Council and the international community as a whole
have repeatedly emphasized the necessity of the full
respect of resolution 1244 (1999), which guarantees the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. This resolution continues to be
the sole basis for the consideration of the future status
of Kosovo and Metohija.

Regrettably, before the official election results
were even known, some of the local Albanian
politicians called on the international community to
recognize the independence of Kosovo and Metohija.
We consider this to be, to say the least,
counterproductive. In the present fragile situation,
restraint needs to be exercised, particularly by those
who will hold high office in the provisional institutions
of self-government. It is not cheap propaganda that is
needed now, but constructive efforts by all to make the
provisional institutions of self-government credible,
efficient and effective. It should be clearly understood
that the elected representatives in Kosovo and Metohija
are actually facing a test of their political maturity.
They have an enormous responsibility to prove that
democratic forces are taking over from the forces of
violence and destruction.

We therefore expect the Security Council, as well
as the United Nations Administration in Kosovo and
Metohija, to ensure that the newly elected leadership
takes no steps to dash renewed hopes for viable multi-
ethnicity in that troubled area. In this context, let me
reiterate that we highly appreciate the engagement of
the Security Council in these past months, from the
June visit to Belgrade and Pristina to the October and
November presidential statements. We also hope that
such an approach will be maintained.

For our part, I would once again like to underline
the commitment of my Government to working closely
with UNMIK, the Security Council and the
international community as a whole on creating a
peaceful, multi-ethnic Kosovo and Metohija as an
important precondition for achieving overall stability
in the region.

