Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I align
myself with the statement that will be made by the
representative of Italy.

The report of Mr. Larsen on the developments in
Israel and the Palestinian territories has been
particularly clear and accurate. It bears out the critical
situation of which we are all aware.

I will not dwell on the tragic accumulation of acts
of terrorism and violence, with their endless cortege of
innocent victims, which, of course, we condemn
vigorously. No one can convince us, for example, that
the placement of a bomb on a school bus can have the
slightest justification, political or otherwise. It is an
outrageous and condemnable act.

In these delicate times, I wish to address one
point that has already been mentioned. The decision of
the Government of Israel on the possible deportation of
the President of the Palestine National Authority, Mr.
Arafat, contributes absolutely nothing to the cause of
peace. To the contrary, it opens the door wide to
increased tensions in a fragile and highly dangerous
scenario. Apart from the non-existence of a legal basis,
the decision constitutes a mistake of seemingly
incalculable, but in fact foreseeable and terrible,
consequences. Its revocation would be a step in the
right political direction.

We have been stressing the fragility of the
mechanism contained in the road map and the need for
it to be applied with an interpretation and in a context
that will make it possible for it to succeed. That is not
happening. The road map is being used to get bogged
down in the search for tiny steps forward that are
constantly being refuted by the facts.

I believe that, at this juncture, the Council and the
Secretary-General should insist on two central points,
without which the road map is doomed to failure.

The first point is to stress the need for and the
reality of a presence and an international commitment
to the resolution of the conflict. The international
community has always been present in this conflict,
inter alia, by financing through a variety of channels
the very survival of its actors. The road map has been
sensitive to that need and contemplates the holding of
an international conference on peace in the Middle
East. But we cannot wait for the conditions to come
about for such a conference. Our Organization must
demand that the key international actors represented by
the Quartet act in a much more committed fashion and
confront both parties with their responsibilities. Among
other things - and not least important - external
observation, in depth and on the ground, continues to
be absolutely necessary.

Secondly, we wish to reiterate that the driving
engine of the road map can only be a political
perspective that is deserving of the support of both
societies in the conflict. That political perspective is
defined ambiguously in the road map. This does not
lead us anywhere. There needs to be a design, as
detailed as possible, of the point that we wish to reach,
a design that can be proposed to both societies with
expectations of gaining majority support and a design
that responds truly to the two most pressing
requirements: Israel's security and the viability of the
future Palestinian State.

In the pursuit of those two goals, the role of the
United States and other members of the Quartet,
particularly the European Union, will be essential.

I would venture to say, and I conclude on this
note, that the horizon of peace necessarily implies an
in-depth commitment by the United States and the
European Union. The Secretary-General of our
Organization should revitalize the very essence of the
operations of the Quartet with those prospects in mind.

