Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the comprehensive briefings on the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and
on the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals in connection with the completion strategies
for the Tribunals, in compliance with resolutions 1534
(2004) and 1966 (2010). We take this opportunity to
welcome President Agius, who succeeds President
Meron at the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, to whom we reiterate our appreciation and
gratitude.

My delegation acknowledges the significant
progress described in the most recent reports, without
losing sight ofthe challenges that still remain in the final
phase of work, especially in the case of the Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, the closure of which is
planned for 2017. On that account, we appreciate the
firm commitment of the judges and of Prosecutor
Brammertz in sparing no effort to comply with the
deadlines indicated in the respective resolutions. For
that reason, we also support the extension of their
appointments in line with their requests. Nevertheless,
we remain convinced that both the cooperation of
certain State actors with regard to the provisions of the
statute of the Tribunal, as well as the support of the
international community as a whole, particularly the
Security Council, continue to be crucial if we are to
achieve the full completion of the respective mandates
in the effort to end impunity.

We would like to commend in particular the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and
Judge Vagn Joensen, for having carried out their
completion strategy this year, a symbolic ceremony for
which took place 1 December in Arusha, reminding
us of the tragic events of 1994. The work done by that
Tribunal constitutes a historic milestone of which we
are proud to be a part, and its legacy will not only
serve in the successful completion of the mandate of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the Mechanism, but will also be useful for the
design and implementation of any new tribunals that
may be established in future. The rich experience
and jurisprudence accumulated, the development and
maintenance of the archives, as well as the invaluable
task of capacity-building undertaken throughout the
region linked to the work of the Tribunal have paved
the way towards a new era in the development of
international criminal justice. Once again, we express
our satisfaction and extend our gratitude to all those
involved throughout the decades in the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. We remain confident in
the Mechanism's ability continue the remaining work
assigned to it.

We also appreciate the recent completion of the
report of the International Organization for Migration
on the study prepared for the Government of Rwanda
on reparations for the victims of the genocide. We look
forward to its timely publication and to the planning of
follow-up activities aimed at the prompt implementation
of that important project.

My country recognizes the significant contribution
made by the Mechanism under President Meron and
Prosecutor J allow, and would like to reiterate our positive
assessment of the work done to date in the framework
of the recently launched review process in accordance
with presidential statement S/PRST/2015/21, adopted
on 16 November.

The question of those that have been sentenced and
yet remain at large, as well as the issue of the relocation
of persons that have been acquitted and released yet
remain in Arusha, deserve our collective concern and
focus as the Council, with a View to reaching a solution.
International cooperation, which has found tangible
expression in the mechanisms intended to facilitate the
dispensation ofjustice, is indispensable going forward
and should be intensified in both cases to ensure
accountability.

As Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, Chile would once again like to
express its commitment to the work of the Tribunals
and the Mechanism. As we approach the end of our two-
year chairmanship, we reiterate that cooperation with
its completion strategy is one of the most direct ways
in which the Council can contribute to international
justice in situations of crimes against humanity.

Echoing the content of the reports, we would like
to conclude by expressing our gratitude to all who
have contributed to the functioning of the Tribunals,
including each member of the staff. We would like to
pay special tribute to the ongoing support of the Office
of the Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs.
These Tribunals are, in the end, the way forward to
strengthen the rule of law, peace and justice - an
aspiration that we all share.

