Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me to congratulate you, Sir, and to express our best
wishes to you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council. I should also like to thank the Spanish
delegation for its endeavours during its presidency last
month. I would like to welcome the presence this
evening of the Secretary-General, which attests once
again to his commitment to peace and stability in West
Africa. I would like to take this opportunity to say how
much we appreciate the very important personal role
that he has played in recent days and weeks in the
service of the people of Liberia.

We are all familiar with the tragic situation that
has been continuing in Liberia for many months.
France fully supports the thrust of the resolution that
has just be adopted. The Security Council has thereby
authorized the speedy deployment in Liberia of a
Multinational Force and, subsequently, of a United
Nations force. We welcome the fact that the resolution
was adopted so rapidly. We are grateful to the
delegation of the United States for having taken the
initiative on this matter.

As we all know, the contribution of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) has
been and remains decisive for creating the opening for
a resolution of the crisis in Liberia. In this regard we
welcome the role played by the leaders of ECOWAS, in
particular President Kufuor and President Obasanjo. It
is crucial that ECOWAS receive all necessary support
from the international community. Today's resolution
represents an important stage in that respect.

France, unfortunately, was not able to join in
voting in favour of the resolution because of one of its
provisions, which is unrelated to the situation in
Liberia. I am referring to the establishment of
exclusive jurisdiction by the national criminal courts of
States participating in this operation for the prosecution
of their nationals.

We do not believe that the scope of the
jurisdictional immunity thus created is compatible with
the provisions of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, the norms of French law or the
principles of international law. Furthermore, it causes a
problem of consistency at a time when the Security
Council has the intention of spearheading the
movement to reject impunity in all its forms.

My delegation put forward several suggestions
regarding this provision that we believed would allow us
to get around the problem. With respect to the vote
itself, we, like others, made some procedural
suggestions that would have made it possible for the
Security Council to affirm its unity regarding the
objective of the resolution while enabling those States
having a problem with the question of penal immunity to
dissociate themselves from the text on that specific
point. We regret that those initiatives were not agreed to.

But the point we wish to make this evening is that
new hope is being born for Liberia and its people.
Despite the disagreement on a major issue of
international law to which I referred, we would like to
welcome the commitment of the United States of
America to Liberia within the United Nations
framework. That commitment will considerably change
the situation regarding the tragedy of Liberia. Nor can
we forget that that tragedy affects security in the entire
subregion.

The commitment of the United States will
therefore also have a positive impact on regional
stability. France, like the United Kingdom, is
committed, under the auspices of the United Nations,
to countries neighbouring Liberia, and we welcome the
commitment of the United Nations. We are determined
to work closely with all those who contribute to the
security of the region, side by side with ECOWAS and
the United Nations, so that West Africa can embark
once again on the path to peace, stability and
development.

