Ms. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): Saint Vincent and the Grenadines thanks SpecialRepresentative of the Secretary-General Shearer for his briefing and for his efforts aimed at assisting in making progress in the peace process. We also thank Ms. Betty Sunday for her briefing. We acknowledge the presence of the Permanent Representative of South Sudan in the Chamber today. South Sudan is on a path towards a significant milestone in its nine-year history, and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines stands with the people of South Sudan as they embark on this new chapter of their journey. We are conscious that the formation of a transitional Government will not resolve all of South Sudan's challenges overnight, nor can it serve as a panacea for the devastation wrought on the country over several years. Notwithstanding these difficulties, we believe that South Sudan is on a productive course to ensure a prosperous future. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines applauds the decision by the South Sudanese parties to form the Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity in South Sudan, in keeping with the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. The spirit of compromise exhibited by the parties to put aside their differences for the benefit of the people is positive and reaffirms the significance of dialogue in resolving conflict. We also commend the effort to meet the 35 per cent quota for women in the formal implementation and monitoring mechanisms of the Revitalized Agreement, in particular the Ceasefire Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification Mechanism and the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission. As South Sudan ushers in a new dawn in nation-building, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines encourages all its leaders to assume their collective responsibilities and to ensure that the hard-won gains to form a transitional Government will be maintained and enhanced. In this respect, the full implementation of the Revitalized Agreement, including the permanent cessation of hostilities, the commencement of the National Dialogue Conference, the establishment of a permanent Constitution and the appropriate management of the Transitional Government within the next 36 months geared towards general elections, remain critical. My delegation is mindful that the promise of lasting peace faces daunting challenges, including the lingering impediments to security arrangements and transitional justice and the issues of poverty, corruption, the adverse effects of climate change, conflict-related sexual violence, the recruitment of children in armed conflict and a dire humanitarian situation. Such challenges run the risk of thwarting sustainable development for the people of South Sudan. Though difficult to address, they are by no means insurmountable. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines therefore urges the South Sudanese leaders and all stakeholders within the State to seize this moment and continue to work together to ensure peace, security and development for the future of the country and all its children and to refrain from taking any adverse action that may undermine the progress already made. A return to conflict and widespread violence would not only compound the suffering on another generation of South Sudanese but also could cause irreparable damage, which would have dangerous ramifications for neighbouring countries and the broader continent. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines commends the unstinting effort of the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the African Union, the Community of Sant' Egidio in Rome and the Government of South Africa, in particular Deputy President David Mabuza, South Africa's Special Envoy to South Sudan, for their constructive role in helping South Sudan to reach this promising moment. In closing, we reiterate our unwavering solidarity with the people of South Sudan and remain enthusiastic about the country's rebuilding process. Unity is pivotal for success. We call on the international community to continue to support South Sudan during this new phase of its history.
