Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this interactive
meeting on a particularly pertinent and important
issue, namely, cooperation with host States, which,
as we all know, is a crucial component of the success
of peacekeeping operations. I would also like to pay
heartfelt tribute, through Lieutenant General Leonard
Muriuki Ngondi and Major General Cheryl Pearce, to all
their military components carrying out their missions
in often highly challenging and adverse conditions.

I would like to make two preliminary remarks.
First, cooperation with the host State is crucial and

sine qua non to ensure that peacekeeping operations
can achieve their objectives, respecting, of course, the
sovereignty of the host State and taking account of the
need to protect the Blue Helmets and all United Nations
personnel in general, both civilian and uniformed.
Secondly, cooperation with the host State is not an
option but a pressing necessity enshrined in the guiding
principles of peacekeeping. Such cooperation entails
rights and duties for both the host State and the United
Nations. In that connection, I would like to highlight
three principal points, followed by questions pertaining
to these for our briefers.

First, the host State's consent to the deployment of
a peacekeeping operation must be sought not only as a
matter of principle, but also for operational purposes.
The political dialogue between the United Nations and
the host State is essential, but it must also be pursued
on the ground between the Blue Helmets, on the one
hand, and the military and police of the host State on
the other. It is clear that such respect and dialogue are
a means of guaranteeing the mission's effectiveness
and its acceptance by the local population. This
cooperation can take many forms, such as the exchange
of information on the risks and threats that affect the
civilian population as well as peacekeeping personnel;
or operational coordination, if provided for in a
mission's mandate.

Here I would like to ask our briefers a question: what
feedback can they give regarding their experiences at
these two levels of strategic and operational cooperation
in the context of their respective missions?

The second point that I wanted to highlight is that the
host State must respect its commitments under a status-
of-forces agreement, which ensures the freedom of
movement and protection of the Blue Helmets deployed
on host State territory. There is no context in which
violating a status-of-forces agreement is acceptable. I
believe that the Security Council must monitor this and
ensure that dialogue between a deployed mission and
host State authorities is ongoing, in order to resolve, at
an early stage and as rapidly as possible, any difficulties
that may emerge.

Thirdly and finally, the principal mandate of a
peacekeeping operation, as we know, is often the
protection of civilians. Nevertheless, it is the host
States that have primary responsibility for protecting
their people. Peacekeeping operations can help States
in difficulty to protect their populations against a
particular threat, but they cannot replace the host
State, which must do everything in its power to protect
its civilians, including through the police and the
military as well as the legal system, by systematically
prosecuting perpetrators of violence against civilians
and attacks on the rights of the population, even if such
perpetrators were to be found within the ranks of the
security forces themselves.

I have another question for our two briefers: what
do they expect from the Security Council in terms of
supporting cooperation with the host State, particularly
in the area of the protection of civilians?

Another remark I would like to make on this point
is that while the Security Council demands exemplary
conduct from its peacekeepers, similar behaviour is
expected from the security forces of the host State
receiving United Nations support. This is a major
requirement that is sometimes difficult to meet in
areas where a State may have been destabilized or have
limited capacities. France stands ready to provide all
necessary support to such States to help them achieve
this goal.

Finally, cooperation between the host State and
the peacekeeping operation may involve helping to
strengthen the host State's security and defence forces,
particularly in terms oftraining personnel and providing
equipment. The goal is then to shift the responsibility
to protect onto the security and defence forces so that
the host State is able to fully ensure the security of the
civilian population.

I wish to pose one last question here: what options
could we collectively explore, in terms of the capacity-
building of security and defence forces, to bolster
cooperation between a force and the host State? We
are often told that a United Nations force can withdraw
once the host State's defence and security forces are
fully operational.

