Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mariano Fernandez, for
his briefing. I align myself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union and the
representative of Uruguay on behalf of the Group of
Friends.

This biannual debate comes just a few weeks
after the Security Council visit to Haiti. That visit
allowed us to reaffirm our collective support to the
Haitian population and its representatives. That support
is combined with recognition of the progress made
since the earthquake, be it in terms of the 119,000
Haitian refugees who have been able to leave camps
since June 2011, or as it pertains to the removal of
debris. I bear in mind the numerous humanitarian
challenges that the country continues to face, which
were mentioned by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2012/128). For its part, France is determined to
deliver on the commitments undertaken by its
7

President, which now total €326 million, including our
share of European aid.

However, the challenges facing Haiti today
require the mobilization of the international
community and of all the Haitian leaders. In Port-au-
Prince we saw how the current level of tensions -
aggravated since the Council's return by the
resignation of Prime Minister Garry Conille - is such
that it is impeding the regular functioning of
institutions and risking generating unrest within the
population. That situation is all the more unfortunate
since, on the other hand, certain progress has been
made at the institutional level. The police are
increasingly visible and respected. The President and
Vice-President of the Superior Council of the Judiciary
have finally been nominated. An encouraging sign in
the struggle against impunity is that those responsible
for the massacre that took place in Les Cayes prison in
January 2010 have been brought to justice.

Finally, as the Secretary-General's report notes,
the security situation is relatively stable, although still
fragile. To continue its stabilization and reconstruction
efforts, the international community needs political
stability. It needs an established Government. It also
needs coordination on the part of donors, as such
coordination is no longer carried out by the Interim
Haiti Recovery Commission since October 2011. The
foreign investment requested by President Martelly
also requires political stability.

We would therefore remind the Haitian
authorities of their responsibilities to the people who
elected them. We expect them to set a date for interim
local and legislative elections, adopt a budget, swiftly
promulgate the constitutional amendments with
guarantees for the President, establish a permanent
electoral council, appoint a Prime Minister and respect
a truce between the executive and the legislature. We
also call on President Martelly to take all the steps
necessary to halt the grouping of armed men claiming
to be former members of the Haitian armed forces.

MINUSTAH has been deployed in Haiti for eight
years. It is responsible for maintaining order and
stability and support to the Haitian police. It has
gradually strengthened the capacities of the Haitian
National Police, which today numbers 10,000 men. It
has several highly professional civilian and military
staff that have been provided by troop-contributing
8
countries. And we provide it with significant resources
every year for it to carry out its mission.

At the same time, however, it is well known that
the task of the peacekeeping operation is not to remain
indefinitely in Haiti to maintain order or to carry out
reconstruction and development. It is therefore
important to have a clear idea of what we want to
achieve and by when.

During the years of presence in Haiti, the
Missions that have accumulated via mandates, the
inexcusable conduct of certain elements deployed in
Haiti and the tragedy of the cholera outbreak have
tainted our image in the eyes of Haitians. We can regret
that but certainly not ignore it; just as we cannot ignore
the will expressed by some Haitians to see the
departure of MINUSTAH one day.

After the tragedy of the earthquake, we decided
urgently to increase the MINUSTAH contingent.
Today, what we must do is to pursue the dual
movement of drawdown and adaptation set out in
resolution 2012 (2011), taking into account, of course,
the conditions on the ground.

We must refocus MINUSTAH's efforts on police
training and improving the rule of law. To do that, we
need to improve the balance within the Mission among
troops, police and civilians. Although outbreaks of
violence are still possible, the basic tendency is
towards an improved security situation that will enable
a significant reduction in MINUSTAH's overall
strength.

The status quo and the current drawdown are both
fraught with instability and tension. Because the
United Nations presence in Haiti is viewed in the long
term and we want MINUSTAH to be the last
peacekeeping operation deployed in Haiti, we want the
Mission to evolve in a gradual, responsible manner
towards a withdrawal in good conditions.

