The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Adom for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Equatorial Guinea.

First of all, Ijoin Ambassador Adom in reiterating
my sincere thanks to Cote d'Ivoire, with whom we made
up a very united team to lead the visit. I also thank the
authorities of Guinea-Bissau for the warm reception,
as well as the members of the Secretariat who worked
on the organization and smooth roll-out of the visit,
both in New York and on the ground. I am referring,
of course, to the staff of the Security Council Affairs
Division, with special thanks to Nikolai Galkin and his
team, Annika Kohnert and Wifag Hadra in particular.
My thanks also go to all the personnel deployed and
involved in the preparation of the mission, namely, the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), with special recognition
to the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and United Nations Resident Coordinator,
Mr. David McLachlan-Karr, the UNIOGBIS political
staff, the Travel, Shipping and Visa Unit and the
interpreters and the security officers who accompanied
us on the mission. The work of the entire great team
was truly exemplary and key to the success of the visit,
which took place from 13 to 17 February. On behalf
of everyone, I express our deep gratitude to the team
and we hope to continue working with the Secretariat to
draw all possible lessons from the mission.
After C6te d'Ivoire, the Security Council mission
continued on to the second phase of its visit to West
Africa by travelling to Guinea-Bissau from 15 to
16 February to assess, together with the main political
and civilian actors, the current political situation,
especially the ongoing electoral process, the role of
UNIOGBIS and humanitarian and security issues. In
Guinea-Bissau, the members of the Security Council
met with a large number of stakeholders, including
Prime Minister Aristides Gomes, with the attendance
of some members of his Government, and the Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, David
Mclachlan-Karr, as the Special Representative was
absent from Guinea-Bissau.

We also had very useful and in-depth discussions
with representatives of partner organizations involved
in the peacebuilding process in Guinea-Bissau, the
diplomatic corps and the group of five regional and
international partners, comprised of the African
Union, the European Union, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the United
Nations. The delegation also met with the President
of the National Assembly, the leaders of the political
parties with and without parliamentary representation,
the President of the National Electoral Commission, the
Vice-President of the Supreme Court of Justice, in the
absence of the President, who was travelling abroad,
and civil society representatives. In addition, we also
had the opportunity to speak with His Excellency the
President of the Republic, Mr. Jose Mario Vaz.

The Security Council went to Guinea-Bissau, on
the one hand, to call on all political stakeholders to
work to preserve the still-fragile achievements on their
way to peace, stability and prosperity and to overcome
their differences by always prioritizing inclusive
dialogue, and on the other hand, to support the Republic
of Guinea-Bissau in launching its electoral campaign,
which took place on 16 February, with a view to holding
the legislative elections on 10 March and the subsequent
presidential elections later this year, in accordance with
the legal framework. We all hope that the elections will
be peaceful, free, transparent and credible, and that they
will contribute to putting a definitive end to the chronic
instability and institutional crisis of the country.

In their meeting with Prime Minister Aristides
Gomes, the members of the Security Council
underscored the importance of the upcoming elections
in promoting key institutional reforms, as stipulated in
the Conakry Agreement of 2016, including reforms in
the security, justice and public administration sectors.
The Prime Minister described the Government's
commitment to ensuring that the electoral process
was transparent and the results credible by noting two
important instruments that were signed at the National
Assembly headquarters the day before our arrival, in
the presence of President Vaz: the 2019 stability pact,
which emphasizes the need for institutional reforms,
and an electoral code of conduct, in which competing
political parties pledge to respect election results.

The Prime Minister outlined a number of
challenges to holding legislative elections, including
such major difficulties as electoral financing, which
he stated is due to the failure of donors to honour
their commitments. Prime Minister Gomes stressed
that the Government was facing pressure in trying to
handle social grievances and maintain a consensual
electoral process.

During their meetings, the Council members tried
to clarify Prime Minister Gomes's assertions about the
shortage of funds for the elections. UNIOGBIS and
the National Electoral Commission confirmed that
donors had provided $2 million above the $7.7 million
fund established by the United Nations Development
Programme for the elections. They argued that the
Government was not covering the expenses for which it
was responsible. As was discussed at the meeting with
the United Nations country team, as well as during
other meetings, after three and a half years the political
crisis has ended up adversely affecting the economy by
exerting budgetary pressure on the Government due to
a decrease in State budget revenue.

The members heard assessments of possible
attempts to obstruct elections during their meetings with
the international community, political parties and civil
society. However, several of those speakers said that
this included senior Government officials. The leader
of the main opposition party, the Partido da Renovacao
Social, drew attention to concerns about irregularities
in the electoral process. That idea was also underlined
by several other opposition political parties, as well as

civil society organizations; they pointed in particular
to discrepancies in the voter census, as only 735,000
voters had been registered. Prime Minister Gomes and
the President of the National Electoral Commission
explained that ECOWAS was auditing the voter registry
and that once the audit was complete, the Gabinete
Tecnico de Apoio ao Processo Eleitoral - the office
for technical support in the electoral process - would
correct any anomalies that had been identified.
During the visit, the presence of the ECOWAS
Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB), a military
force of 600 personnel, was visible. In the meeting
with the group of five, the ECOWAS representative
noted that the Mission was costly and could be
withdrawn in September 2019. Meanwhile, UNIOGBIS
recommended the maintenance of ECOMIB in Guinea-
Bissau, given that its role in the current context remains
highly necessary.

Another issue raised during the visit was the
constitutional reform envisaged in the Conakry
Agreement to clarify the powers of the President of the
Republic and the Prime Minister. The representatives
of the group of five warned that the priority should be
the holding of legislative and presidential elections, as
the parties had strongly opposing ideas with regard to
reform. However, we were informed of the possibility
that the reform of the Constitution would be pushed after
the renewal of Parliament and that the Government was
considering that possibility, which would be carried out
by referendum.

On the other hand, our speakers highlighted the
fact that Guinea-Bissau's problems have historically
not been with the holding of elections, but in the
post-electoral period. In that connection, there were
discussions that revealed the weakness of Guinea-
Bissau's institutions. In that regard, the need for the
United Nations to continue to support Guinea-Bissau
was highlighted.

At our meeting with Mr. Cipriano Cassama, the
President of the National Assembly, he said that a
reconfiguration of UNIOGBIS should provide for
continued assistance to address issues such as drug
trafficking, child trafficking and corruption. The
civil society representatives, while expressing their
appreciation for the support of the international
community over the years, made strong appeals to
the mission for the continued presence of the United
Nations to provide solid support to Guinea-Bissau in
the implementation of its reforms.

Among other issues, the role of the military was
brought to the attention of the members of the Council
and it was emphasized that it had been constantly
removed from political disputes since the restoration
of constitutional order in 2014. A representative of
the group of five stressed that security sector reform
depended on donors financing the pension fund.
During the meeting with civil society organizations and
President Vaz, Security Council members were asked
to lift the travel ban sanctions that the Council had
maintained against the 10 military officers involved
in the April 2012 coup. Several speakers said that the
sanctions should be applied to those who had caused
the most electoral delays, who were not members of the
military but rather the politicians.

It should also be noted that Council members met
with representatives ofcivil society organizations. They
discussed, among other issues, the humanitarian and
security situation, in particular the issue of women's
participation at all levels of the decision-making
process in the areas of peace and security, including
security, economic and social structures, which very
often prevent many women from participating in
elections. Security Council members encouraged the
Government and other parties to continue to redouble
their efforts to strengthen the political participation of
women in all electoral and political processes. In that
regard, they commended the adoption of the Parity Law,
which seeks to ensure a minimum quota of 36 per cent
representation of women in elections, local Governments
and appointments to the National Assembly.

The last meeting of the members of the Security
Council was with His Excellency President Vaz at the
presidential palace on 16 February, which coincided with
the start of the electoral campaign. Council members
reiterated that the purpose of the Council's visit was to
help Guinea-Bissau emerge from the political crisis and
the importance of the legislative elections to be held on
10 March, as well as the presidential elections. President
Vaz responded by giving priority to the legislative
elections, which would be followed by a programme of
institutional reforms. The Council members stressed to
President Vaz the importance of dialogue in resolving
the crisis and highlighted the regional and subregional
repercussions of the political stalemate, the threat of
transnational organized crime in Guinea-Bissau, drug
trafficking and the fear that terrorists and extremists
would take advantage of the situation to further
destabilize Guinea-Bissau and the region. That was the
message that we conveyed to all political and civilian
actors with whom we met.

We believe that the outcome of the visit is entirely
positive. All our counterparts were receptive. It is
now up to all political forces to set the country on
the path to peace, stability and the strengthening of
democratic institutions.

Allow me to conclude this report by expressing
my sincere thanks to all Security Council members,
whose active participation, collaboration, flexibility
and understanding in the face of the very busy agenda
of the visit allowed it to go smoothly.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

On behalf of the Council, I would like to express
appreciation to all members of the Security Council
and the Secretariat who participated in the mission
for the manner in which they discharged their
important responsibilities.

The meeting rose at10.35 am.
