Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank the presidency
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands for organizing
this high-level debate on peacekeeping operations and
for building on the momentum generated over recent
years on the reform agenda. We are pleased to see you,
Mr. Prime Minister, presiding over this meeting, which
demonstrates the importance that your country attaches
to reforming and strengthening the role of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

We thank the Secretary-General for his briefing,
as well as for his leadership on the issue. Allow me to
say how grateful we are for his statement today, which
was frank, incisive and comprehensive. He has said all
that needs to be said. It is a must-read statement indeed.

We are also pleased that Chairperson Moussa Faki
Mahamat was able to join us via video-teleconference,
and we thank him for his remarks. We are proud of
what he has been doing to revitalize the African Union
Commission. Let me take this opportunity to express
how pleased we are to see the excellent cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
under their respective new leadership.

We also thank Ms. Fatimata Toure for her remarks.
The Security Council mission was in Mali and two
other countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel in
October last year. We therefore had the opportunity to
appreciate the deep concern she expressed and shared
with us. We thank her.

We all agree that United Nations peacekeeping
operations are one of the most important tools that we
have in the promotion and maintenance of international
peace and security. That is why we continue to attach
great importance to United Nations peacekeeping. But
at the same time, we know that the peace and security
challenges we face today are by far different from
those we faced in the early days of United Nations
peacekeeping. That is why there is a need to change and
adapt to the new reality in order to be able to effectively
respond to the challenges and threats of our time.

Of course, the discussion on the reform of United
Nations peacekeeping has been ongoing for more
than two years now. There are many good ideas and
recommendations that have been generated through
those discussions. It therefore seems to us, as was also
alluded to by the Secretary-General, that now is the
time to prioritize implementation. What matters most
is taking practical steps to move the reform process
forward. It is vitally important that we avoid getting
bogged down in the same old discussions, some of
which have been with us since the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809), issued more 17 years ago. We thank the
Secretary-General for making the reform agenda his
top priority and for the important measures that he is
taking in that regard. That was manifest in his statement
today. Let me now raise a couple of issues.

We agree that there is a need to change our mindset
for the reform process to succeed. That is absolutely
important. Part of the new way of thinking should be
that reform of United Nations peacekeeping requires
the involvement of everybody. Therefore, the idea of a
shared responsibility involving all actors - including
host nations, regional organizations, the Security
Council, troop- and police-contributing countries
and the Secretariat - is very critical. That should be
front and centre in the whole reform process because
there is a great need to alter the tendency, which is
often apparent, to look at reform only from a narrow
perspective. It is vitally important that this tendency be
avoided and discarded.

We very much appreciate that there is a lot going on
at the moment in terms of reforms, which is not limited
to peace and security. What is involved is a reform
process that is system-wide, encompassing management
and development reforms as well. We certainly see a lot
of synergy among all those reform processes, and we
understand the enormous significance that they have in
avoiding fragmentation and ensuring a holistic approach

to addressing peace and security threats and challenges
across the whole conflict cycle, from prevention and
resolution to peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

That said, however, we understand that it is
practically impossible to implement those reforms all
at the same time and in one go, and we see value in
prioritization. Taking the incremental approach in
undertaking those reforms will have a better chance of
delivering the desired result. As recommended by the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/466), the Secretariat should be
much more field-focused. While appreciating the bold
steps that are being proposed to reduce bureaucratic
barriers and ensure greater efficiency, we should be
careful not to make the reform process too centred on
structures and processes at the Headquarters, without
having much impact in the field. Here again, propositions
and visions have been laid out in a convincing manner.
What remains is implementation on the ground in an
equally convincing manner.

Peacekeepers can only be expected to effectively
deliver on their mandate of protecting civilians, while
ensuring their own safety and security, if they are
provided with the necessary resources and capabilities,
which are matched with the needs and requirements on
the ground. Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat rightly
stressed that point. The issue of performance and
accountability can be meaningfully addressed if those
necessary conditions are fulfilled. That is in no way
meant to understate the value of ensuring accountability
and compliance with the required standard of
performance. It is rather a call for balanced judgment
and objectivity. It is very obvious that we have yet to
address that challenge. That, at any rate, is the view
of troop- and police-contributing countries. We are
hopeful that the ongoing reform will seriously address
the challenge, which is critical to the effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping.

The other important point that should also be
emphasized is the need for global-regional partnerships,
which are no longer a matter of choice, but one of
necessity. That has been a topic of discussion here in
the Council, and it is encouraging to note that there
is now greater appreciation of that important reality.
Such partnerships are no doubt instrumental, not only
in enhancing the responsiveness of the United Nations
in addressing conflict situations, but also in ensuring
greater efficiency and effectiveness. We are pleased that
the Secretary-General has attached great importance
to the issue and is already taking important steps to
significantly enhance the partnership, for obvious
reasons, with the African Union.

Those important reforms cannot be carried out
without bringing all Member States on board. That
is no doubt frustrating, as building the necessary
consensus is never easy, but it is indispensable and
without alternative. It is, however, undeniable that at
present summoning the needed political will is bound
to be difficult, though not unachievable. It is doable
because it is in the common interest of all to ensure that
the reforms succeed, including those involving peace
operations. But that is going to require every effort
to be made to build trust and a spirit of compromise
among Member States. That is why there is need to
work in close consultation and partnership with troop-
contributing countries and other relevant stakeholders.

As one of the leading troop-contributing countries,
we definitely attach great importance to strengthening
the United Nations peace operations in all their aspects.
Our long-standing contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping operations is because of our history
dictated by a strong conviction in multilateralism
and collective security. That can be attested to by
our track record over the past 70 years, as well as the
performance of the thousands of our peacekeepers who
are currently operating in some of the most volatile
conflict situations, making sacrifices for the cause of
regional and international peace and security.

I wish to conclude by reaffirming Ethiopia's
commitment to continuing to play an active role in
enhancing the role of United Nations peacekeeping.

