Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Ethiopian presidency
of the Security Council for holding today's important
meeting in response to paragraph 11 of resolution 2309
(2016). I should also like to extend my appreciation to
Ms. Fang Liu, Secretary General of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), forher briefing today.

The meeting held on 7 July by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism (CTC) on terrorist threats
to civil aviation was one of the most important meetings
held by the CTC in 2017, given the importance of the
topic. As we have heard, that meeting resulted in an
important outcome that should be fully respected and
implemented.

In that vein, I note the relevance of resolution 2309
(2016), which stresses the important and pivotal role
of the International Civil Aviation Organization in
the implementation of that resolution and in all areas
related to civil aviation and in the implementation
of the Convention on International Civil Aviation to
protect civil aviation against terrorist risks and threats.
The resolution welcomes the work of ICAO to protect
civil aviation. It calls on ICAO, within its mandate, to
continue and enhance its efforts to establish compliance
with international aviation security standards through
effective implementation on the ground, and to assist
Member States in this regard.

We underscore the need for States to comply with the
implementation of resolution 2309 (2016), including all
its provisions, such as guarding against the use of civil
aviation as a tool to transport foreign terrorist fighters.
It stresses the need for all States to protect the security
of their nationals from terrorist attacks targeting civil
aviation, in accordance with international law. We also
reiterate the need for all States to do what it takes, in
accordance with international law and relevant Security
Council resolutions, to prevent and combat terrorism,
including terrorism that targets or uses civil aviation.

In that regard, Egypt has been taking internal
measures to protect its people and territory against any
terrorist attack that could target civil aviation. Egypt is
pursuing its close cooperation with friendly countries
and ICAO. Recently, we conducted a comprehensive
review of practices in Egyptian airports to ensure
the implementation of global security standards, in
accordance with the Chicago Convention.

Additionally, Egypt is implementing effective
measures to assess risks in Egyptian airports with a View
to strengthening security screening and audits, as well
as the security of facilities, and detecting and deterring
terrorist attacks against civil aviation. Egyptian
authorities conduct regular and comprehensive reviews
and assessments of those measures to ensure that they
manage evolving threats and that they are in line with
the ICAO Standards and Recommended Practices.

In that respect, the ICAO aviation audit team has
given Egypt a positive assessment for its application
of the standard security procedures set forth in the
Chicago Convention. Egyptian authorities received a
formal letter on 17 August from the Chair of the ICAO
audit team, indicating the progress made by Egypt in
reaching the highest standards of aviation security.

To conclude, Egypt underscores the need to secure
the financial resources required by ICAO to enhance
its ability to carry out its functions and assist States
in the implementation of the Chicago Convention
and the Global Aviation Security Plan. We may also
consider that the Fund for Counter-Terrorism finances
the projects carried out by ICAO in different States to
protect civil aviation from terrorist risks and threats.

