Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): As we approach the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations, it is a
fitting time to reflect on how we, the Member States,
and our representatives on the Security Council uphold
the guiding principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, specifically peace, security and the respect for
human rights and the dignity of persons.

The Charter underscores the Security Council's
important work in the protection of civilians and, by
extension, the promotion of equality between women
and men, as well as the empowerment, human rights,
protection and well-being of women and girls in
situations that pose a threat to international peace
and security. It is important that we address how the
Council must evolve in order to respond to shifting and
emerging peace and security issues, and meet those
responsibilities.

(spoke in French)

The legitimacy of the United Nations family, in
particular that of the Security Council, depends upon its
effectiveness, the quality and timeliness of its decisions
and its ability to mobilize the necessary support for
action in times of crisis. The primary responsibility
of the Security Council is to maintain international
peace and security. We cannot allow this body to be
used for political self-interest, thereby flouting the very
principles on which it was founded. We cannot stand
idly by while innocent civilians, women and children are
made the targets of atrocities, a tactic that has become
frighteningly common in modern-day conflicts. As
a Member State, Canada expects the Council to act
when the guiding principles of the United Nations are
flouted or disregarded, and thereby threatening peace
and security. Those responsible for serious violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
must be held to account. We expect the members of
the Council to respect the independence, sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of other Member States.
Unfortunately, that has not been borne out in Ukraine.

(spoke in English)

Fundamentally, the United Nations and the Charter
itself will be judged not by words but on the ability to
act to preserve international peace and security and to

protect the most vulnerable. The horrific events in the

Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)-affected

areas of Iraq and Syria add impetus to the need for the
Council to show real leadership in support of women
and girls in particular. The rampant sexual violence
and abuse perpetrated by ISIL against women is an
assault on all of our values. The most recent killings of
21 Egyptian Christians in Libya, again at the hands of
terrorists, is a stark reminder that people are killed daily
around the world for their beliefs. In ourjudegment, the
freedom of religion is a litmus test of the degree with
which other fundamental freedoms can be ignored.

In Darfur mass rapes occur, and the Government
simply covers them up. Without further delay, the
United Nations must properly investigate the abuses
that have taken place, and the Government of the Sudan
must be held to account for its complicity in the hiding
of such horrific crimes. In Syria the Al-Assad regime
has dropped barrel bombs and used chemical weapons
against its own people. Hundreds of thousands ofpeople
are not receiving the emergency life-saving assistance
that they are in dire need of because the regime will not
let humanitarian aid get through.

(spoke in French)

Those few examples serve as daily reminders that
in far too many places civilians are deliberately targeted
and continue to suffer from unspeakable crimes. That
reality stands in stark contrast to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. All
too often, implementation falls short of translating
the decisions of the Council into concrete actions. The
Council must act and exercise real leadership to ensure
that those failures can be overcome. It must be willing
to exercise the full range of options at its disposal to
stop violence against the most vulnerable. Faced with
the many challenges before us - combating violent
extremism, the use of sexual violence and rape as a
weapon of war, the targeting of civilians, especially
women and children, protracted humanitarian crises,
and public health emergencies that threaten years
of development gains and the stability of affected
countries - it is time to act decisively in those areas
where we continue to fall short.

(spoke in English)

In our judgement, it is critical that we defend our
principles with concrete action. Vulnerable populations
around the world deserve the full commitment of the
United Nations. The United Nations and the Security
Council can continue to rely on our country to support
those efforts and to promote freedom, democracy, human

rights and the rule of law - the very underpinnings of
the Charter of the United Nations - wherever in the
world that support may be required.

