Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and her
team for their substantive briefing.

Equatorial Guinea welcomes the definitive
destruction of the 27 chemical weapons-production
facilities declared by the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic. The verification of that information
was requested in previous meetings, and we should
indeed be pleased that the Technical Secretariat of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) made all the arrangements necessary for
the verification of that information. It is a significant
step forward that should encourage the parties to take
concrete steps towards the implementation of the
relevant provisions of resolution 2118 (2013), and the
members ofthe Security Council to return to unanimity
in addressing this important and sensitive issue.

With regard to the security of OPCW personnel, we
believe that access to places of investigation requires
that the security of the Mission be guaranteed on a
permanent basis, in accordance with the provisions of
the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention, held on 26 and 27 June. In
that regard, we encourage the OPCW secretariat to
implement the new measures aimed at mitigating the
high security risks proposed by the United Nations
Department of Safety and Security.

The efforts and, above all, the contributions of
countries and international organizations to the Trust
Fund for Syrian Missions, which currently amounts
to €17.1 million, deserve our praise. Those resources
should undoubtedly be used to further support the
activities of the OPCW in Syria.

Faced with the current context of the terrorist threat
in north-western Syria and the offensives of the Syrian
Government that are making progress in recovering
territories, the parties must continue to consider
the importance of upholding international treaties,
especially the Chemical Weapons Convention. It is
also worth recalling is that the authorities of the Syrian
Arab Republic should prioritize their cooperation with
the OPCW Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic so that no single case of chemical weapons
use goes uninvestigated and that those responsible do
not go unidentified.
The principled position of Equatorial Guinea on
chemical weapons has not changed. It has always been
clear and consistent. We are firmly opposed to the use
of chemical weapons by any country, organization,
group of States or person in any circumstance. The use
of chemical weapons is unjustifiable and intolerable
anywhere, at any time.

The Security Council and the OPCW are the
primary channels for addressing the problem of Syrian
chemical weapons. We recognize the important role
they have played, and we hope that the stakeholders
will adopt a constructive approach in order to find a
solution through direct and unhindered dialogue that
can prevent and put a definitive end to any future use
of chemical weapons in the Arab Republic of Syria
by any party. In that context, it is essential to create a
mechanism to identify those responsible for the use of
chemical weapons, to make formal accusations against
them and to prosecute them. That will require the unity
of the Security Council.

In conclusion, I reiterate that in the view of the
Government of Equatorial Guinea, it is now understood
that a political process is the only viable solution to the
problem of the Syrian Arab Republic. The international
community must continue cooperating with the parties
concerned in order to reach a political solution that
respects the sovereignty, the independence, the unity
and the territorial integrity of the people of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

