Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I want at the outset to
thank those who voted in favour of this balanced draft
resolution (S/2006/878). We thank Qatar, the Arab
Group, the Organization of the Islamic Conference and
the Non-Aligned Movement, which unanimously asked
for the convening of a Security Council meeting and
sponsored the draft resolution. We are disappointed
that the draft resolution was not adopted. Palestine has
been disappointed again.

The Security Council today has conveyed two
wrong messages. It has conveyed to Israel that it can
continue to behave as though it were above
international law. It has conveyed to the Palestinian
people that, with regard to their issue, the Security
Council is not dealing with justice in the proper way.

But our people, in spite of this disappointment,
will never lose hope. Justice will prevail. Occupation
will eventually come to an end. This aggression, which
has been continuing in Gaza for the past five months,
has not broken the will of our people and will never do
so. Only through negotiations - not massacres and
aggression - will we be able to move forward to find
a just solution to this conflict.

As our nation commemorates today the second
anniversary of the death of our historic leader, Yasser
Arafat, we are committed more than ever to
accomplishing our national objectives. Our President,
Mahmoud Abbas, stated today in Ramallah, at the
second-anniversary commemoration of the death of
President Arafat, that we are committed to the two-
State solution. One has been in existence since 1948;
ours needs to be established in all the area occupied by
Israel in June 1967, including East Jerusalem, with a
just solution to the Palestinian refugee issue, based on
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

We will never lose faith in the great principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. Our
6
belief in the United Nations, including the Security
Council, will never weaken. We will continue to come
to the Council and other bodies of the United Nations
system until justice prevails.

