The Secretary-General (spoke in French): If I may be permitted, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo will brief the Security Council on behalf of the Secretariat. (spoke in English) However, I would like to say a few words to express my deep concern about what I believe is the changing nature of the conflict in Idlib. The Council is well aware of the desperate humanitarian situation in the region, namely, following the most recent offensive. But beyond the desperate humanitarian situation, I think that it is important to acknowledge that the conflict has changed in nature and we have witnessed a very significant escalation in the past few days. I want to take this opportunity to express my deep gratitude to Ambassador Nebenzia of the Russian Federation and Ambassador Sinirlioglu of Turkey, who have always made themselves available to me, not only allowing the necessary contacts but also facilitating other contacts with the two countries that have been very useful in my commitment to follow the events very closely. Indeed, if one looks at what has happened in recent days, knowing that there was a telephone conversation between the Presidents of the Republic of Turkey and of the Russian Federation this morning and a Russian delegation in Ankara, which met the day beforeyesterday, yesterday and today, without, as far as I am informed, a solution having been found, I think that all this creates an environment in which the risk of an uncontrolled escalation, given the number of forces in Idlib and surrounding areas, is something that cannot be taken lightly. When I have been insisting on the need to stop the fighting and for a ceasefire, I have therefore been taking into account not only the humanitarian consequences of the fighting - and of course any escalation would inevitably have more desperate humanitarian consequences - but also the enormous risk that a potential escalation could in itself represent a conflict of a different nature that could have a much more tragic impact. I would now like to ask Ms. DiCarlo to brief the Council.
