Mrs. Papadopoulou (Greece): I would like to
join others in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Gambari and Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for
their briefings today.

In the last few days, we have been witnessing
events in the Middle East spiralling out of control and
reaching new, unacceptable levels of violence and
tension unseen in the last few years. The situation
seems to be worsening by the hour.

It was only two weeks ago that, during our last
discussion on the developments in the region (see S/PV.5481), we expressed our great concern over the
violence in the Palestinian territories and condemned in
the strongest possible terms the killing of an Israeli
civilian hostage and the continuing holding of an
Israeli soldier, as well as the killings of innocent
civilians, including women and children, by the Israeli
armed forces.
Today we can only stress once more our deep
concern at the latest events unfolding as we speak, this
time around the border between Israel and Lebanon, an
area which has been enjoying relative calm over the
last six years.
We deplore the recent attack by Hizbollah which
resulted in the killing of a number of Israeli soldiers
and the abduction of another two, as well as its
continuing firing of Katyusha rockets into Israeli
territory, which has led to the killing of at least two
civilians and the wounding of many more. We call
upon Hizbollah to release the two abducted soldiers
immediately and without preconditions and to refrain
from such actions in the future.

We equally deplore and express our deep alarm at
the Israeli counterattacks, which have resulted in the
killing of more than 50 Lebanese civilians, including
10 children, and the wounding of 100 more, as well as
in the destruction of civilian infrastructure in the
country. We continue to believe that, while preserving
the right of self-defence, Israel must respect its
obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law, as well as the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
Actions which are contrary to international law can
only aggravate the vicious circle of violence and
retribution and cannot serve anyone's legitimate
security concerns.

In that respect, we call upon Israel to
immediately halt the disproportionate use of force, put
an end to its attacks against civilian population areas
and public infrastructure, such as the international
airport of Beirut, refrain from violating Lebanese air
space and lift the naval and air blockade of Lebanon.

It is imperative for the Lebanese Government to
take effective and immediate strong action to prevent
further attacks against Israel by Hizbollah. At the same
time, it is of crucial importance not to jeopardize the
stability of Lebanon, while preserving and respecting
its sovereignty and territorial integrity by, inter alia,
full implementation of Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 1559 (2004).

We express our support with regard to the appeal
of the Lebanese Government for a comprehensive
ceasefire and call upon all parties concerned to
exercise restraint and demonstrate a spirit of
composure, which is absolutely necessary in this very
critical moment.

In that context, Greece would like to express its
strong support for the upcoming mission of the
Secretary-General's envoys in the region and its hope
that it can obtain concrete results in the immediate

future in terms of re-stabilizing the situation in the
area.

