The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Lebanon, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Assaf
(Lebanon), took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/36, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon. Members also have before them document
S/2005/53, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Denmark, France, Greece, Romania, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.

I should also like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to documents S/2005/l3,
S/2005/23, 8/2005/24, S/2005/25, 8/2005/26, which
contain letters from the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon, and documents S/2005/14 and S/2005/40,
containing letters from the Permanent Representative
of Israel.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
If I hear no objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.

There being no vote, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China,
Denmark, France, Greece, Japan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America


The President (spoke in Spanish): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1583 (2005).

I now give the floor to those members of the
Council that wish to take the floor after the vote.


