Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting at short
notice. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman and Alexander Hug, Deputy Chief Monitor
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine,
for their assessments of and briefings on the reality on
the ground in Donbas, eastern Ukraine.

When in February Russian-backed forces occupied
Debaltseve in violation of existing ceasefire agreements,
many worried that that violation would not be the last and
that, just like the September 2014 Minsk agreements,
the February 2015 agreement was also signed only to
be broken. The only question was when.

For some time now, the OSCE Mission has been
reporting violations of the Minsk agreements and
an increased movement of heavy weaponry in the
territories held by the illegal militants. For example,
the 3 June OSCE Mission report states that the Mission
observed the movement of a large amount of heavy
weapons in areas controlled by the so-called Donetsk
People's Republic - generally in a westerly direction
towards the contact line - close to Marinka, preceding
and during the fighting. Between 10.30 pm. on 2 June
and 5.30 am. on 3 June, the Mission - positioned in
the Tekstilshchik area of Donetsk city, controlled by
the so-called Donetsk People's Republic i made a
number of observations. It observed, inter alia, eight
tracked armoured vehicles moving west, four of which
were main battle tanks, at 10.30 p.m.; four main battle
tanks at 11.03 p.m.; a military-type truck moving west,
towing a 122-millimetre artillery piece, at 11.45 p.m.;
two T-64 battle tanks moving west at 4.30 a.m.; and a
column of one infantry fighting vehicle, three military
trucks - one carrying an ZU-23-2 anti-aircraft
gun - and two T-72 main battle tanks moving west at
4.50 am. Such reports have been increasingly frequent
in the last few days.

The military attack against the Ukrainian positions
in Marinka and Krasnogorivka and the use of multiple
rocket launcher systems against Pisky, Nevelske and
Vodiane in the pre-dawn hours of 3 June are a most
serious blow to the increasingly fragile status quo of
the implementation of the Minsk agreements. Under
attack, the Ukrainian military has had no choice but
to inform the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission that
in order to defend themselves they would need to move
weapons toward the line of contact to respond to these
attacks by Russian-separatist forces.

Notably, the Special Monitoring Mission made
several attempts to contact the leaders of the so-
called Donetsk People's Republic, including the self-
proclaimed Prime Minister, Parliamentary Speaker,
Minister of Defence and Chief of the General Staff,
in order to facilitate a cessation to the fighting around
Marinka. None of the calls were taken. According to
the Mission staff, all were either unavailable or did
not wish to speak. This is not how anyone caring for a
fragile ceasefire would behave. On the contrary, such
behaviour indicates a clear intent to go on the offensive
in breach of all existing agreements. Notably, according
to the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission, last week,
outgoing automatic grenade launcher fire from within
the city was heard, indicating that the so-called Donetsk
People's Republic is using residential areas to launch
their attacks, posing deliberate and grave risks to the
local population.

Furthermore, the self-proclaimed leaders of the
illegal armed groups do not hide their intention to
seek more territory. Just recently the self-proclaimed
militant boss Zakharchenko told journalists:
"Slaviansk, Konstantynivka, Krasnoarmiysk are towns
of the Donetsk People's Republic", indicating intent to
take them by force. Little does it matter to him and his
peers that they have no legitimate claim whatsoever
on the sovereign territory of the State of Ukraine and
its people, to which and to whom he and his peers,
supported and armed by Russia, have done and continue
to do incalculable damage.

The Council has put its weight behind the
Minsk agreements, unequivocally demanding their
implementation in resolution 2202 (2015). Among other
things, these agreements demanded full withdrawal of
heavy weapons, foreign armed formations, military
equipment and mercenaries from the territory of
Ukraine, called for safe, free and unrestricted access for
the monitors of the Special Monitoring Mission in all
parts of eastern Ukraine, and stressed the release of all
hostages. However, all points of the Minsk agreements
have been ignored or wilfully breached by the proxy
militants.

Persistent flows of foreign fighters and weapons
from the Russian Federation, as noted in the latest
report of the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, continue to fuel the conflict. Ukraine's
eastern borders remain open to the supply of arms and
heavy weapons. Russian soldiers have been captured
on Ukrainian soil. Russian soldiers continue to die
anonymously on the Ukrainian soil. Thanks to arms
supplies, the illegal militants have a larger and better
equipped military force than quite a few European
States and NATO members; it is probably the largest
illegal army ever. The comings and goings across the
border of individuals in military uniforms without
insignia, and most recently with the insignia of the
armed forces of the Russian Federation, as reported by
the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission.

OSCE monitors can observe less than 1 per cent of
the conflict border. Ifthis is happening before their eyes,
it is quite easy to guess what is happening in places that
they cannot observe, where there are no international
monitors. OSCE observers continue to be intimidated
and, as noted earlier, threatened and systematically
denied access by the illegal Russian militant proxies;
OSCE unmanned aerial vehicles are jammed. The
training, arming and financing of militants continues
unimpeded. Heavy weapons have not been completely
withdrawn, have been moved around a great deal and
are being returned to the frontline. Ukrainian coal is
being smuggled out of the country and into Russia in
broad daylight while Ukraine itself suffers from a coal

shortage. The so-called humanitarian convoys continue
their comings and goings as if eastern Ukraine were
Russia's own backyard. Prisoner exchanges are stalling.
The former United Nations peacekeeper, Ukrainian
pilot Nadiya Savchenko, remains illegally imprisoned.
Oleg Sentsov and other Ukrainian citizens are being
illegally detained in Russia.

We support the efforts of the United Nations, the
OSCE and other international actors aimed at finding
solutions to this conflict, including through the
strengthened good offices of the Secretary-General.
We call on the Secretary-General to redouble his
efforts and act fast, before the conflict claims more
lives and flares up once again. We also support the idea
of strengthening the United Nations presence on the
ground, including through the setting up of a United
Nations peace support office.

And yet today we reiterate our strong support for
the independence, unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine, with Crimea as an integral
part. And yet today, because of a Russian-supported
asymmetrical war accompanied by an aggressive
propaganda campaign, Crimea remains occupied and
Ukraine finds itself among the top 10 countries in
terms of the number of internally displaced persons.
The conflict has claimed some 6,500 lives, while many
more - including the children of eastern Ukraine - are
wounded or displaced, living in subhuman conditions
and constant fear.

Today, as tensions risk to explode once again into
open military conflict, sadly, Russia chooses once
again to blame the victim, Ukraine, for defending itself,
while protecting and arming the illegal militants. We
have said time and again that it is up to Russia to rein
in the illegal militants and put an end to this bloody
conflict which it started with the occupation of Crimea
over a year ago. For its part, Ukraine has done and
continues to do everything within its power to uphold
the fragile ceasefire agreement. But like any country
under attack, Ukraine has the right and the duty before
its citizens to defend itselfin the face of aggression. No
one can take that right away.

As the illegal militants and Russian proxies
continue their blatant attempts to change facts on the
ground, we must stand firm with the people of Ukraine
and the United Nations Charter in condemning such
criminal efforts. We call on all the parties to respect
all existing agreements and the ceasefire and redouble

their efforts to move forward in the Trilateral Contact
Group.

