Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Jeffrey Feltman and Stephen
O'Brien for their briefings.

As a result of the cessation of hostilities, which was
put in place thanks to the leading role of the Russian
Federation and the United States and confirmed in
resolution 2268 (2016), the level of violence in Syria
has significantly decreased. That move was a real
breakthrough in the protracted conflict. New prospects
for a peaceful resolution have opened up, and the
Syrians have to decide for themselves the parameters
of that peaceful resolution with the support of the
United Nations.

Overall, the two rounds of negotiations went very
well. However, not all of the opposition forces showed
a willingness to reach an agreement. Once again, a
separate position was adopted by the Riyadh group,
which still has not formulated a clear position. In many
parts of Syria the truce has been observed. Numerous
armed units and towns are joining the truce, thanks to
the efforts of the Syria Reconciliation Centre opened
by Russia in Hmeymim. Today, there are 90 such towns
covered by the truce. At the same time, hundreds of
meetings with the city elders, field commanders and
representatives of local administrations have been
carried out. And in a number ofprovinces, peaceful life
is slowly returning.

We should not question the radical improvement
of the situation resulting from the implementation
of the cessation of hostilities, which has, however,
spurred on others who are interested in perpetuating
the Syrian conflict. We also believe that it is counter-
productive to express public criticism about unverified
incidents simply to add new charges against the Syrian
Government. That has occurred more than once. The
deterioration in certain areas of Syria, including Aleppo,
is a serious source of concern. Government forces are
fighting off a large-scale offensive by the jihadists. In
the past few days, we have seen a significant increase
in shelling from the parts of the city controlled by
jihadists. So-called hell's cannons are being used - gas
canisters packed with tiny metal fragments, which have
a devastating effect. Those weapons are by definition
indiscriminate and are meant to destroy and terrorize
the civilian population.

We were long promised that the armed units of
the so-called moderate opposition would break off all
links with Al-Nusra, withdraw from the territories they
occupy and clearly state their readiness to take part
in the peace settlement. That has not occurred so far,
which raises the question of whether the political will
exists among those who have an influence on the various
players. We are beginning to get the impression that
external sponsors cannot or do not want to influence
the Syrian opposition groups in order to force them to
distance themselves from the terrorists.

Russia and the United States of America, as
co-Chairs of the International Syria Support Group,
are ready to continue working together to ensure
de-escalation. At least that is how we would like to see
the situation to evolve. Russian and American military
experts are working together on a daily basis. As we
speak, a joint centre for rapid response to breaches of
the cessation of hostilities has begun to operate on a
permanent basis in Geneva, maximizing the effective
monitoring of the situation. It must be said say that,
from the very beginning of our increased participation
in the Syrian situation in October, Russia has proposed
such cooperation to the United States. Unfortunately,
it has taken more than six months to achieve it, but we
hope that this will be an important step in our efforts to
stop the bloodshed in Syria.

Thanks to the efforts in the military and political
spheres, calm has been restored in Latakia and eastern
Ghouta, with the aim of making it permanent. Russia
and the United States, with the agreement of the
Government of Syria and the moderate opposition,
hoped to introduce a regime of calm in Aleppo on
3 May. However, that planned timetable was derailed
by attacks by terrorist groups. That day, the insurgents
sought to break the defences through coordinated
offences from the west, preceded by a massive artillery
bombardment. Jabhat Al-Nusra, Ahrar ash-Sham,
Jaish al-Islam, Harakat Nour al-Din al-Zenki and local
criminal groups took part in the offensive. All those
groups shelled residential areas the whole day long;
in particular, the Martyrs of Badr Brigade claimed
responsibility for the destruction of Al-Dabit maternity
hospital. Over the past 24 hours, dozens of people were
killed and hundreds were wounded.

The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, Jabhat
Al-Nusra and other terrorist groups are excluded from
the cessation of hostilities regime. It is unacceptable
to pause in the fight with terrorists so as to allow them
to regroup. No one will spare the terrorists and those
who are in breach ofthe cessation of hostilities required
United Nations resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2268 (2016).

We would add that the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) has genuine
evidence of the use of mustard gas in Syria, and thee
are serious grounds to believe that war gases are
being used by terrorists. There is an alarming risk that
they have the capacity to produce toxic substances,
as recently confirmed by the Director-General of the
OPCW. It is unfortunate that, just when we need to take
all necessary steps to impede the activities of chemical
terrorists, some Western members of the Council,
under contrived pretexts, are stifling the Russian-
Chinese initiative aimed at neutralizing the threat of
the production of chemical weapons by terrorists in and
around Syria.

We need to pursue our very serious work on the
issue of the Syrian peace settlement and support for
Russian-American efforts. Let us speak clearly a we
need to put an end to all provocations once and for. It is
clear that without external support for terrorist groups
in Syria, they could not operate on such a scale. We
need help in cutting off supplies to terrorists, first and
foremost across the Syrian-Turkish border. Parties
under patronage should be compelled to come to the
negotiating table, which will contribute to ensuring
peace in Syria. Iwould like to repeat in a slightly different
form a rhetorical question posed by one speaker: How
could you allow the destruction of an ancient country in
a prolonged, bloody conflict to achieve the geopolitical
aims of one party or its partners?

We hope that the Geneva talks will resume in May
and lead the way to further negotiations. We call on
all sides to participate constructively in dialogue and
to refrain from threats or sabotage. As for the press
statement proposed by the United Kingdom, we will
of course consider it, but we would have viewed it as
a truly serious attempt to urge the Security Council
to contribute to the maintenance of the cessation of
hostilities if the delegation of the United Kingdom had
consulted with the co-Chairs of the International Syria
Support Group, Russia and the United States, which
are spearheading the ceasefire efforts. As I see it now,
it is more of a propaganda gesture. However, we will
take a look at the text and consult with our military
colleagues, who, alongside our American colleagues,
are doing relevant work in Geneva.

