Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to thank you, Sir for organizing this open debate
and the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing. We
reiterate once again Uruguay's total support for his
efforts.

In 1947, the General Assembly, including Uruguay,
adopted resolution 181 (II), which decreed the partition
of Palestine to create an Arab State and a Jewish State.
Uruguay voted in favour, convinced that the decision
would allow the establishment of two States, Israel
and Palestine, that would live in peace withing secure
borders. The position of Uruguay has not changed since
then.

In the seven decades since the adoption of
resolution 181 (11), Israel has established itself as a full,
modern State and member of the Organization, while
Palestine continues to face serious difficulties in its
development and international integration, resulting in
serious consequences for its population and an increase
of tensions in the whole region. Undoubtedly, this is
a particularly relevant time on the long and winding
road to peace in the Middle East. The adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016) and the recently concluded
peace conference in France both clearly indicate the
urgency that the international community attaches to
the peaceful and successful conclusion of the peace
process.

Uruguay reaffirms, as it has since 1947, its
unwavering support for the right of Israel and Palestine
to live in peace within secure and recognized borders
and in an atmosphere of renewed cooperation, free of
any threat to peace or acts that could undermine peace.
My delegation also reiterates its support for the two
independent States solution, as it is convinced that that
is the only option that would allow for the peaceful
coexistence of Israel and Palestine. In that regard, we
call once again for the resumption of direct negotiations
between both parties, which is essential to achieving the
desired goal. It is crucial that their authorities give clear
political signals to each other and to the international
community in order to escape the current vicious
circle of misunderstandings and violent confrontations
between the parties. Similarly, it is necessary that they
refrain from unilateral decision-making that could
act as a barrier to dialogue, and that they comply in
good faith with their obligations under international
law and with the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Moreover, in the light of several announcements made
by key third-party countries to the process, composure
and reflection are needed in order to avoid measures
that might seriously affect the future of negotiations
and the two-State solution.

Last week Uruguay strongly condemned the
terrorist attack committed in Jerusalem on 8 January,
showing its solidarity with the victims, their families
and Israel, and once again reiterating its total rejection
of such acts, which pose a serious threat to the peace
process in the Middle East. We are distressed and
saddened that the Palestinian Authority has not publicly
condemned that despicable and cowardly attack. We
reiterate that there should be no place for incitement to
or glorification of violence. Neither should there be any
room for complicit silence.

Uruguay welcomes any initiative that makes it
possible to move forward in the search for solutions in
the Middle East peace process, with a View to achieving
a solution that is peaceful, fair, negotiated and lasting,
and that, in accordance with international law, takes
into account the legitimate aspirations of both parties.
In that framework, Uruguay was among the countries
that signed the Paris statement on the peace process last
Sunday.

Allow me to mention briefly the conflict in Syria.
After several failed initiatives in 2016 to achieve a
cessation of violence, the year ended with the adoption
of two resolutions that provide a glimpse of hope for the
Syrian people. Although those steps are encouraging,
there is still a long way to go before we reach the end of
that horrendous six-year conflict.

We acknowledge the important step achieved in
unanimous adoption of resolution 2328 (2016), which,
after several attempts, made it possible to take into
account the humanitarian situation in Aleppo and to
monitor the evacuation of the inhabitants of that city.
We also welcome the adoption, on the last day of the
year, of resolution 2336 (2016), and wish to highlight
the efforts made by Russia and Turkey, as well as the
opportunities that those efforts offer to find a solution
to this conflict. Uruguay reaffirms its support for the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Staffan de
Mistura. My delegation trusts that the negotiations that
will take place in Astana, Kazakhstan, and in Geneva
will yield immediate and effective results. We are
certain that the new Secretary-General will continue to
work tirelessly to achieve peace in Syria.

Throughout the open debates on the Middle East,
in which Uruguay has participated, participants have
stressed the pressing need to protect civilians and to
allow humanitarian assistance to reach them, as well as
the basic care needed to survive the chaotic situation in
which civilians find themselves embroiled, in particular
the most vulnerable groups. For that reason, we should
also not forget the critical situations in Yemen, Iraq and
other countries of the region.

