Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): The
Council is convened today on a High Holy Day, and we
do indeed thank you, Mr. President, for your response
in convening this meeting to consider the current grave
situation. We would also like to thank Secretary-
General Kofi Annan for his presence here today, as
well as for his constant efforts to end the ongoing
tragedy in Palestine, and in the Middle East in general,
with a View to establishing peace in the region.

We are gathered today in the wake of a new,
insane step taken by Mr. Ariel Sharon and his
Government - at a time when the Israeli occupation
forces have dispatched their tanks and armoured
vehicles, with the support of helicopter gunships, in
order to destroy and smash through the headquarters of
President Arafat of Palestine, the elected President of
the Palestinian National Authority and Chairman of the
Executive Committee of the Palestine Liberation
Organization. Israeli forces have destroyed most of the
President's compound, with the exception of the single
building in which the President himself remains in the
company of a very limited number of his aides. This
has put his personal safety at high risk, and talking
about guarantees of his personal safety would add
insult to pain and suffering. It is unprecedented for
occupying forces to use such weaponry to attack a
location ofthis nature. Israel, the occupying Power, has
committed grave mistakes against our people. Let me
state here that any harm to President Arafat would be
the mother of all those mistakes.

Israeli occupation forces have also occupied the
city of Ramallah, the largest Palestinian urban centre,
as well as reoccupied parts of other Palestinian towns,
such as Nablus and Bethlehem, and torn the Gaza Strip
into three separate areas. The Israeli Government has
also declared Yasser Arafat to be its enemy. Mr. Sharon
has declared that the military operation under way will
last for weeks.

I must state that this represents the beginning of
the destruction of the elected Palestinian Authority and
the start of removing Yasser Arafat, the reoccupation of
Palestinian territory and, in brief, throwing the
situation back to pre-Oslo. This is Mr. Sharon's true
political purpose. The man has made no secret of these
positions. Time and again he has publicly declared his
great hatred for the peace framework agreements in the
context of Oslo. Time and again he has refused to
accept a final settlement and has repeatedly declared
his rejection, of even the Mitchell recommendations. In
point of fact, Mr. Sharon wants to return to the
pre-Oslo status and to attempt to create isolated
Palestinian entities under local proxy leaders because,
briefly, he does not want to put an end to occupation
and he is not interested in a genuine, peaceful
settlement.

Many of us did not want to see these facts. I am
speaking of these political facts that surround the
character of Mr. Sharon and his declared positions - I
repeat, declared positions - in defiance of the entire
international community. This insane Israeli step comes
directly on the heels of the 14th Arab Summit Meeting,
which was held in Beirut. The participants of the
Summit adopted resolutions of landmark
significance - resolutions that guarantee a change in
the entire situation in the Middle East region - and
perhaps this is one of the reasons for the timing of the
Israeli actions now. Mr. Sharon tried to frustrate the
positive outcome of this Summit by insisting on a
military blockade of President Arafat in order to deny
him the chance to participate in the Arab Summit.
When this failed, the onslaught, in this form, started,
and it may kill the positive potential of the Beirut
Summit.

In some Israeli quarters it is being said that what
is going on is only a reaction to the explosions, the
latest of which took place in Netanya, undertaken by
Palestinians inside Israel. We in the Palestinian
Authority and in the Palestinian leadership have
categorically condemned these explosions. And, by the
way, we have condemned them not only in English, as
some have claimed; indeed, we have condemned them
in Arabic as well and, if you wish, will do so in all
United Nations languages. These silly interpretations
are an insult to the Palestinian people. Our position is
clear: we are against such acts because they do not
serve Palestinian national interests.

However, Mr. Sharon's Government has indeed
destroyed the Palestinian security institutions and has
reduced their capabilities to a minimum. On the one
hand, the Israeli forces have laid siege to President
Arafat and have a stranglehold on the entire Palestinian
people. On the other hand, they have called on the
Palestinian people to fulfil their obligations. This is
perverted logic. It is impossible to comprehend. The
Palestinians could put an end to this phenomenon once
they feel that there is hope for the future, that the end
of Israeli occupation is only a matter of time, that
Palestinian statehood is coming and that there is indeed
a future for their children rather than a perpetuation of
occupation, oppression, siege and the presence of
Israeli settlements that destroy the fabric oftheir lives.

All this notwithstanding, the Palestinian side has
tried to deal with the facts on the ground. We have
accepted the Mitchell recommendations and, after that,
we accepted the Tenet plan. Obviously, however, the
Israeli side buried the Mitchell recommendations under
a cover provided by some parties. Only yesterday
President Arafat declared his willingness to implement
a ceasefire and to implement unconditionally the Tenet
plan. The other side - and here I appeal to this
Council to recognize this - rejected the mere mention
of the Mitchell recommendations or their
implementation at a point later in time. They made no
mention of the Mitchell recommendations. At the same
time, they expected the Palestinian side to be
convinced that Tenet would lead to Mitchell and all
would lead to the resumption of peace talks, which
would result in a political solution.

The status quo cannot continue. We cannot turn
ourselves into an ostrich that buries its head in the
sand; we cannot try to address only the security
concerns, as advanced by Mr. Sharon. This will not be
possible without a political framework. This will not be
possible without a promise to put an end to occupation.

Once again, I wish to pay tribute to the position
set forth time and again by the United Nations
Secretary-General in terms of the need to address the
situation on the ground and to address the security
question in a political context. Disregarding the
Secretary-General's call and continuing the attempt to
serve Mr. Sharon's goals will lead nowhere.

We came to the Security Council convinced that
the Council has responsibilities under the Charter that
it must uphold. This is a matter of principle. We also
came to the Council in order to affirm the need for the
Security Council to follow up the implementation of its
resolution 1397 (2002), the landmark resolution cited
by the Secretary-General which has yet to be
implemented, despite some positive indications from
certain Israeli quarters. The Israeli Government has
neither issued any official position on that resolution
nor stated its commitment to fulfilling its provisions.
The Palestinian side has done so and is still waiting for
the Israeli side to state its position in that regard.

We, too, want this Council to address the
extremely grave situation created by Mr. Sharon and
the Israeli occupation forces since daybreak yesterday,
Palestine time. Specifically, we want this Council to
issue an order halting acts of aggression and for Israeli
forces to withdraw from Palestinian towns, including
Ramallah, as a first step towards the implementation of
the Tenet plan and the Mitchell recommendations. This
is the central issue at this moment - in addition, of
course, to the Council's affirmation of its traditional
support for the peace process and for the efforts of the
Secretary-General and of the special envoys to the
Middle East, be they those of the Secretary-General,
the United States, the Russian Federation or the
European Union.
This is what we expect from the Security
Council; indeed, we have distributed a Palestinian text
to all members of the Council in the hope that it will
receive their support. We further hope that the Council
will also, swiftly and expeditiously, take the necessary
measures to make its own contribution to halting the
deterioration of the situation on the ground and to
helping restore conditions to a positive track. This is
the natural role of the Security Council and what we
hope will be achieved.

The entire Middle East needs the Council's
action, especially given the promise of peace
emanating from Beirut. This will require specific
action to dispel the threat of war currently looming
over the heart ofthe city of Ramallah,

