Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President, and
your delegation for organizing this wrap-up session,
which provides us with an opportunity to assess the
work of the Council during the month of August. My
comments will focus on three issues, namely, working
methods and the conduct of Security Council business,
the Council mission to Africa and briefings.

With regard to the conduct of meetings, we
commend the presidency for its efforts during the past
month to encourage participants in Council meetings,
including Council members, to deliver their statements
in five minutes or less. That is in consonance with
paragraph 29 of the annex to document S/2010/507. The
efforts of the United Kingdom helped to substantially
improve time management during Council meetings,
and that allowed for greater efficiency in the conduct
of business. We strongly encourage the continuation of
that practice.

I would also like to comment on the Security
Council mission to Africa. According to the paragraph
66 of the Council's 2010 Working Methods Handbook,
the value of Security Council missions lies in the
fact that they allow the Council to understand and
assess particular conflicts or situations on its agenda.
The mission to South Sudan afforded members an
opportunity to interact with the key political leaders of
the country and to get a first-hand assessment of the
current situation on the ground and of the prospects
for a peaceful resolution of the conflict. The Council
was able to deliver an important message directly to the
leaders of South Sudan, that there could be no military
solution to the conflict in the country and that both
sides should work towards the formation of an inclusive
Government of national unity.

The Council mission to Somalia, the first since 1994,
was also very significant. It allowed close interaction
between Council members and the Government of
Somalia, whereby they could hear directly from the
Somali authorities their aspirations and challenges and
convey the concerns of the Council.

The meeting of Council members with the President
of Kenya and officials of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) was also a notable
Council achievement in August. Kenya as a country
and IGAD as a subregional body have been key players
in the efforts to resolve the conflict in South Sudan.
Kenya has also been an important player in ongoing
efforts to stabilize Somalia.

Close engagement between the Council and
regional organizations, as well as with countries with
influence in countries dealing with conflicts, remains
a crucial tool for Council use in conflict resolution.
Our assessment is that the Council effectively used the
mission to Africa to further its work in the maintenance
of international peace and security. It is a significant
demonstration of transparency on the Council's part
that the briefing on the mission was conducted in the
Council Chamber and was open to non-members (see S/PV.7245).

With regard to briefings, we are pleased to note that
several of the country-specific briefings in August were
held in public and that concerned countries were able to
participate under rule 37 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure. The monthly briefing by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on the
humanitarian situation in Syria, which used to be held
in the Consultations Room, is now being held in public,

with the country concerned participating. That has
helped to improve transparency in the Council's work.

I would now like to comment on the open debate on
conflict prevention held on 21 August (see S/PV.7247).
The participation of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights in the debate was significant in highlighting the
often-overlooked link between human rights violations
and conflict. The High Commissioner noted that while
the Council's interest in human rights had increased
during her tenure, principled decisions by Council
members to end crises were hampered by short-term
geopolitical considerations and narrowly defined
national interests. Those were the words of the High
Commissioner. The question that then arises is: are
Council members willing to sacrifice their narrow
national interests in the larger interest of humankind?
There is no doubt that the pursuit of national interests
sometimes hampers the effectiveness of the Council.

The debate also brought to the fore the importance
ofidentifying and addressing the root causes ofconflict.
We believe that it is necessary for the Council to focus
attention on this, not only in the context of conflict
resolution but also to prevent a relapse into conflict in
post-conflict settings. In our view, that will enhance
the capacity of the Council to carry out its mandate to
maintain international peace and security.

In conclusion, we commend and thank the
delegation of the United Kingdom for the effective
way it conducted business in the month of August. We
congratulate the delegation of the United States for its
upcoming assumption of the presidency in September
and give assurances of our full support.

