Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): We thank
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and Deputy High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs Thomas
Markram for their briefings.

Only five days ago, here in this Chamber (see S/PV.8221), we mourned as we remembered the sarin
attack at Khan Shaykhun that occurred a year ago.
This weekend another devastating gas attack was
carried out in the city of Douma, killing more than
45 civilians and injuring more than 500. It was another
in a series of chemical-weapon attacks in Syria. That is
unacceptable. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is one of
nine Security Council members that requested today's
emergency meeting because we all believed that it was
critically important to address this horrific attack. We
must reinstate the prohibition on the use of chemical
weapons. We must underscore the basic norms of the
international legal order and stop the ongoing tragedy
in eastern Ghouta and Douma.

We almost met twice today because one permanent
member of the Council seemed not to want a focused
discussion on the issue at hand, the chemical attack
in Douma. That begs the question of whether that
particular member State would prefer the international
community to stand by and watch like a spectator while
it covers for the crimes of its ally, the Syrian regime,
some of which amount to serious war crimes. The
Council must not stand idly by. It is high time for us to
act in three ways, condemning, protecting and holding
to account. First, today we should condemn in the
strongest possible terms any use of chemical weapons.
International law has been trampled on. Silence and
impunity are not an option. However, condemnation
alone is not enough.

Secondly, we must deliver on our responsibility
to protect. The protection of civilians must remain an
absolute priority. We call on the Astana guarantors
to use their influence to prevent any further attacks.
They must ensure a cessation of hostilities and a
de-escalation of the violence, as per resolution 2401
(2018). An immediate ceasefire is needed in Douma so
that humanitarian and medical aid can reach the victims
of the attack and so that humanitarian personnel can
continue their life-saving work. We owe it to the men,
women and children of Douma and of Syria. We owe it
to our own citizens.

Furthermore, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
would also like to point out that the majority of the States
Members of the United Nations count on the permanent
members of the Council not to use their veto in cases
of mass atrocities. The international community should
be able to count on the Council to uphold international
humanitarian law and the international prohibition
on the use of chemical weapons, and to act when
international law is trampled. Let me be clear. We
support the humanitarian work of the White Helmets.
They do extremely important humanitarian work for
civilians in Syria in dire circumstances.
Thirdly, all members of the Council regularly stress
the importance of accountability for perpetrators who
use chemical weapons. Yet the Council has not been
able to move forward on that issue for months owing
to one permanent member's use of the veto. We have
been unable to tackle this crisis because one permanent
member is a direct party to the conflict and has proved
that it will defend the Syrian regime at all costs. We
must intensify our efforts to establish a mechanism
that can continue the meticulous work of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM) and investigate and
identify perpetrators independently of the politics in
the Council. The JIM. has identified both the Syrian
regime and a non-State actor as responsible for the use
of chemical weapons in Syria. As I said last week (see S/PV.8221), the discontinuation of the JIM. mandate
cannot be the end of the story - all the more so because
since the JIM. ceased to operate, we have received
reports that the regime has carried out at least six
more chemical-weapon attacks and perhaps even more.
For those who claim that chemical-weapon attacks
have not taken place or that such accounts have been
fabricated, I have a clear message. The establishment of
an effective, impartial and independent attribution and
accountability mechanism must not be vetoed.

Let us not forget that the United Nations is bigger
than the Council alone. We have strong leadership
at the helm of Organization and a powerful General
Assembly. Both must consider all instruments to
advance accountability for the use of chemical weapons.
The work should build on the important work of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) Fact-finding Mission and the JIM. We welcome
the Fact-finding Mission's immediate investigation of
the terrible incident in Douma this weekend. It should
be given full access and cooperation by all parties. We
reiterate our strong support for, first, the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011; secondly, the Commission of Inquiry; thirdly, the
International Partnership against Impunity for the Use
of Chemical Weapons, initiated by France; and fourthly,
a referral of the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court in The Hague as the most appropriate
path to accountability andjustice.

In conclusion, the Council must act. The OPCW
Fact-finding Mission must complete an investigation
as soon as possible, and there can be no impunity
for the use of chemical weapons. To do otherwise is
tantamount to condoning such appalling attacks,
failing in our responsibilities and undermining the
international architecture that we have collectively
designed to stop such attacks. It is time for the Council
and the international community as a whole to act.

