Mr. Dunn (United States of America): The
United States is honoured to participate in this
important debate on Haiti. We would like to thank you
personally, Mr. President, for your leadership at this
meeting and for your efforts to sustain international
attention to the situation in Haiti during Colombia's
presidency of the Security Council. We are pleased to
welcome Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
President Clinton and thank them both for their
briefings. We also welcome President Preval and the
many distinguished Ministers of Government who are
here today.

The United States supports the draft presidential
statement that has been proposed by the Colombian
delegation. As a member of the Group of Friends of
Haiti, we join with the statement that Uruguayan
Minister Almagro will deliver on behalf of the Group.

Progress in the reconstruction and development
of Haiti is crucial to achieving the future that the
people of Haiti deserve. To achieve sustainability, it is
important that the international community work
through Haitian institutions and thereby strengthen
those institutions for the benefit of the people of Haiti.
We call on countries that have pledged assistance to
fulfil those commitments and to work through the
Interim Haiti Recovery Commission (IHRC), the
coordination body for reconstruction activities in Haiti.
We commend the IHRC for its leadership of the
strategic planning process, helping to focus donor
efforts on the top four priorities in Haiti's action plan
for national recovery and development: debris removal,
water and sanitation, health, and housing. To date, the
Commission has approved a total of 87 projects,
representing a long-term investment of over $3 billion.

Haitians continue to face enormous difficulties.
However, through their hard work and determination
and with the support of the international community,
the people of Haiti are making progress and rebuilding
their lives and their country. I would like to briefly
highlight a few areas where we have seen results.

First, with respect to debris removal, the
earthquake of 12 January 2010 in Haiti created an
estimated 10 million cubic meters of rubble in
30 seconds, which is enough debris to fill dump trucks
parked bumper to bumper halfway around the world.
The United States remains the leading donor in the area
of debris removal. We reiterate the call of the IHRC for
more donor attention to that sector. Through short-term
rubble-removal jobs programmes, the United States
Government has cumulatively employed more than
350,000 people in rubble removal work, creating more
than 3.5 million person-days of work. To date, those
programmes have injected nearly $19 million into the
local economy. On average, 40 to 50 per cent of those
jobs are being filled by women.

We applaud United Nations agencies - in
particular the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Human Settlements
Programme and the United Nations Office for Project
Services - as well as the International Labour
Organization, for working with the United States in
implementing this top priority of the IHRC, as we
heard from President Clinton.

Secondly, with regard to water and sanitation, in
October, when cholera was first confirmed in the
Artibonite region of Haiti, the leadership of the Haitian
Ministry of Health and Population was crucial in the
planning of what became a nationwide response. The
United States provided Haiti with $45 million in
emergency funding for immediate efforts. The
Government of Spain and the Inter-American
Development Bank have also been particularly active
in the water and sanitation sector.

Despite the challenges, especially in sanitation,
the people of Haiti have seen rapid progress with
respect to the availability of safe drinking water. The
IHRC target was to increase the rate of sustainable
access to potable water from an original 2 per cent to
50 per cent by October 2011. Today, the IHRC
estimates that one third of Haiti's population has access
to potable water, thanks to chlorination efforts, and that
Haiti will meet or exceed the 50 per cent goal by
October 2011 - a major accomplishment that is ahead
of schedule.

Thirdly, with regard to the health sector, the long-
term investments planned by the United States build
upon the partnership with Haiti's Ministry of Health
and Population. The United States is working with
Haiti to reduce infant and maternal mortality rates,
increase contraceptive prevalence, lower the
prevalence of infectious diseases, reduce levels of
severe malnourishment in children and improve
sanitation and hygiene practices.

Fourthly, with regard to housing, population
density rates in some areas of Port-au-Prince are four
times those of New York City, but without the familiar
high-rise buildings. From a high peak of 1.5 million
people living in camps, the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) estimates
that approximately 680,000 continue to live in those
spontaneous settlements today. Major long-term
challenges remain in that sector. The IHRC has
expressed a need for the Government of Haiti to
establish a framework for the identification of property
owners and to identify beneficiaries of housing
programmes. The United States recently joined with
the Clinton-Bush Haiti Fund and the World Bank
Group to create a new housing finance facility, which
President Clinton described.

Fifthly, with regard to job creation, despite the
many challenges Haiti faces, its economy offers cause
for guarded optimism. A strategy that links
development to trade is paramount for this Caribbean
nation. The creation of a new industrial park near
Cap-Haitien, a combined effort of the Government of
Haiti, the United States and the Inter-American
Development Bank, is projected to create 20,000
permanent export-oriented jobs by the first tenant of
that park alone, Sae-A, a global textile firm.

The United States applauds the nations of the
Caribbean Community for providing duty-free access
to Haitian goods. We urge the international community,
especially those here in the Americas, to support
Haiti's long-term development through aid and trade.

Sixthly, with regard to security, a secure and
stable environment is critical for Haitians to continue
rebuilding their lives. The international community's
support, through MINUSTAH, is a critical contribution
to that stability. We applaud the commitment of all
those nations that have contributed troops and police to
MINUSTAH. We urge MINUSTAH to continue
assisting the Government of Haiti in providing
protection to the civilian population, especially in the
context of the ongoing electoral process. The United
States joins with other partners of Haiti in working to
help strengthen Haitian institutions, which is a critical
element of Haiti's ability to assume responsibility for
its own security.

Finally, with regard to elections, we applaud the
cooperation between MINUSTAH and the Haitian
National Police, which provided a secure environment
during the second-round election on 20 March. The
United States supports a timely conclusion to the
electoral process based on a fair and transparent
procedure and a peaceful and democratic transition of
power by early May.

The United States remains committed to assisting
the people and the Government of Haiti in their efforts
to rebuild their country. We welcome today's open
debate as a contribution to, and continuation of, that
process.

