Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for giving me
this opportunity to speak following the adoption of
resolution 2362 (2017), in relation to the renewal of
the sanctions regime initiated in 2011. In that context,
I take this opportunity to welcome the appointment of
Mr. Ghassan Salame as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya and to wish him every success
in achieving consensus among the Libyan parties in
implementing the Libyan Political Agreement in such
a way as to ensure the establishment of security and
stability and the strengthening of institutions. I also
thank Mr. Martin Kobler for his efforts as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
With respect to the resolution just adopted, I
welcome certain paragraphs related to the renewal of
the mandate of the Panel of Experts and the paragraph
related to the prevention of illicit oil exports and refined
oil products. However I express my country's deepest
regret and huge disappointment that the resolution
ignores the amendment of the sanctions regime related
to the Libyan Investment Authority, which is incurring
substantial losses due to this regime, in accordance
with resolutions 1970 (2011), 1973 (2011) and 2009
(2011), which stipulate an assets freeze of the Libyan
Investment Authority and which were formulated
without considering the potential long-term effects of
those resolutions on the actual value of assets. Under
those resolutions, the assets freeze of the Libyan
Investment Authority has caused its portfolio and
related entities great financial loss, equal to more than
$1 billion annually, according to the calculations and
estimates of the Authority. Those losses are unjustified
and, in certain cases, have enriched foreign financial
institutions that are considered to be the custodians of
those assets, at the expense of the Libyan people. Ifthat
is not immediately and definitively addressed, it will
eventually lead to the erosion of all of the resources of
the Libyan Investment Authority.

Our disappointment and deep regret regarding the
resolution's failure to amend the sanctions regime related
to frozen assets are due to the fact that we notified the
Security Council, both formally and informally, more
than one year ago, about the extent of the catastrophe
threatening the frozen assets. We requested that certain
amendments should be introduced in order to improve
the management of the frozen assets and to avoid the
continuous depreciation that is afflicting the same since
2011. However, all of our requests have fallen on deaf
ears. I would refer to those requests briefly, as follows.

First, we formally informed the Security Council
of the huge loss to those assets through a letter from
the Permanent Mission of Libya to the United Nations,
on 21 March 2016 (S/2016/275). The letter also included
a suggestion of paragraphs to be included in the
sanctions regime. However our fair and logical requests
were totally ignored. The Security Council adopted
resolution 2278 (2016) without those amendments.

Secondly, in the same letter we referred to the
report of the Panel of Experts on Libya (see S/2016/209)
submitted to the Security Council on 3 March 2016,
which addressed the issue. Paragraph 257 of the
report states:

"It was clearly not the aim of the Security Council
that the investments should be diminished,
meaning that this matter needs to be clarified,
preferably by including an explicit exemption for
fund management in a future resolution".

Recommendation 8 provides:

"[t]o explicitly allow and encourage the reinvestment
of assets frozen under the measures, in consultation
with the Government of Libya, in order to protect
the value of investments of designated individuals
and entities."

However, despite the explicit and clear
recommendation on the part of the Panel of Experts,
the Security Council has taken no steps to amend the
sanctions regime, a matter that is causing the ongoing
depreciation of the assets and funds of the Libyan
people.

Thirdly, during the past year and before the adoption
of resolution 2278 (2016), a team from the Permanent
Mission of Libya, in coordination with a number of
experts from the Libyan Investment Authority, has
provided explanatory notes regarding all of the adverse
effects and impacts on the frozen assets. This occurred
in bilateral meetings with members of the Security
Council, during which the team also proposed certain
minor amendments to the sanctions regime to improve
management of frozen assets.

Fourthly, a team from the Permanent Mission of
Libya and experts from the Libyan Investment Authority
have convened a number of meetings with the members
of the Security Council since the beginning of 2017,
with the aim of reminding members and the Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) of the continuous attrition of Libya's assets due
to the sanctions imposed since 2011, with the hope that
the issue would be taken into consideration in the draft
resolution to be adopted in July. Unfortunately, today
we were surprised to find that resolution 2362 (2017)
was adopted under a silence procedure during a holiday
without consulting the Libyan Mission and with no
regard to our fair requests for amending the sanctions
regime or to our correspondence related to this issue.

Fifthly, in our 7 June statement (see S/PV.7961) we
alluded explicitly to the losses sustained by our frozen
assets and reminded the Council of the severity of the

problem. We also noted that, when the assets freeze
was introduced, it was not meant to punish Libya, but
rather as a precautionary measure against the misuse
and waste of those assets during the revolution and the
transitional period after the fall of the previous regime.
We asserted that the Libyan authorities were not
requesting that the assets freeze be lifted but simply that
its funds be deposited in certain accounts or reinvested,
and that accounts be allowed to be opened or closed.
However, most unfortunately, our request once again
fell on deaf ears.

Sixthly, a new letter on that issue was submitted
to the President of the Security Council on 26 June by
the Permanent Mission of Libya to the United Nations
in order to remind the Council of the heavy losses
incurred since 2011 due to the sanctions regime. We
requested swift intervention and amendments to the
sanctions renewal resolution, citing paragraph 11 of
resolution 2278 (2016) regarding the assets freeze, and
which refers to the Council taking note of the letter from
Libyan Mission circulated as document S/2016/275 .
That paragraph

"affirms the Security Council's readiness to
consider changes, when appropriate, to the asset
freeze at the request of the Government of National
Accord".

We affirmed that this is a formal request made by the
Government of National Accord.

We also submitted a letter from His Excellency
Mr. Fayiz al-Sarraj, head of the Presidency Council
of the Government of National Accord, requesting
that the Council take speedy and immediate action
to put an end to the decline and erosion in assets of
the Libyan people, originally allocated for the future
generations. However, and this is very unfortunate, the
Council did not heed either letter despite the fact that
they were both submitted before the silence procedure.
The letter from the Mission was circulated before the
deadline, but the letter from the head of the Presidency
Council of the Government of National Accord was not
circulated until after the silence procedure had ended.
Additionally, and this is very unfortunate, no Council
member moved to extend the consultation period f not
even for a few days - in order to review and consider
both letters before the final drafting of resolution 2363
(2017) to extend the sanctions regime.

Accordingly, my delegation was astonished by this
repeated and deliberate ignoring of its fair, essential
and urgent request for amending the sanctions regime
related to frozen assets, which was intended not as
punishment but as a precautionary measure to preserve
and protect the assets from being wasted during the
transitional period. The current situation runs totally
counter to the primary objective for which the assets
freeze was imposed. It is a huge waste of the wealth of
the Libyan people in the very difficult conditions under
which they are living.

While introducing those facts and our urgent and
necessary request to the Council today, I would like to
remind the Council of its ethical, legal and professional
responsibility to put an end to the losses and depreciation,
which could well totally eliminate the assets belonging
to the sovereign wealth fund of the Libyan people if the
sanctions regime, which has been in place since 2011,
is maintained. I would also remind the Council of its
repeated assurance, through resolutions and statements
related to the Libyan situation, that it is eager to help
Libya and protect its resources. In that regard, let me
ask: Is there any assistance greater or more important
than amending the sanctions regime to safeguard the
wealth of Libyan people?

After more than a year since our initial alert to the
Council of this disastrous situation, which the Council
did has taken no action to address and which has
caused the frozen assets additional losses of more than
$1 billion during the past year, I reiterate the official
request of the Presidency Council that the sanctions
regime regarding assets freeze be amended as soon as
possible in order to save the remaining assets and funds
belonging to the Libyan Investment Authority. There is
no justification whatsoever for ignoring our fair, urgent
and necessary request. We stand ready to cooperate
with the experts from the Libyan Investment Authority
to provide the Council with explanations and to respond
to all inquiries, leading to the expedited amendment of
the sanctions regime regarding the frozen assets. The
Council should therefore adopt a draft resolution to
address this problem and to end the loss and avoiding
further loss.

In conclusion, we are confident that our fair, urgent
and repeated request to amend the sanctions regime
will be considered positively by the Council so as to
allow the regime to attain its goal of protecting and
preserving the frozen assets the Libyan people.

The meeting rose at 3.25 pm.
