Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I thank Mr. Ivica Dacic,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and Ambassador
Vlora Citaku of Kosovo for their contributions to
this debate. I also thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, for his briefing.

Kosovo is a peaceful and more prosperous place
today. The Kosovo Government formed last year has
actively embarked upon wide-ranging reforms. The
progress in the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
now is measured in deeds, not words. Kosovo has
strengthened its relations with the European Union
(EU). It has also made undeniable progress in the light
of the challenges faced by many countries of the region
in strengthening the rule of law and addressing the
social and economic situation.

In October, the European Union and Kosovo
signed the Stabilization and Association Agreement,
setting out a clear path for stronger relations, deeper
political dialogue and economic cooperation. It is an
opportunity for the people of Kosovo to access new
markets and boost trade and investment, provided that
the reforms take place. It is indeed up to the Kosovo
authorities to make full use of that instrument, and
we look forward to the swift entry into force of the
Agreement. Lithuania has been a consistent supporter
of Kosovo's path towards the European Union. We are
ready to continue sharing our experience in reform,
including through the EU twinning programme.

Historic decisions require courage. We welcome
the solid steps by both sides aimed at normalizing
relations within the framework of EU-facilitated
dialogue in implementing the First Agreement on
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations,
signed in Brussels in 2013. Results have been achieved
in the areas of justice and civil protection integration.
The dialogue has also brought about agreements on
energy and telecommunication and the establishment
of the association/community of Serb-majority
municipalities, as well as on freedom of movement and
the Mitrovica bridge. The time has come to implement
the agreements, and we encourage Serbia and Kosovo
to move forward in the normalization of their relations.
That is at the core of the European integration agenda
for both countries, and the key to regional prosperity
and stability. The future of their progress is in the
hands ofthe leaders ofboth countries. The region needs
less divisive rhetoric and more cooperation, trade and
increased connectivity.
The leaders of Kosovo have demonstrated their
ability to unite in making important decisions, as was
seen by the decision to establish the specialist court to try

cases arising from the Special Investigative Task Force.
Further efforts to pursue an inclusive political dialogue,
a culture of compromise and respect for democratic
processes are essential in moving forward with the
necessary reforms. At the same time, we encourage
the Government of Kosovo to do more in fostering
interfaith and inter-ethnic dialogue. We welcome the
commitment of Kosovo to abide by UNESCO standards,
and we believe that all communities throughout Kosovo
would benefit from the protection of their culture and
heritage provided by UNESCO.

The situation on the ground remains stable, and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continue to play an
important role in contributing to security, stability and
the rule of law. Lithuania will continue its contributions
to KFOR and EULEX. However, let me also take this
opportunity to remind everyone of the need to expedite
the investigation into the killing of the EULEX staff
member, customs officer Audrius Senavicius, two years
ago. We call for cooperation on both sides to expedite
the investigation.

The support of the international community for
a stable and prosperous Kosovo remains firm. The
international community helped to bring security and
stability to the region, and the Kosovo authorities have
demonstrated that they are able to take matters into
their own hands. Given the progress on the ground, I
wish to echo the request made by the representative of
Kosovo that reducing the frequency of Council debates
on UNMIK is long overdue.

