Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I wish to welcome Mr. Riad Malki, Foreign Minister
of Palestine, to the Council and to thank Robert Serry
for his comprehensive briefing on the developments in
the situation in the Middle East, including Palestine.

No one can disagree that the Palestinian question is
in an extremely critical and historical phase right now.
We have seen many years of stalemate and setbacks
in the peace process in the Middle East as a result of
obstacles erected by the Israeli occupation authorities
and their complete lack of political will to allow the
Palestinian people to establish their own independent
sovereign State.

The situation has further deteriorated with Israel's
intensification of settlement activity, particularly
its announced intention to construct thousands of
settlement units in the E-l area, north and south of
East Jerusalem and in the West Bank, in a way that
would lead to the geographical bisection of the entire
West Bank, effectively erasing the possibility of
achieving peace. Morocco strongly condemns this
Israeli settlement plan and calls on the international
community, as represented in the Council, to intervene
to put an end to such policies, which, if things remain
unchanged in 2013, will effectively make any political
solution, including the two-State solution, impossible.

While Israel persists in its settlement activities
in Palestinian territory, it prevents Palestinians from
building on their own land. It destroys Palestinians'
homes, displaces them, and confiscates their land, as
we recently saw in Bab Al-Shams and Bab Al-Karamah.
East Jerusalem is the primary area targeted by the new
settlement plan because of the religious significance it
holds for the three religions. The policy is designed to
change the demographic and geographic composition of
the area and its cultural and religious features in order
to isolate it from its natural Palestinian surroundings.

His Majesty the King of Morocco, as Chairman
of the Al-Quds Committee, has called on the Security
Council, and especially its influential members, to live
up to their responsibility, to take a principled position
opposing the desecration of Muslim and Christian
religious sites, and to safeguard the people and those
sites. Israel should be made to honour international
resolutions that declare its actions as null and void.

Palestinians have proven by word and deed their
commitment to the peace process and to negotiations to
put an end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We believe
thatPalestinianreconciliationwillbolsterthenegotiating
position of the Palestinian side. Arab countries have
reaffirmed that a just and comprehensive peace is an
irreplaceable strategic choice. However, experience has
shown that the flexibility and commitment shown by
the Palestinian side are not reciprocated by the Israeli
side. Rather, Israel persists in its settlement activities,
its blockade against Gaza and its occupation practices,
thereby undermining the comprehensive final solution,
which enjoys international support.

The international community must firmly and
immediately intervene and reaffirm the need to
work for the two-State solution within clear political
parameters and a finite timeframe through negotiations
between the two parties to reach a settlement, enabling
the Palestinian people to establish their own viable,
independent State based on the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and living side by side in peace
and security with Israel.

The economic situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, as Mr. Serry said, continues to deteriorate
owing to the Israeli occupation and the Palestinian
Authority's growing budget deficit caused by Israel's
withholding of tax and customs revenues in response
to General Assembly resolution 67/19, which granted
Palestine non-member observer status in the United
Nations. This jeopardizes the Palestinian Authority's
achievements to date. The Gaza Strip continues to suffer
an unjust blockade that flagrantly violates international
law and international humanitarian law and denies the
rights and dignity ofmore than 1.5 million Palestinians.
We call for an end to this condemned blockade, and urge
the international community to stop such collective
punishment.

The deterioratating situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories and Israel's suffocating grip on
its population increase tensions, reduce the chances for
peace, and pose unprecedented threats to all peoples
of the region, without exception. The situation compels
the Council and the Quartet to act immediately to
ensure that negotiations towards the establishment of
a just and comprehensive solution in the Middle East
can resume.

Our focus on the Palestinian question, which is at
the heart of the Arab-Israeli conflict, arises from our
serious concern about the situation. However, that does
not mean that we are any less concerned about Syria
or Israel's occupation of other Arab territories in the
Syrian Golan and southern Lebanon. We note with the
utmost concern the worsening humanitarian conditions
in Syria. I would like to express our recognition and
appreciation of the initiative of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon to hold a donors conference in Kuwait City by
the end of the month.

We also commend the efforts of Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi on behalf of the United Nations and the League
of Arab States. We hope that, by the end of the month,
the Council will be able to report conditions that are
more conducive to ending the armed conflict and to
the launching of an inclusive national dialogue aimed
at the establishment a free and democratic society in
Syria that guarantees the rights and dignity of all and
preserves the national unity and territorial integrity of
that brotherly country.

In conclusion, I cannot fail to mention Morocco's
condemnation of Israel's policies towards Lebanon. We
reiterate our grave concern about the stability, territorial
integrity, unity and sovereignty of Lebanon, in
particular given the challenges that the region currently
faces. We would like to welcome the foresight, wisdom
and responsibility of all Lebanese parties that have
refrained from taking any action that would exacerbate
the situation in the region.

