Mr. Mercado (Philippines): Mr. President, we
thank you for convening this important meeting on
peacekeeping and HIV/AIDS in the context of Security
Council resolution 1308 (2000). We wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno for
updating us on the steps taken by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) in implementing
resolution 1308 (2000). We also thank the Executive
Director of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), Mr. Peter Piot, for his report on
the progress made on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1308 (2000).

The Philippines commends UNAIDS and its
sponsors for their continued efforts to fight the
HIV/AIDS pandemic since the Security Council
acknowledged five years ago that the scourge was a
threat to international peace and security and that
measures had to be put in place to develop further
HIV/AIDS prevention and education, particularly for
peacekeepers deployed to conflict areas.

We are pleased that UNAIDS has been able to
strengthen its partnership with DPKO, particularly in
mainstreaming HIV/AIDS awareness in United Nations
peacekeeping missions through the assignment of
AIDS advisers to major peace missions and in
providing technical support for strategies to address
HIV/AIDS among uniformed services.

We laud the work of UNAIDS, not only with
Member States' international uniformed services, in the
development and implementation of national AIDS
strategies, but also with regional organizations; this has
led to the integration of HIV/AIDS prevention into
their operations.

While we acknowledge the significant strides
made by UNAIDS in mainstreaming HIV/AIDS
awareness among uniformed personnel since the
adoption of resolution 1308 (2000), the Philippines
believes that there is still much that needs to be done to
protect the vulnerable and to prevent our worst fears
from coming true.

The present unprecedented demand for
peacekeepers in conflict areas worldwide, especially in
high-risk areas, exposes peacekeepers to the possibility
of contracting and even transmitting the deadly
disease. As of June this year, more than 66,000
peacekeepers from 105 countries are serving in United
Nations missions in 18 countries in Africa, the
Americas, Europe and the Middle East. By the end of
the year, the total number of Blue Helmets rotating in
and out of those areas will be approximately 100,000.
That figure does not include other peacekeepers to be
fielded as the United Nations opens new fronts for
peace or expands existing ones.

One way to address the problem of protecting
peacekeepers and the populations with which they are
in contact is to ensure continuous retraining and the
transmission of knowledge gained from other
peacekeeping missions. Cooperation between troop-
contributing countries and UNAIDS in providing
peacekeeping personnel, from officers down to enlisted
personnel, with adequate training at the predeployment
stage and with education on HIV/AIDS for the duration
of the mission should be pursued and strengthened.
Troop-contributing countries with no mandatory
screenings should encourage their troops to participate
in voluntary and confidential testing and counselling in
the national military setting, as well as treatment, as
part of their preparation for participation in
peacekeeping operations. We agree with Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno that AIDS awareness
should be a command responsibility.

It is also imperative to tailor HIV/AIDS training
to the wide range of cultures represented by
peacekeepers. Since peacekeeping personnel come
from more than 100 troop-contributing countries, we
welcome efforts to address language requirements for
HIV/AIDS training, such as by means of HIV
awareness cards. There is also a need to make a more
conscious effort to address the human nature factor -
that is, changing the attitudes of troops.

Although the Philippines considers itself
fortunate to have one of the lowest HIV/AIDS
prevalence rates in Asia, the dreaded disease continues
to be of great concern for my country. As of June 2005,
the Philippines has deployed military and civilian
police personnel to eight United Nations mission areas
across the world, including countries whose peoples
are among the hardest hit by the virus. With Philippine
participation in peacekeeping operations on the rise,
extra efforts are being undertaken by my Government
to ensure that this particular aspect of HIV/AIDS
awareness is covered.

My delegation is pleased to inform the Council
that the Philippines has put in place mechanisms to
address the threat of HIV/AIDS among its uniformed
services. As part of its implementation of resolution
1308 (2000), the Philippines has made predeployment
screening mandatory for all military and civilian police
personnel who wish to take part in United Nations
missions, along with post-deployment screening for
those who have just returned from missions.

Prevention education is a key component of the
predeployment programme for peacekeepers drawn
from the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the
Philippine National Police. UNAIDS-trained medical
professionals give presentations on HIV/AIDS
awareness and prevention, and former peacekeepers are
invited to share their experiences with new ones. Our
peacekeepers also benefit greatly from mission training
activities in their respective areas of assignment.
My delegation takes this opportunity also to
inform the Council that the Armed Forces of the
Philippines are finalizing new policy guidelines that
take into account not only resolution 1308 (2000) but
also recent recommendations on the prevention of
sexual exploitation and abuse and on stipulating
penalties for violators.

In closing, I once again commend UNAIDS, its
sponsors and DPKO for their efforts in implementing
resolution 1308 (2000). I also express support for the
recommendations contained in the reports of UNAIDS
and DPKO. The Philippines pledges to continue
working and cooperating closely with UNAIDS and
DPKO in this important endeavour.

