Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): I am
pleased, Sir, to see you presiding over the Council this
month and would like to thank you for having
convened this public meeting on the grave situation in
the Palestinian territories.

While the broad repression of the Palestinians in
the occupied territories has continued unabated, the
recent onslaught by the Israelis against President
Arafat's compound in Ramallah is deliberately
designed to further deteriorate the situation. Flattening
all the buildings in the compound with the sole
exception of a wing of an office building, digging a
deep trench, running coils of barbed wire and placing
explosives, tanks and bulldozers around the main
building attest to the expansionist designs of the
Israelis.

The shooting and killing of several Palestinian
demonstrators, the closure of the East Jerusalem offices
of the president of Al-Quds University by the Israeli
police, the tightening of curfews on several Palestinian
towns and the raids carried out in Tulkarem and in
several parts of the Gaza Strip are among other recent
repressive measures that followed the raid on the
compound.

By launching a new round of violence and by
making an issue of the Palestinians in the compound,
Mr. Sharon seeks to sabotage any effort to develop a
road map for establishing a Palestinian State. In the
past several weeks of relative calm in the occupied
territories, the Israelis never stopped their campaign.
They kept up their attacks, including the bombing of a
Palestinian school. Tight closures and curfew
regulations continued unabated. Settlement building
activities went on ceaselessly. In other words, the
Israelis were deliberately seeking to provoke a
response, thereby to find yet another excuse to derail
any effort that might one day lead to the restoration of
Palestinian national rights.

Throughout the ongoing conflict, Mr. Sharon has
demonstrated that he continues to have his
longstanding agenda; he spares no effort and misses no
opportunity to push ahead with it. That agenda seeks to
squash the Palestinians and to conquer them
completely. The basic strategy upon which the agenda
is predicated is to make the Palestinians capitulate fully
and to have them renounce their basic legitimate
national rights. The ongoing siege of President Arafat's
compound and what preceded it in the past several
weeks confirm once again the View that he does not
believe in a negotiated settlement. Nor did his
predecessors really believe in the peace process, for
they ceaselessly expanded settlement activity on the
very lands from which they ostensibly negotiated the
withdrawal.

In the midst of tragic events taking place in the
course of this ongoing conflict, the international
community must contemplate the reasons that prompt
Palestinian teenagers and youngsters, who normally
should see a bright future ahead, to sacrifice their lives.
It should be borne in mind that the exceptional nature
of the response demonstrates the exceptionally ruthless
nature of the crimes committed against the Palestinian
people over a very long period of time - crimes that
by any measure are unprecedented even in comparison
with similar instances in the colonial era.

Israel continues to flout all provisions of
international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, particularly those banning indiscriminate
and disproportionate use of force and the humiliating
treatment of civilian populations. It is also adamant in
showing contempt for the recent resolutions of the
Council, which stipulate its withdrawal from the re-
occupied lands. We believe that the Security Council
should not stand idly by and let its authority erode.

It is time for the Council to act more resolutely
and demand full compliance with its resolutions. It is
very unfortunate that those who sometimes stretch
Council resolutions to advance their interests have no
qualms about seeing the flouting of the letter and the
spirit of clear-cut resolutions on the Palestinian
question.

There is no doubt that selective enforcement of
Security Council resolutions has an adverse impact on
the authority of the Council and thereby undermines
the overall international security system. It is also time
for the Council to seriously consider the establishment
of an international force to provide basic protection for
defenceless Palestinian civilians.

