Mr. Tiangaye (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): It is a great honour for me to speak before the
Security Council. I should like to take this opportunity
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your country's
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. I wish to assure you of the full support of
my delegation during your term of office. I take this
opportunity to pay tribute to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Rwanda, for the work he
accomplished on his watch in April.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/261)
to the Council represents an opportunity for me and
my country an opportunity to convey the gratitude
of the Central African Republic to the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for the continued support
of the United Nations for the quest for peace, stability
and development in this highly fragile State, beset by
almost ongoing instability. Here we wish also to thank
the Special Representative, Ms. Margaret Vogt, as well
as all of her team.

The report before us is clear and concise in its
description of the situation on the ground in the Central
African Republic as it was previously and is now. An
tragedy of unprecedented scope is unfolding before our
eyes today in this State of 4.6 million inhabitants, and
we take note of this. The Central African crisis, which
has long been forgotten, must once again take centre
stage and be included on the agenda of the Security
Council.

The tragedy that is gripping the Central African
Republic at all levels is characterized by disturbances
to the public order, violence, abuses, summary

executions, rape, the recruitment of child soldiers, and
crimes against World Heritage wildlife, exemplified by
the incidents of poaching in Dzanga Sangha reserve
last week, in which more than 20 elephants were killed.
It has inevitably had a humanitarian impact, including
increased insecurity.

Since the taking and looting of a number of cities
in the province, up until the entry of Seleka troops into
the capital of Bangui on 24 March, the city of Bangui
has witnessed almost three weeks of light and heavy
fire, which has led to a massive displacement of people
within and outside the city. It has been characterized by
insecurity caused by the looting, rape, destruction and
killings perpetrated by lawless elements of the Seleka.
That also applies to those charged with protecting
public and private establishments. Lack of security on
the roadways and in regions has made the circulation
of persons and goods impossible, thus hampering
economic recovery.

The continuing insecurity at the level of strategic
infrastructure, such as fuel-storage facilities in Kolongo
and facilities related to water and electricity distribution
and to the dredging activities of the Ubangi river; the
systematic looting of documents and bureaucratic
materials from administrations, of pharmaceutical
products and of medical and biomedical material from
hospitals; and the destruction of production facilities,
which has made it impossible for most companies to pay
their tariffs and taxes to the State, poses a threat to the
stability resulting from the Libreville Agreements and
the decisions of successive summits of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) held
in N'Djamena. All of those violations disrupt the daily
lives of people and provide a particularly painful and
disturbing illustration of the situation.

Nevertheless, generally speaking, the process ofthe
implementation of the structures recommended by the
most recent Summit of Heads of State and Government,
held in N'Djamena on April 18, has been moving
forward in a manner satisfactory to Central Africans
with respect to the recommendations that have been
made.

However, the situation remains worrisome, despite
the goodwill of the Government and the efforts of the
Mission for the Consolidation of Peace in the Central
African Republic (MICOPAX). Indeed, certain
incidents that have been noted continue to be worrisome
for national and international public opinion and could
hinder the ongoing efforts of the Government and the
international community to achieve security, peace
and stability in the Central African Republic and the
subregion.

Given that chaotic situation, which has caused deep
upheaval within the State, what do we intend to do, and
how shall we do it?

First and foremost, on the institutional and
political fronts, pursuant to the recommendations
of the Extraordinary Summit of Heads of State and
Government of ECCAS held in N'Djamena on April
18, in the coming days, following broad consultations,
a Government will be established, a Government of
national unity.

Although the National Transitional Council was
supposed to have 105 members, the ECCAS subregional
authorities increased it to 135, so as to ensure the
broadest representation possible in the transition
management process .

The illegally elected Office of the National
Transitional Council should be abolished in the coming
days so as to adapt to current circumstances. Here I
would recall that the outlines of this political transition
were sketched out by ECCAS during the various
Summits held in N'Djamena on 3 and 18 April, as well
as in Brazzaville, on 3 May.

It is clearly stated in the N'Djamena declaration
that all actors involved in managing the transition,
including the Head ofthe transition, the Prime Minister,
the Ministers and the members of the Office of the
Transitional National Council cannot present their
candidature during the next presidential elections.

We would note that the international community
has unequivocally condemned that forcible and
unconstitutional change. However, ECCAS noted
the election by the National Transitional Council of
Mr. Michel Djotodia as the President of the Republic
and conferred upon him the title of Head of the
Transition. ECCAS also recognized the legitimacy of
the Prime Minister, because he was the head of the
Government of National Unity established under the
Libreville Agreements of 11 January 2013.

Concerning the security situation and the rule of
law, as we have indicated, the collapse of the State
and the lack of any defence or security forces have led
to a security vacuum resulting in total anarchy, with
widespread violence and serious violations of human
rights, including the looting of public and private
property, arbitrary arrests and detentions, sexual
violence against women and children, torture, rape,
targeted killings, the recruitment of child soldiers and
other atrocities committed by uncontrolled Se'le'ka
elements and unidentified groups.

Nor was the United Nations spared, as residences
of both national and international staff were looted and
pillaged, and vehicles stolen. Bangui is witnessing an
alarming situation, where the looting and pillaging of
houses has reached an unprecedented and unimaginable
level, setting the country back several decades. All
of this has been accompanied by car theft and armed
robbery. Schools and many businesses in Bangui have
not fully reopened because of insecurity.

Outside Bangui, security conditions continue to
deteriorate as Seleka elements engage in vandalism,
violations of human rights and attacks on the civilian
population. It should be noted that the looting primarily
targets non-Muslims and spares Muslims. This situation
is a source of resentment in the Christian communities
and inflames religious tensions.

Finally, the climate of insecurity in the Central
African Republic affects the stability of the entire
subregion.

The Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) thrives in
lawless areas and remains a threat to security and the
rule of law, having killed at least seven people and
carried out kidnappings in the reporting period. At the
same time, a leader ofthe group has been killed and some
of its fighters have defected. Uganda had at one point
announced the suspension of its monitoring activities
in LRA area of activities following a statement by the
Head of State of the transition, but reversed its decision
following an agreement reached between the various
institutions engaged in the hunt for Joseph Kony and
his men.

We note that the Se'leka offensive destroyed
a large part of the country's judicial system and
administrative infrastructure, including town halls.
That will ultimately raise questions about voting lists
in the electoral process ahead. The Sele'ka offensive
has destroyed law enforcement. The forces of defence
and security - the gendarmerie, the police and the
army - have disintegrated. Despite repeated calls for
the old forces of defence and security to go back to
work, so far only a small number of officers ofthe army
and police have rejoined the ranks. Although Seleka
took control of all political and military levers of the
country after seizing power, it cannot restore order.

Despite the efforts of the Government in the fields
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
and security sector reform, its results have not been
commensurate with its investment. The Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), which
had deployed nearly 700 men, has seen the number of its
personnel rise to 2,000; hence the urgency of deploying
them fully equipped and trained with a mandate to use
force. The reform of the security sector, which was
long on standby, should be activated in order to lay
the groundwork for creating new forces of defence and
security.

With respect to the protection of human rights, the
precarious situation deteriorated even further during
the conflict, with summary executions and targeted
attacks motivated by religious or tribal affiliation,
violence against women and girls, the recruitment
of child soldiers, and so on. In short, human rights
violations of every stripe have been committed, and we
must find ways and means of stopping them.

The humanitarian situation deteriorated after
Bangui fell. Nearly 47,000 people have fled the
country to seek refuge in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Congo, Cameroon and Chad. Nearly
1.5 million have been displaced internally. The absence
of a humanitarian corridor, insecurity and the looting
of property, warehouses and vehicles belonging to
non-governmental organizations complicate the work
of relief and other assistance to the people.

This chaotic situation leads us to ask the Security
Council to inscribe the situation in the Central African
Republic on its agenda in order to ensure that it will no
longer be a forgotten crisis. Faced with the dissolution of
the army, and in order to save a people in great distress
and before the necessary deployment of the 2,000-
man force of the ECCAS Mission de Consolidation
de la Paix - which we would like to see opened to
non-member States of the ECCAS space - we ask
France, which is endowed with a clear United Nations
mandate, to intervene by force to disarm Seleka, whose
abuses the Central African people have been compelled
to endure.

We also ask the European Union and the African
Union to do everything possible to fund and/or
provide other resources to the forces that would
intervene under that mission. We ask the United
Nations to appoint a special rapporteur to investigate
violations of human rights in the Central African
Republic in order to determine the extent of the crimes
committed and prosecute their perpetrators in national
and international courts alike, and to assist in the
opening of humanitarian corridors in order to allow
humanitarian actors to provide relief and assistance
to displaced persons and other populations. We call
on the international community to mobilize to provide
the significant emergency relief that is critical to the
survival more than 1.5 million victims waiting for
relief.

Finally, we suggest that a Chairman be appointed
to the currently leaderless Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, by
mutual agreement with the Central African authorities.
Once we have resolved the security situation, even if
only partially, we can begin to rebuild the State and to
consider calmly preparing the transparent and credible
elections that everyone wants.

Before concluding, allow me to convey the heartfelt
gratitude of my Government to the United Nations, the
African Union, the European Union, the International
Organization of la Francophonie, the ECCAS States,
France, the United States of America, the United
Kingdom, Belgium, Luxembourg, Australia, China,
Japan, Germany, the Republic of Korea, the Kingdom
of Morocco, Uganda, and all bilateral and multilateral
partners that have always supported the Central African
Republic in its relentless pursuit of peace and stability.

To all those who have been overtaken by fatigue,
we ask them to continue despite it all to believe in
the Central African Republic and to act on its behalf.
Helping the Central African Republic is to continue
stabilizing the subregion of Central Africa. Helping
the Central African Republic is to consolidate peace
in Africa. Helping the Central African Republic is to
fulfil the international community's duty of solidarity
vis-a-vis one of its members clinging to life, peace and
the fulfillment his people.

