Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First, I would like to
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali, His
Excellency Mr. Tiebile Drame, to the Security Council
Chamber. I would also like to convey my deepest
condolences to the Government and the people of Mali
on the attack on the village of Sobame-Da that resulted
in the loss of 95 civilian lives and injured many others.

Like other speakers before me, I would also
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, for
his comprehensive briefing.

Indonesia greatly appreciates the work of the
Special Representative and of MINUSMA in ensuring
peace and stability in Mali. We would also like to pay
tribute to the fallen personnel of MINUSMA and convey
our sincere appreciation to all personnel who continue
to risk their lives working in a difficult situation.

Indonesia welcomes and commends the recent
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the mandate of MINUSMA (S/2019/454). The
comprehensive assessment of the situation on the
ground and the recommendations contained in the report
clearly serve as valuable input for our deliberations on
the future of MINUSMA when its mandate expires at
the end ofthis month. Our recent Security Council visit
to Mali in March also provided us with a much clearer
picture of what is happening on the ground, as we also
had the opportunity to meet with many representatives
of the United Nations system there.

Based on that and based on recent developments,
we have several points we would like to share with the
Council. First, we welcome the positive developments
in Mali, including the establishment of a consensus
Government and the signing of a political agreement
between key political stakeholders in the country.
We also welcome the limited but continued progress
achieved in the implementation of the Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation. We hope that the recent
political momentum will speed up progress in priority
areas. We urge all Malian stakeholders to work together
towards the completion of constitutional reform through
an inclusive and consultative process.

In addition, we cannot overstate the importance
of ownership and engagement of all parties in this
process, including the Government, signatory armed
groups, political opposition groups and civil society.
We commend the continued efforts to support the
redeployment of Malian defence and security forces
through an accelerated disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process. We hope that any outstanding
issues will be resolved in a timely manner. We also
view that the establishment of a northern economic
development zone needs to be pursued swiftly, so that
the living conditions of the Malian populations in the
north could be improved.

Secondly, we note with concern the security
situation in Mali, particularly in the north and central
regions. In this regard, we believe that the effective
redeployment of the reconstituted and reformed Malian
defence and security forces and the restoration of State
authority are of paramount importance. It is high time
for the Malians to take the reins of their destiny, so
that the State can deliver on its promises to the people
who have entrusted it with their future, including by
ensuring security and the provision of basic services.

With regard to MINUSMA, Indonesia believes
that its presence in Mali remains crucial to enabling
further progress and to preventing further deterioration
of the situation. We support the mandate renewal so
that the Mission can provide certainty in its support of
peace efforts in Mali. We appreciate the increasingly
agile posture adopted by the Mission. We concur that
given the volatility of situation in Mali, a significant
reduction or withdrawal of the Mission is not the wisest
way forward. It should be the other way around, namely,
providing MINUSMA with greater resources.

We take note also of the statement made earlier
by the Special Representative, highlighting that 70 per
cent of the uniformed personnel of MINUSMA, is
currently in the field giving protection to civilians. That
is an important aspect. We need to continue to support
MINUSMA. We also feel that the Mission could benefit
from a clearer mandate, division of labour with the
United Nations country team, enhanced coordination
with other security presences in Mali and, of course,
closer collaboration with the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel). We took note of
that during our visit to Mali and in our coordination
and collaboration with the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. I
think that that is an important aspect, which must be
clearly stated.

We also remain concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Mali. We deplore the hindrance of
humanitarian access and call on all parties to ensure
that humanitarian assistance reaches those who need it
the most.

Thirdly and lastly, we would like to reiterate our
belief that it is only by addressing the root causes
of conflict that stability and progress in Mali can
truly materialize. We therefore call on regional
and international partners to support sustainable
development in Mali, in line with the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. Earlier today, we
also discussed the issue of conflict. Conflict cannot be
resolved without development assistance in addressing
its root causes.

The country is now at a critical juncture. It is
important for all of us to enhance cooperation to
ensure lasting peace and development for the benefit
of the entire Malian population. I believe that from the
statements we have heard thus far today, there is unity
in the Council. I sincerely hope that this unity can be
translated concretely into a robust draft resolution when
we discuss the Mission's mandate renewal.

