Mr. Rosales Diaz (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): I would like first to convey the condolences
of the Government of Nicaragua to our sister nation of
China for the earthquake that occurred this morning. I
would also like to congratulate you on your presidency
of the Security Council and to thank you for convening
this meeting on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine.

Nicaragua, as a member of the Non-Aligned
Movement, fully associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Egypt as
Chair of our Movement. I would also like to thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, for the briefing he gave the Council
this morning.

Once again, Nicaragua reiterates its profound
condemnation of Israel's illegal occupation of all
Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese territories, and we
demand its immediate withdrawal. We condemn the
Israeli policies and practices of construction and
non-dismantling of settlements, as well as the inhuman
blockade of Gaza and the policy of breaking up the
West Bank and other Palestinian territories. Having
converted the Gaza Strip into a cemetery, the
occupying army has launched a policy aimed at
completely crushing the Palestinian people with the
construction of 1,600 new settlements in East
Jerusalem, breaching international law, particularly the
Fourth Geneva Convention. Israel has also illegally
and provocatively designated two sacred places in the
occupied Palestinian territory as belonging to Israeli
national heritage.

As if this were not enough, the occupying force
has decided to proceed with mass expulsions by
promulgating a military order, which, if implemented,
would mean that tens of thousands of Palestinians
would be arrested and illegally expelled from their
homes in the West Bank. This order is not merely
illegal and in violation of human rights; its wording is
so general that, in theory, it would enable the Israeli
army to deport all the Palestinian inhabitants of the
West Bank by classifying them as infiltrators, thus
achieving the aim of cleansing the entire West Bank of
its Arab population.

Nicaragua rejects and roundly condemns the
illegal expansion of settlements and the expulsion of
Palestinian inhabitants, and categorically denounces
Israeli plans and actions aimed at the demographic
re-engineering of East Jerusalem by cleansing it of all
Arab characteristics. This is further proof that for Israel
the two-State solution, living side by side, is not an
option. Israel, ignoring the international outrage, in
contravention of the most basic rules of international
law, is violating the Charter of the United Nations and
every human rights law and ignoring the relevant
United Nations resolutions - as well as the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice, which
declared the wall to be illegal - thus perpetuating the
hardline and brutal occupation of Palestine.

For some inexplicable reason, many developed
countries, supposedly in favour of human rights,
maintain political, economic and military support for
Israel, thus rewarding it for its conduct, such as, for
example, the updating of the agreement with the
European Union and the invitation to Israel to join the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development. It is unacceptable to see the total
impunity with which Israeli actions and policies have
been carried out over the last 60 years, and
demonstrating the surprising incapacity of the Security
Council to shoulder its responsibilities.

