Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Let me start by
congratulating the delegation of the United Kingdom
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of March. I would also like to put on record
our appreciation for the delegation of Togo, and in
particular Ambassador Kodjo Menan, for their
stewardship of the Council during the month of
February.

The political, security and humanitarian
situations in Somalia and their consequences,
particularly the problem of piracy and hostage-taking,
are of serious concern to the international community.
Today's open debate is therefore a timely endeavour to
comprehensively address the situation in Somalia. We
appreciate the efforts of the delegation of the United
Kingdom in organizing the meeting and thank you
personally, Sir, for presiding over today's deliberations.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative, Mr. Augustine Mahiga, for
their comprehensive and valuable briefings.

A few days back more than 50 countries,
including my own, participated in the London
conference on Somalia. The conference served a useful
purpose in reiterating the support of the international
community for the comprehensive stabilization of the
situation in Somalia, while taking stock of the progress
made so far in the political, security and humanitarian
fields. The conference also reminded us of the difficult
challenges that lie ahead.

The past year has been a mixed bag for Somalia.
There have been significant gains made by the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and Kenyan and
Ethiopian forces in securing Mogadishu and other
areas in southern and central Somalia. The extended
transition period saw the adoption of a comprehensive
road map by the Transitional Federal Institutions
(TFIs), in accordance with the June 2011 Kampala
Accord. The effective engagement of the international
community also helped to tide over the worst phase of
the humanitarian crisis. Still, millions have continued
to suffer from the crisis and the implementation of the
road map has left much to be desired. In spite of the
pressure it is under, Al-Shabaab with its recent
affiliation to Al-Qaida remains a serious threat to peace
and stability in Somalia and in the larger region.

There is, however, an opportunity today in
Somalia that has not been available for years. The TFIs
could consolidate the gains made by AMISOM. and the
forces of the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia by urgently addressing the issues of
governance and basic services in areas recovered from
Al-Shabaab. That would also result in the emergence of
organized economic activities and employment
generation. For that to materialize, the international
community must persevere and continue its effort for
the people of Somalia.

AMISOM, as the mainstay of security-related
operations in Somalia, deserves our continued support.
In that connection, we welcome the Council's adoption
of resolution 2036 (2012), which provides for force
enablers and multipliers for AMISOM. and also
expands the United Nations support package. The
resolution will make available more sustainable and
predictable resources for the troop-contributing
countries and assist in the full implementation of the
new strategic concept of AMISOM, including its
limited maritime component. This would help
AMISOM. to sanitize the Somali coastline and deprive
Al-Shabaab of revenues earned from port facilities and
the export of charcoal.

We hope that the Council will agree to include
naval assets for the reimbursement of contingent-
owned equipment when it considers the extension of
the AMISOM. mandate later this year. India made an
uncaveated contribution of $2 million in 2011 to the
United Nations Trust Fund in Support of AMISOM. We
stand ready to provide further support to AMISOM.

In parallel with AMISOM. operations, Somali
stakeholders have to build on the gains made in the
field of security through progress on the political track.
The TFIs should rid themselves of internal divisions
and focus their energies on implementing the Kampala
Accord and the road map. The drafting and adoption of
a new constitution and its endorsement by a constituent
assembly in a timely manner, as per the Garowe
Principles, should remain a priority task. That process
should be as broad-based as possible, taking into
consideration the traditional social structure and
security situation on the ground.

Piracy off the coast of Somalia remains a serious
problem for maritime security and trade. A large
portion of the world's trade, including India's,
estimated at about $120 billion annually, passes
through the Gulf of Aden. Piracy off the coast of
Somalia is adversely affecting that trade at a cost of
several billion dollars, due to the rerouting of vessels
into safer routes and increased costs of insurance and
security. As we speak, a number of seafarers, including
33 Indians, remain hostage to pirates. Their
humanitarian condition remains a source of serious
concern to the Government and people of India. What
is more worrisome is that attacks by pirates have been
increasing in spite of counter-piracy operations.

Given the growing scope and expanding coverage
of piracy off the coast of Somalia, the international
community has to think about the adoption of a
comprehensive counter-piracy strategy. Such a strategy
should involve the effective sanitization of the Somali
coastline, the priority enactment of national laws to
criminalize piracy as defined in the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, and United Nations-
led anti-piracy forces to conduct naval operations and
coordinate anti-piracy operations by various naval
forces.

India, on its part, continues to undertake
anti-piracy patrols in the Gulf of Aden and has
deployed its ships in the eastern and north-eastern
Arabian Sea. So far, the TFIs have paid little attention
to this problem. We expect the TFIs to expeditiously
implement the benchmarks on piracy contained in the
road map on transitional tasks. We stand ready to help
in capacity-building of the TFIs and the States of the
region for effective measures to combat piracy.

In conclusion, to ensure lasting peace and
security in Somalia, economic development has to
form an integral part of our efforts. The international
community should expand its development assistance
to Somalia so that the Somali people directly benefit
from the peace dividend. India, on its part, will
continue to extend help to Somalia in capacity-building
through human resource development. We have
recently increased the number of scholarships for
Somali students and experts. We have also contributed
to the information technology sector in Somalia. We
will continue to partner with the Somali authorities as
they work towards turning a new page.

