Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
important briefings delivered by Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General Michel Kafando and Ambassador
Jiirg Lauber, in his capacity as Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, on his
recent visit to the country.

Peru underscores the importance of the
inter-Burundian dialogue, andhopes thatthe Government
will reconsider its position that the dialogue has become
obsolete under the new Constitution and subsequently
decided not to participate in its latest meeting. We
believe that an inclusive process of inclusive dialogue
is indispensable to improving the political situation and
building sustainable peace in Burundi.

In that regard, we stress the importance that the so-
called 2018 Kayanza road map, on the organization of
the 2020 general elections, include all political forces
in the country in its drafting and implementation. We
also consider it important to expedite the dialogue
between the Government and the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights so that the agency can
resume its activities in Burundi, in a context of ongoing
reports of human rights violations and abuses.

On the other hand, we acknowledge the
Government's efforts to strengthen the economy of
the country through the national development plan,
with a view to achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals, thereby addressing the root causes of conflicts
and reaching sustainable peace. We underline the
importance of the international community's support
for that plan, which seeks to promote development in
Burundi's rural areas, taking into account governance,
the sustainable management of the environment and
planned land use. In that regard, we highlight the work
of Ambassador Lauber and the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission.

Finally, we believe that it is important for the
Council to monitor developments in the country closely,
and that regional organizations and neighbouring
countries support them more closely in order to ensure
an environment conducive to the holding of credible,
transparent and inclusive elections in 2020.

