Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting. I also thank the Special Envoy ofthe
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan De Mistura,
for participating by video-teleconference from Geneva.

Since the beginning of the crisis in Syria, the
Syrian Government has spared no effort to reach a
political settlement. It has repeatedly demonstrated
its commitment and will pursue that approach on the
basis of its desire to end the bloodshed of our Syrian
people, restore security and stability and implement
the will of the Syrian people. The Syrian Government
has officially announced its acceptance ofthe cessation
of hostilities on the basis of ongoing military counter-
terrorism efforts against Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front and
its affiliates, and other terrorist organizations linked to
Al-Qaeda, in accordance with the Russian-American
joint declaration, which the Government of Syria
considers to be an important step towards a political
settlement. We reaffirm our readiness to contribute to
the implementation of the cessation of hostilities.

To ensure the successful and timely implementation
of the cessation of hostilities, the Government of
Syria continues to coordinate with the Russian side
to identify the areas and armed groups to be included
in the cessation of hostilities as long as it remains
in effect. In this regard, we stress once again the
importance of controlling the borders, stopping the
support provided by certain countries to armed groups
and preventing those groups from strengthening their
capacities or changing their locations, in order to avoid
any eventuality that could undermine the agreement.
The Government also reserves the right of its armed
forces to respond to any breach of the agreement by
those terrorist groups against Syrian citizens or the
Syrian armed forces.

The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic
participated in the recent Geneva talks in good faith
and full earnest in order to reach a political settlement
to the crisis in my country, Syria. Today, I reiterate the
readiness of the Government of Syria to participate
actively in all sincere efforts to reach a political
settlement in which Syrians and Syrians alone shall
decide on their future and their choices through a
Syrian-led dialogue among Syrians, without foreign
intervention. That would safeguard Syria's sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity, pursuant
to the second preambular paragraph of resolution 2268
(2016), just adopted.

On the basis of the foregoing, the ball is again
in the court of the other parties, which have yet
to prove their good intentions and commitment to
facilitating the political settlement of the crisis in
Syria - without imposing preconditions on the
Syrian people and without interfering in our domestic
affairs - by ending their support and justifications for
terrorism and abandonging all actions that could hinder
political settlement. The Syrians are invited to work on
strenthening national reconciliation and to make every
effort to defeat terrorism and to rebuild a newSyria,
united in its territory and people, and to protect its
sovereignty and its national independent stability.

In her statement our colleague, the representative
of the United States, said that there are no Al-Nusra
Front forces in the town of Daraya, located in a suburb
of Damascus. That is incorrect in essence and in
practice. There are Al-Nusra Front elements in Daraya.
I have circulated to members of the Council a list of
the names of hundreds of terrorist fighters who were
killed in Syria in 2015. Most are from Al-Nusra Front
and Da'esh, and some were killed in Daraya.

I recall that, as the experts of the Council's
subsidiary committees are well aware, the real name
of the Al-Nusra Front is Al-Qaeda in the Levant. We
are talking about the Al-Qaeda organization. Who is
the leader of Al-Nusra Front? He is Abu Mohammad
Al-Julani, the former deputy of Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi,
the leader of Da'esh, who went his separate way and
established the Al-Nusra Front in Syria. The Al-Nusra
Front is in effect Al-Qaeda, and as its leader Al-Julani
has sworn allegiance to Ayman Al-Zawahiri, the head
of Al-Qaeda. Al-Nusra Front is thereby affiliated with
Al-Qaeda.

Al-Zawahiri appointed a Saudi mufti, Abdullah
Al-Muhaysini, to be the mufti for the Al-Nusrah Front
in Idlib, with the authority to address issues such issues
as the eating of liver and the beheading of people. In
other words, the head of an Al-Qaida affiliate has
appointed a person who is on the list of designated
individuals and entities sponsoring terrorism to be the
religious authority in Idlib in Syria. This is the true
face of the Al-Nusrah Front, even if some are trying to
overlook the facts and have it be considered as an entity
working to fight terrorism in Syria.

The Al-Nusrah Front is in fact part of Ahrar
Al-Sham, yet another terrorist organization. Created
by the Turkish intelligence services, Ahrar Al-Sham
works in the north of Syria near the border with Turkey.

Finally, some started to violate resolution 2268
(2016) the moment it was adopted. They have also
been saying things that have nothing to do with the
contents of the resolution. Therefore, I call upon the
representatives of those States that have spoken of
my country in an inappropriate manner, in violation
of the provisions of the resolution, to start abiding by
the resolution in this very Chamber before abiding by
it outside.

The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.
