Ms. Grignon (Kenya): It is a pleasure to see you,
Madam President, presiding over this very important
subject matter. We appreciate the opportunity to make
our statement.

Kenya has suffered some of the most atrocious acts
ofterrorism. We recall some ofthe most recent. In 1998,
the Al-Qaida terror group bombed the United States
Embassy in Nairobi, killing 224 people and wounding
over 5,000. The majority of the dead or wounded were
Kenyans along with several Americans, even though
Americans were the main target. In 2002, the Paradise
Hotel in the coastal city of Mombasa was bombed by
terrorists, targeting Israeli tourists and killing over 15
people. On 21 September 2013, Al-Shabaab, an affiliate
of Al-Qaida, devastated the Westgate Mall in Nairobi,
an incident in which over 70 people, including Kenyans
and foreigners of various nationalities, perished. Dozens
of lower-level terror attacks have been witnessed in
various parts of the country over the years. That is our
story, our experience with terror.

Terrorism is not a national phenomenon; it is indeed
an international phenomenon. In fact, terrorism in Kenya
and the region stems from the perennial instability in

neighbouring countries, particularly the Al-Shabaab
movement in Somalia. Kenya is a target only because of
our avowed war on terror and our unflinching support
and partnerships with our key allies in the fight against
terrorism and violent extremism in all its forms and
manifestations. Our experience and policies add legal
and moral authority to our desire to fully engage here
on the theme of today's meeting, not just in terms of our
own self-defence, but also in terms of the larger quest to
ensure international peace and security with due regard
for international human rights and freedoms.

In 2011, Kenya crossed into Somalia in pursuit
of Al-Shabaab and subsequently joined up with the
African Union Mission in Somalia to vanquish that
movement. That was because Somalia had become the
breeding ground for Al-Qaida in the region as a result
of the activities of the Al-Shabaab militia. Through
the exchange of foreign fighters and ideological and
material support, Al-Shabaab became the link with
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula. Such linkages
have been well documented in successive reports to
the Council by the Monitoring Group on Somalia and
Eritrea. We shall, therefore, not elaborate on them now.

Kenya's geographical position has made it easier
for Al-Shabaab to recruit and radicalize Kenyan youth.
Apart from radicalizing our youth, the architects
of terrorism have embarked on distributing video
CDs propagating radical ideologies and violently
targeting Islamic teachers who do not subscribe to
their radical interpretation of the Holy Quran. The
messages contained in the CDs urge young people to
move to Somalia and other jihad theatres to wage war
against Governments in an effort to establish Islamic
caliphates. The radicalization and the indoctrination to
adopt violent extremism have been facilitated by the
prevailing economic hardships and unemployment in
countries of the region.

The presence of an established Al-Shabaab
infrastructure in refugee camps and the use of such
refugee cover for terrorist attacks has also greatly
contributed to terrorism in the region. The porous
nature of our borders facilitates the proliferation of
firearms and explosives from Somalia into the camps
Those weapons are used to propagate and perpetuate
criminal activities and acts of terror in the region.

The tentacles of terrorism now encompass other
transnational crimes, such as drug-trafficking,
poaching, commodity smuggling and money
laundering, with the proceeds being used to fund
terror activities and extremism in the region. Since
Al-Shabaab publicly declared Kenya a target of terror
attacks, the Kenyan Government has mobilized its law
enforcement machinery to counter the threat. It has
also fostered regional partnerships with neighbouring
countries to tackle the menace. We cannot do it alone.

Similarly, the Government has been engaging
local communities at the grass-roots level through
their respective county governments at the lowest level
and other community leadership to fund programmes
aimed at reducing the vulnerability of youth to
violent extremism. The decentralization of funds and
decision-making to county governments so as to initiate
poverty-eradication programmes is now a cornerstone
policy of the State. It is also enshrined in the country's
Constitution. In addition, we welcome the current
efforts by the Secretary-General and the World Bank
President, together with other development partners,
to establish sustainable peace in the region through
an ambitious infrastructure development programme,
developed in consultation with the African Union, that
would open the region to trade and investments.

The Government of Kenya is committed to, and has
actually created national versions of, the four pillars of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, and has taken
steps to implement the Strategy. Such measures include
the formulation of a national counter-terrorism strategy
that emphasizes the need for inter-agency cooperation
among all the relevant stakeholders. We have enacted
counter-terrorism legislation that gives Kenya
jurisdiction over various terrorist offences in a manner
that corresponds to the universal counter-terrorism
instruments to which we are a party. Kenya has acted
on violations fiercely and fearlessly. Another measure
is aimed at combating the financing of terrorism. To
curb the financing of terror, Kenya has established
a Financial Reporting Centre to analyse financial
transactions and work with competent law enforcement
authorities to investigate the financing of terror, even
activities that are masked by an innocent-looking front.

Another measure relates to border security. In that
regard, Kenya's established border control is being
enhanced through passenger profiling and screening
procedures imposed on persons entering and leaving
the country. We are also engaged in capacity-building
through continuous training, increasing the number
of police officers and acquiring modern equipment
and technologies. Community policing and counter-
terrorism awareness programmes have also been
put in place to enhance general vigilance among the
population.

To counter radicalization and violent extremism, our
authorities liaise with religious leaders and civil society
organizations so as to counter extremist messaging.
Such collaborative efforts between law enforcement
and local communities have actually borne fruit, as
is evident from the latest successes in countering
extremism in the coastal areas of Mombasa. We are
also fostering regional and international cooperation.

In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council
that Kenya remains committed to contributing to
regional and international counter-terrorism efforts.
My delegation calls on the international community and
the United Nations system to strengthen their collective
counter-terrorism measures, especially through the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
That will enhance the gravitas for countering incitement
to violent extremism and disrupting terrorist networks,
the movement of foreign terrorist fighters and illicit
financial flows. Lastly, we urge an intensified, more
structured and effective exchange of information
among Member States to deal with terrorism.

