The Deputy Secretary-General: I would like to
begin by expressing our sorrow over the heavy loss of
life, injuries and destruction caused by the powerful
earthquake that struck Algeria yesterday. We extend
our condolences to the families of the deceased and to
the Government of Algeria.

The United Nations is prepared to assist in any
way it can. The United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has already
provided an emergency cash grant of $50,000. A
United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination
Team has been deployed to support the Algerian
Government in coordinating the international response
and to assist in assessing priority needs. The United
Nations has also contacted several Governments, which
have put search and rescue teams and relief supplies on
standby to support the efforts of the Algerian
Government.

Mr. President, I wish to thank you for this
opportunity to provide an update on the humanitarian
situation in Iraq and the activities of the United Nations
on the ground.

Following my remarks, as you have indicated,
Sir, my colleagues from the United Nations
Development Programme, the World Food Programme,
the World Health Organization and the United Nations
Children's Fund will brief the Council. The Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Kenzo Oshima, who has just
returned from Baghdad, is also with us today. All of
them will be pleased to respond to questions.

I would also like to acknowledge the presence of
Mr. Jakob Kellenberger, the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). He
and his colleagues did outstanding work during the
conflict in Iraq and will continue to be our close
partners in the crucial period ahead.

Let me start by stressing the strong commitment
of the United Nations system to fulfilling the
humanitarian, reconstruction and other mandates
assigned to it in the resolution that the Council has just
adopted. The humanitarian situation in Iraq remains
very serious. The breakdown of essential services and
law and order has resulted in a range of urgent needs.
A major humanitarian crisis has been averted so far.
But the civilian population, and children in particular,
remain at risk, particularly if the security situation does
not improve substantially in the near future.

United Nations agencies are at work throughout
the country, providing food, water, medicine and other
emergency assistance. They have helped repair water
and sanitation facilities, assisted in the restoration of
electricity and provided relief to internally displaced
persons and malnourished children.

I would like to pay special tribute to the courage
and commitment of our 3,400 national staff, who
continued to deliver essential supplies to hospitals,
displaced populations and other vulnerable groups
throughout the period of conflict.
The ability of the United Nations to respond
rapidly and effectively from the outset of the crisis was
greatly enhanced by a range of preparedness measures.
Inter-agency coordination resulted in joint planning
and an integrated plan. Substantial quantities of
humanitarian supplies were prepositioned inside Iraq
and in several neighbouring countries. Iraq's
neighbours have also been helpful in ensuring the swift
transit of supplies through five main access corridors.

Since international staff started returning to Iraq
one month ago. we have continued to expand our
presence. More than 300 international staff have been
deployed, with teams positioned in all five subregions.
And, as authorized by the Council, the United Nations
Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission has provided a wide
range of support and services to United Nations
agencies on their return to the country.

The Humanitarian Coordinator and the Area
Coordinators have been holding regular meetings with
United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). In addition, sectoral
coordination groups have been set up in priority areas
with the involvement of relevant ministries, other Iraqi
authorities, and representatives of the Office of
Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance.
Coordination with the latter Office in particular, and
with military authorities, is crucial for ensuring both an
effective humanitarian response and the safety and
security of humanitarian staff.

The overarching priority of virtually all our
assistance efforts is the reactivation of essential public
services. This includes not only health services,
electricity and water supply, but also the public
distribution system for food, on which much of the
population depends for their survival. United Nations
agencies are working in full support of the relevant
Iraqi national authorities.

One major constraint on public service providers
has been the inability to pay salaries and other running
costs. One-off payments of $20 have been made in
some locations, and we are encouraged by indications
that a regular system of salary payments to public
sector employees will begin shortly.

The other problem, of course, has been the
looting of a large number of essential public facilities.
This leads me naturally to the question of security and
law and order. The general lack of law and order has
had a wide variety of humanitarian consequences.
Ministries, water treatment plants, hospitals and
warehouses have been devastated. Many facilities were
repaired or restocked only to be looted again a few
days later. Security concerns also include unexploded
ordnance, which threatens the civilian population,
particularly children, and impedes transport and a
resumption of normal agricultural activities.

The very fear of violence in many areas is making
it more difficult, and often impossible, to deliver drugs
and other essential supplies, and is preventing people
from going to work. We have also had first-hand
reports about women who are afraid to go outside, and
especially about girls who are afraid to return to
school.

Such insecurity is also a major impediment to
humanitarian assistance activities. With the movement
of our staff limited in many urban areas, they cannot
reach people in need. Personnel of several NGOs have
been attacked in cities and on the main roads to
Baghdad.

The threat of violence has also resulted in
population movements, such as the displacement of
Iraqi Arabs from several areas. Such displacements
highlight, yet again, the vulnerability of civilians in
conflict and post-conflict environments to human rights
violations and other threats. United Nations agencies,
under the leadership of the Humanitarian Coordinator,
and working with the ICRC and NGOs, have drawn up
a protection framework for internally displaced
persons, returning refugees and other civilians at risk.

Finally, I would like to say a word about Iraq's
cultural heritage. The destruction and looting that
occurred in Baghdad and at archaeological sites,
historic buildings, monuments and museums around the
country was a tragedy. International experts working
under the auspices of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization have just visited
Baghdad and are now finalizing their report. We are all
strongly committed to working with Iraqis and all
others concerned to protect and rehabilitate the
country's cultural heritage and to fight the illicit traffic
in cultural property.

Our ability to respond to the urgent needs I have
outlined depends greatly on whether the necessary
resources will be available. To date, more than $700
million has been received in response to our flash
appeal, and I would like to thank donors for their
generosity.

Moreover, as implementation of Security Council
resolution 1472 (2003) continues, the Office of the Iraq
Programme and United Nations agencies have
confirmed that nearly $1 billion worth of priority
humanitarian supplies can be shipped by 3 June. As a
result of the resolution that the Council has adopted
today, additional priority supplies will be made
available to the Iraqi people.

At the same time, there remain significant gaps in
funding for key priorities such as the re-establishment
of the health system, nutrition programmes, water
facilities and restoring the education system.

As United Nations agencies continue to expand
their presence in Iraq, they are conducting
comprehensive assessments that will enable us to re-
prioritize our response plans. Based on these new
assessments, we will be launching a revised
humanitarian appeal in the second half of June.

In conclusion, let me stress that the United
Nations and its agencies, funds and programmes are
committed to doing their utmost to help the people of
Iraq in their time of need.

