Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would like at the outset to congratulate you,
Mr. President, upon the assumption by your friendly
country, Viet Nam, of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. For us, Viet Nam is a symbol
of sacrifice as well as of the struggle against foreign
occupation and colonialism. It is also a symbol of the
victory of right and justice over injustice.

I thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs for his very valuable briefing. I align myself
with the statement to be made by the representative of
Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. I
would like to seize this opportunity to thank all those
who spoke before the Council today and referred to the
importance of the proximity talks between my country,
Syria, and Israel.

We thank the President for giving us the
opportunity to speak before the Security Council in the
framework of its monthly discussion of the situation in
the Middle East. We are full of hope that the Security
Council can consider all the issues on its agenda, and
in particular, the question of the Middle East, leading
to the end of the foreign occupation of our Arab land
and to the achievement of a comprehensive and just
peace in the region.

At the summit held in March in Damascus, Arab
leaders emphasized the importance of working to bring
about a comprehensive and just peace in the Middle
East based on the relevant international resolutions, the
principle of land for peace, the Madrid terms of
reference and the Arab peace initiative. The process
seeks the restoration of Arab rights, the return of
Palestinian refugees and the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State, with its capital Al-Quds,
and full Israeli withdrawal from the occupied Syrian
Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967 and from the
remaining occupied Lebanese land.

Despite the fact that proximity talks have begun
between Syria and Israel through a Turkish mediator -
negotiations that aim at exploring intentions and at
finding common ground for moving on to direct
negotiations at a later stage - the sudden adoption by
the Israeli Knesset of a reckless resolution stipulating
that if two thirds of its members approve or provide for
any attempt to withdraw from the occupied Syrian
Golan, the proposal must then go to a general
referendum, runs counter to the goal of establishing a
comprehensive and just peace in the Middle East.

In parallel, Israel's unprecedented refusal to
respond to international legitimacy on the Israeli-
Palestinian track and on Israeli settlement policies in
the occupied Arab territory, as well as the military
training exercises it continuously undertakes, show
clearly that Israel is not serious about seeking peace. It
is continuing its occupation, aggression, settlement-
building, military escalation and provocation, rejecting
the elements of peace that are supported by the entire
international community.

Israel, the occupying Power, has continued its
hostile and aggressive policies against the Palestinian
people despite the ceasefire agreement in the Gaza
Strip. Extrajudicial killings have continued, as have the
starvation, injustice, coercion, collective punishment,
confiscation of land, human rights violations,
compulsory expulsions and displacements and the
closure of crossing points. The latter has turned Gaza
into the largest prison in the world, preventing the
population from getting the basic needs of life and
impeding the humanitarian assistance work of
international organizations. Israel has even been trying
to reduce the question of Palestine from a question of
the just struggle of a suppressed and repressed people
living under occupation to a matter of merely
providing humanitarian services such as ensuring
supplies of food, electricity, medication and water for
the besieged Palestinian people.

What is even worse is that certain international
parties have sought to justify those aberrant Israeli
measures and have prevented the international
community, and the Council in particular, from taking
measures to stop those violations.

We would like to point out that the United
Nations Charter does not give any State whatsoever the
right to violate the rights of civilians under occupation
on the pretext of self-defence. The Charter lays down
specific and clear legal obligations for every occupying
Power vis-a-vis such people, both from the
humanitarian point of view and regarding all other
aspects under international law.

The situation has deteriorated because of the
illegal repressive measures taken by Israel to expel
Palestinians from their homeland and to confiscate
their land, as well as its plans to continue expanding its
settlements and building the apartheid separation wall,
in violation of the provisions of international law and
the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice. Those violations seriously require us to hold
the Israeli Government to account before the
international community.

The international community, including the
Security Council, should shoulder its clear
responsibilities in this context. It should take concrete
and immediate measures to implement international
law, setting aside policies of double standards, thus
restoring the role of the Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

The Council's inability to halt Israeli settlements
in the occupied territory over the past few weeks
because of the objection of one delegation, specifically
concerning the draft resolution submitted on this matter
by the Arab Group, regrettably reflects policies that
experience has shown to be a failure and indicates a
lack of respect for the purposes and principles of the
Charter.

The situation of Syrian citizens in the occupied
Syrian Golan is not very different to that of the
Palestinians. The occupying Power is still violating the
private property of Syrian citizens in the Golan,
confiscating land, plundering the natural wealth and
water of the Golan, burying toxic nuclear waste and
expanding illegal settlements in that area.

Israel continues its repressive policies against
Syrian citizens, unlawfully confirming them in jails
and detention centres in conditions that expose them to
the danger of death. Israel continues to violate the
rights of Syrian prisoners of war (POWs) in Israeli
detention centres, which has led to a decline in the
health of Syrian POW Bushr al-Muqt. The Syrian
Government has called on the Secretary-General and
on the International Committee of the Red Cross and
other international organizations to intervene to save
his life.
Once again, Syria calls upon the Council and the
United Nations to put pressure on Israel to release all
Syrian POWs without delay, some of whom have been
in prison for 25 years, including the Syrian journalist
Atta Farhat, who was arrested by Israel while working
as a journalist. Israel, the occupying Power, is a
signatory to the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
which makes it imperative for Israel to implement its
provisions.

To give some credibility to this discussion, Syria
calls upon the Council to place pressure on Israel to
permit without delay the resumption of family visits by
Syrians in the occupied Syrian Golan to their country,
Syria, through the Quneitra crossing point. Twenty-
seven years on, we are still awaiting mechanisms for
the implementation of Council resolution 497 (1981),
rejecting the Israeli decision to annex the occupied
Syrian Golan and holding the occupation null and void.

Syria, which has repeatedly emphasized peace as
a strategic option on the basis of the outcome of the
Madrid Conference and the Arab Peace Initiative,
would like to stress again that peace and security will
not be achieved in the region without an end to the
Israeli occupation of the occupied Arab territories in
Palestine, the Golan and Lebanon.

In that context, we would like to emphasize again
the important role of the Security Council in ending the
Israeli occupation of Arab territories through the
implementation of its resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).

We would have liked the Permanent
Representative of Israel to have ended his tenure at the
United Nations with some reflection on what he has
done, awakening an awareness that would bring his
country nearer to peace, instead of showing disdain and
trying to falsify history in a theatrical manner that is
not convincing to anyone.

The Israeli representative talked about the
contributions of Member States to international
civilization, but he did not speak of what his country
has contributed since its creation by this international
Organization. He forgot to mention What his country
has contributed through massacres in Deir Yassin,
Sabra, Shatila, Hebron, Jenin, Nablus, Qana, Beit
Hanoun, Gaza, Bahr al-Baqar and many other places.
Israel has been condemned a record number of times
by the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Human Rights Council. Also, it holds a record number
of vetoes cast by an influential State in the Council to
protect it, a record number of 44.

The General Assembly considers foreign
occupation to be the worst kind of terrorism and the
worst kind of injustice. Thus, the continuation of the
Israeli occupation of Arab territories is the worst kind
of terrorism. Israel has assassinated the largest number
of Palestinian children, such as Mohammed al-Durra,
Huda Ghalia and nine-year-old Emam al-Hams, the
schoolchild Whom an Israeli soldier killed with 30
bullets.

Israel was the closest partner of the apartheid
regime in South Africa when the regime was
imprisoning the freedom fighter Nelson Mandela.
Israel was among the first in the world to engage in air
piracy, doing so against a Syrian civilian aircraft in
1955. In 1973, Israel was the first to shoot down a
civilian passenger plane, a Libyan aircraft, killing 108
passengers. In 1968, Israel destroyed the Lebanese air
passenger fleet on Lebanese soil. Israel has been the
world's biggest aggressor against peacekeeping forces;
according to former Secretary-General Kofi Annan,
that aggression has been deliberate.

There is no clash of cultures or within a culture,
nor between civilizations or within a civilization. The
clash has always been between colonialists and peoples
aspiring to freedom. The Arab-Islamic culture so
despised by the Israeli Ambassador is that which gave
Jews their own philosopher, Moses Maimonides, to take
pride in. Maimonides was a student of the Arab-Islamic
philosopher Abu Nasr al-Farabi. After his expulsion
from Andalusia, Maimonides was welcomed by Arabs in
Morocco and Egypt. Arab-Islamic culture, represented
by the philosopher Ibn Rushd, also known as Averroes,
was the first in history to try to reconcile reason and
religion. Arab-Islamic culture, which gave Ibn Khaldun
to the world, established the science of sociology. Some
35 per cent of the space- and astronomy-related
terminology used around the world derives from the
Arabic language and Arab scientific discoveries.

In 1967, Israel destroyed the espionage vessel
USS Liberty because it had recorded orders given to
Israeli officers to kill Egyptian prisoners of war by
burying them alive.

The representative of Israel described for us his
vision of life in Israel. Let us imagine life in the
occupied Palestinian, Lebanese and Syrian territories
when Israeli F-16s bomb civilian vehicles and kill their
occupants, or when an Israeli military vessel fires on
Palestinians on the Gaza shore, killing entire
Palestinian families. Let us try also to imagine the staff
member of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) who, seeking to provide humanitarian
assistance to the Palestinian people in Gaza, is stopped
at Israeli checkpoints and prevented from rendering
that assistance to those in need. Let us imagine
children studying in UNRWA schools in Gaza when
their building is completely destroyed by gunfire,
indiscriminately killing and injuring the students
inside.

I do not wish to go on at great length. Perhaps we
should consider building a museum to commemorate
Israel's record-breaking behaviour so that people will
remember what it has done and history will live on in
our memories.

