Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Allow, me,
first and foremost, to thank you, Sir, for your initiative to
convene today's public debate on the working methods
of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council and
to congratulate your country on its accession to the
presidency of the Council for the month of February. I
also warmly congratulate the Permanent Representative
of Sweden and the Deputy Permanent Representative of
Chile on their high-quality briefings. Addressing such
an important issue deserves our utmost attention, as it
serves to strengthen the effectiveness and efficiency of
the Council.

The 2015 high-level review of sanctions comes
10 years after the Working Group on Sanctions made
important contributions to enhancing the effectiveness
of the sanctions committees. The key role played by
subsidiary organs, in particular the sanctions committee,
in implementing Security Council resolutions should
lead us to consider the best ways ofensuring that working
methods, as well as the appointment of committee
Chairs, are more transparent and inclusive, improving
the sharing and dissemination of information on their
work and strengthening interaction and consensus
among countries and subsidiary bodies, on one hand,
and between such bodies and the Council, on the other.

My delegation believes that the appointment of
the Chairs of subsidiary bodies should be subject to
an informal consultation process with all Council
members that is balanced, transparent and inclusive. In
that regard, it would be appropriate for appointments
to be made at least three months before mandates
begin and that, as soon as appointed, for incoming
Chairs to attend all meetings of the relevant subsidiary
bodies. With regard to outgoing Chairs, they should be
encouraged to provide oral and written presentations
on the most noteworthy activities of their mandates.
Given the often technical nature of the issues addressed
by subsidiary bodies, the Secretariat should continue
to provide support to appointed Chairs and their
respective staff by providing access to the appropriate
methodological tools through briefings.

To improve transparency in the work of subsidiary
bodies, it is crucial for Chairs to hold briefings
followed by exchanges with non-members of the
Council, thereby giving States an opportunity to
contribute to the work of those bodies. In addition,
we might consider implementing regular consultation
mechanisms between Chairs of sanctions committees
and the penholders of relevant countries.
In the same connection, the committees might be
given the opportunity to inform the Council of the
content of their reports in an open meeting, taking
into account, wherever possible and as needed, the
requirements of the principle of confidentiality.
Furthermore, affected countries, their neighbours
and those directly concerned by sanctions should be
involved in the work of the committees by participating
in meetings, in particular those where panel of experts
reports are presented. Similarly, the translation of these
reports into all United Nations official languages is
imperative to facilitating their timely use by committee
members.

In paragraph 59 of resolution 2253 (2015) of
17 December 2015, on the financing of terrorism,
the Security Council requests the Secretary-General
to continue to strengthen the capacity of the Office
of the Ombudsperson of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999),1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida, and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, in
particular by providing resources to allow the Office
to fill translation needs, among others. My delegation
believes that we could go beyond this recommendation
by institutionalizing the Office of the Ombudsperson
to ensure that it is effectively independent with respect
to the committees and the Security Council, and by
strengthening its ability to take decisions. The manner
in which the Ombudsperson, who has the same contract
status as members of panels of experts, is appointed
hardly reflects the importance of the position's
mandate and does not contribute to the independence
and legitimacy on which the effectiveness and even
the credibility of the Ombudsperson's actions depend.
Similarly, we believe it crucial to bring the mandate of
the Ombudsperson into line with that of the Office, in
keeping with the conclusions of the high-level review
on sanctions of November 2015.

In practice, the Security Council must ensure that
sanctions serve international peace and security. Their
effectivenss depends on how the Security Council
uses them and how effectively they are implemented
by Member States, while upholding the purposes and
principles of the Charter. Furthermore, review of the
implementation of sanctions in concerned countries
should be done in a regular, objective and transparent
manner. Evaluating the impact of targeted sanctions,
with their possible collateral effects on the security and
humanitarian situations, as well as the exploitation of
and trade in the natural resources of affected countries
should be accorded their rightful place in the mandate
of the panels of experts. In this regard, it is essential
that the panel of experts carry out their mandate with
full independence while upholding the sovereignty of
concerned States.

In conclusion, my delegation hopes that, beyond our
discussion today, the Security Council will continue
to deepen its consideration of this matter with a View
to improving the methods of work of the subsidiary
bodies. Similarly, my delegation supports the draft
document proposed by the Venezuelan presidency to
improve the working methods and transparency of the
sanctions regimes.

