Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): Malaysia welcomes the
convening of this open debate. We commend Japan's
commitment in seeking continuous improvement in
this important area of the work of the Security Council.

Malaysiajoins other Council members in welcoming
the just-adopted presidential note S/2016/619, which
focuses on the issue of transitional arrangements for
newly elected members of the Council. The consensus
on this note is an important demonstration of the
Council's commitment to support the call of the broader
membership of the United Nations and to uphold the
principles of transparency and inclusiveness in its
work. We firmly believe that the note paves the way for
more robust and timely engagement on the work of the
Council by the newly elected members, including its
subsidiary bodies.

Since joining the Council last year, Malaysia has
been pleased to witness and be part ofthe positive trends
towards better coordination and cooperation between
the Security Council and the General Assembly. The
good and constructive coordination and cooperation
between the Council and the Assembly on the selection
of the next Secretary-General is a good example. As
stipulated by General Assembly resolution 69/321, the
Assembly successfully undertook early elections for
non-permanent members in June. That was a significant
and important break from previous practice. From our
own fairly recent experience, we can genuinely attest
that time is indeed a precious commodity in the run-
up to joining the Council. As such, for the incoming
members, the additional time afforded could be taken
advantage of, including by addressing key substantive
issues and administrative concerns, among other issues.

We are also pleased that the note just adopted
recognizes that the process of appointing new Chairs
for Council subsidiary bodies should commence as soon
as possible, with the full involvement of current and
newly elected non-permanent members. In our view,
such transparency and inclusivity would contribute
immensely to improving the legitimacy of the process,
particularly in the eyes of elected members and the
wider United Nations membership.

A core component of the Council's responsibility
revolves around the work of its subsidiary bodies, which
are crucial for the implementation of Council decisions.
Such bodies carry out a broad range of tasks, ranging
from implementation monitoring and compliance
assessment, to coordination and cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations, among other
tasks. In that connection, we fully support efforts
to make the work of the subsidiary bodies more
streamlined, coordinated and effective, including
via the initiative by New Zealand regarding the
communications of such bodies. Furthermore, Chairs
of Council subsidiary bodies also have an important
outreach role. Greater understanding of the work of the
subsidiary bodies promotes better and more effective
implementation of the Council's decisions.
At the same time, we believe there is cause for better
coordination among subsidiary bodies, especially those
with related themes and/or geographical scope. During
our current term as a Council member, Malaysia has
sought to promote and support the idea of working better
across related themes and issues. By way ofillustration,
earlier this year, a joint consultation involving the
Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict and the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan. Similar
joint consultations were held with the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014) and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the
Central African Republic. We remain committed to
pursuing such an approach to the end of our term.
Looking ahead, we hope that such joint consultations
could become a regular practice by the Council.

On a related issue, Malaysia welcomes the
proposed initiative to update the Council's presidential
note S/2010/507 on working methods. We stand ready
to support and commit to such an initiative, including
working towards a single comprehensive note.

In line with our collective effort to enhance the
transparency, inclusiveness, coherence, accountability
and, ultimately, the legitimacy of the Council and its
work, we hope that the views of the wider membership
expressed today will be reflected upon and duly taken
into account in any possible Council outcome or future
decisions on working methods.

Finally, I wish to underscore that improvements
to Council working methods should be seen as part
of a larger institutional or structural reform process,
which requires significant political will and flexibility
on the part of all Council members, permanent and
non-permanent. This is crucial to ensure the Council's
continued adaptability and to ensure that it remains
relevant and appropriately equipped to address the
immediate global peace and security challenges of the
present, as well as in the future.

