Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, allow me, through you, Mr. President,
to thank the Permanent Representatives of Lithuania,
Australia and yourself, in your capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), for your informative briefings and your work in
leading the subsidiary bodies.

I would like to begin by reaffirming that the
General Assembly, together with the Security Council
and its competent bodies, are the most appropriate
forums for effective action to prevent and eradicate
terrorism. In that sense, we consider it important to
continue to strengthen the coordination and coherence
of the United Nations activities in the fight against
terrorism. That is particularly important this year when
the General Assembly will hold the fourth review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
in June.

First, I would like to refer to the work of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, and to underscore, as noted by the Chair
of the Committee in his briefing, the importance of
ensuring that the sanctions regime remains an effective
response to the threat represented by Al-Qaida and
its associated entities. In that regard, we agree with
Ambassador Quinlan that is essential to ensure that
the list of individuals and entities subject to sanctions
remains relevant and evolves in line with the evolution
of Al-Qaida and its associated entities. On that point,
we join the support for the inclusion of the Boko Haram
group in the list, as was done just a few days ago.

Furthermore, we believe that in order to maintain
the effectiveness of the sanctions regime, it is important
to guarantee respect for due process. As on previous
occasions, I would like to acknowledge the work of the
Ombudsperson, Kimberly Prost, who is an example of
efficiency, professionalism and independence. In that
connection, we have carefully considered her report to
the Security Council (S/2014/73), dated 31 January 2014,
and we regret that, in accordance with paragraph 70, she
has been obligated to submit reports on her travels, which
is a clear interference in the independence of the work
ofthe Office ofthe Ombudsperson and compromises its
efficiency. We consider it essential that the impartiality
of the Ombudsperson and the confidential nature of
her work be respected. Therefore, we believe that the
Security Council should closely monitor that issue to
ensure that the Ombudsperson can carry out her duties
independently and without restrictions. We also believe
that the Ombudsperson should have the appropriate
tools to carry out the mandate entrusted to her by the
Council. Therefore, we note the challenges and pending
issues identified in the report, for example, the need for
a database and the importance of improving methods in
certain issues related to transparency.

Finally, let me reaffirm the importance of the
availability of the list in the six official languages of
the Organization. This issue is directly relevant to the
implementation of the list by the competent authorities
and the relevance of the sanctions regime. On that
issue, I would like once again to thank the Chair of
the Committee for his efforts to find a solution to
that problem, which we hope will be resolved as soon
as possible. I would also like to underscore the work
carried out by the Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Matters, which examined the
practice of the different sanctions Committees in the
area of the translation of their respective lists, in order
to contribute, from a general point of view, to the way
in which the 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) Committee
deals with that issue.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee plays an
important role in ensuring that the international
community's efforts in the fight against terrorism
are more effective. In that context, we welcome the
adoption of resolution 2129 (2013) and the extension of
the mandate until 31 December 2017 of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
which assists the Committee in its work. In that regard,
we hope that respect for human rights and the validity
of the rule of law in the context of the fight against
terrorism continue to be cross-cutting aspects of the
Executive Directorate's work.

The open debate of 7 May on the occasion of the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004) and the prospects for its implementation, which
was presided over by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of your country, Mr. President, clearly demonstrated
that Member States agree on underscoring the 1540
Committee's work and the resolution's provisions as
essential tools to prevent weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery from falling into the hands
of terrorists (see S/PV.7169).

At the same time, the debate allowed the
international community to reaffirm that, in combating
terrorism, effective international efforts depend on
the adoption and implementation of the necessary
national measures and regional coordination. It also
underscored the need to mobve forward in the area of
nuclear disarmament, since, while weapons of mass
destruction continue to exist, there will be the risk
of them falling into the hands of terrorists. As many
delegations, including mine, pointed out during that
open debate, the only way to eliminate that risk is the
complete elimination of weapons of mass destruction.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our support
for initiatives that help to improve transparency in the
work of the Security Council and its subsidiary bodies, as well
as actions to strengthen their coordination and cooperation
so as to enhance the Security Council's contribution to
the fight against terrorism and allow for consideration
of the issue in a more comprehensive manner.

