Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like at the outset to thank the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his briefing. On the
question of justice and the rule of law, I should like to
emphasize the following points.

First, the Charter of the United Nations and the
fundamental principles of international law enshrined
therein should be upheld. The rule of law in
international relations should be strengthened. The
Charter and the principles of international law
enshrined therein constitute the core of the rule of law
in international relations and the bedrock for its
development. In the conduct of international relations
and international affairs, adherence to the Charter and
to other fundamental principles of international law,
such as respect for national sovereignty, non-
interference in internal affairs and the fulfilment of
international obligations in earnest, represents the
essence of the promotion of the international rule of
law.

Under the Charter, Security Council resolutions
constitute an integral part of the international rule of
law, whose promotion requires the strict
implementation of Council resolutions by Member
States. It does not allow for arbitrary distortions or
extensive interpretations of the contents of resolutions,
even less the option of action beyond the mandate
provided in such resolutions.

Secondly, diversity has become the predominant
fundamental reality in today's world. Conflicts are
inevitable when countries with different historical and
cultural backgrounds, different political, economic and
social regimes and varied levels of development
endeavour to achieve their aspirations. The rule of law
has therefore become a requirement in the achievement
of peaceful settlements. Chapter VI of the Charter
provides a number of modalities for the peaceful
settlement of conflicts, and we support the legitimate
right of countries to seek such a peaceful settlement.

Thirdly, the development of the rule of law in
countries in conflict or post-conflict situations should
be addressed in a comprehensive and holistic manner.
The development of the rule of law is pivotal to
the achievement of peace and to peacebuilding in
countries in conflict and post-conflict situations.
However, that is not the only important aspect. In such
countries, the effectiveness, sustainability and
continuity of the rule of law must be ensured and
efforts made to ensure coordination between the rule of
law and political processes, economic development and
national reconciliation. The sovereignty of those
countries must be respected. Efforts must be devoted to
their capacity-building, and the specific and unique
situation of each country should be respected. Only in
this way can efforts to develop the rule of law meet the
requirements of such countries.

Fourthly, the relationship between the
maintenance of peace and the pursuit of justice must be
addressed in an appropriate manner, as there has been
increased activity in the field of international criminal
justice, and issues relating to peace and justice are
receiving increased attention. We condemn all
violations of human rights and humanitarian law. We
support penalizing those who commit serious
international crimes such as genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity. We believe also that peace
and justice should facilitate and complement each
other. Since peace is a universal value, it represents the
fundamental aspiration of all nations. The pursuit of
justice should promote rather than interfere with peace
processes and facilitate rather than hinder national
reconciliation. The problem of impunity can be
resolved only in a situation of decreased tensions and
political stability.

Fifthly, caution is called for in the meting out of
sanctions. We support an improvement of the United
Nations sanctions regime on the basis of extensive
consultations so as to improve its credibility and
procedures and to establish effective monitoring
mechanisms, strict criteria and defined timelines.
Sanctions should be carried out only on the basis of
facts and evidence. Double standards must be avoided.
Impacts on civilian lives and on socio-economic
development must be minimized.

