Ms. Johnson: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
Secretary-General's report on South Sudan (S/2013/651).
The world's youngest nation is still travelling a bumpy
road but there are also positive indications that the
country can turn the corner. I will talk about three
important trends that have emerged since my last
briefing to the Council in July (see S/PV.6998).

First, as noted in the Secretary-General's report,
despite enormous challenges and a State struggling to
establish and to extend its authority, progress has been
made in some key areas. There are new opportunities to
strengthen State-building and accountability. The new
Cabinet is in the process of entering into a New Deal
compact with international partners and is showing
genuine commitment to improving relations with the
Sudan.

Secondly, however, the situation in parts of Jonglei
State continues to be worrying despite intermittent
calm during the major part of the rainy season.

Thirdly, the behaviour of security forces continues
to be a cause for grave concern Whether with regard
to human rights abuses and the incidents of violence
and harassment affecting United Nations personnel,
diplomats and ordinary citizens. Let me start with the
two latter concerns and revert to the opportunities last.

Despite the relative stability in Jonglei in recent
weeks, the vicious cycle of retaliatory violence continues
and poses significant risks to the Government's efforts
to stabilize Jonglei. The latest deadly attacks occurred
on 20 October in Twic East County and resulted in a
significant loss oflife. Those attacks, as well as tensions
between the Lou Nuer and Anyuak in Akobo and Uror
counties and possible retaliations, may lead to further
instability in the State.

The attacks have made it even more urgent to make
concrete progress in the ongoing peace efforts between
the Government and the David Yau Yau armed group,
which should be complemented by intercommunal
reconciliation, to address the underlying causes of
conflict. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) is supporting those efforts. Additionally,
beyond Jonglei, for the first time in more than two
years, there have been reports of suspected attacks and
abductions by the Lord's Resistance Army in South
Sudan, in Western Equatoria state.

With the dry season fast approaching, the mobility
of both armed groups and the Sudan People's Liberation
Army (SPLA) will increase, creating risks of increased
attacks but also opportunities for response. With that in
mind, UNMISS has developed a series of contingency
plans to address the emerging security threats and
protection of civilians needs, especially in the high-risk
state of Jonglei, the tri-state areas of Lakes, Unity and
Warrap and Upper Nile state. The contingency plans
provide for graduated responses to foster a safe and
secure environment across the affected areas.

Concurrently, UNMISS is utilizing all available
assets and measures in areas with a history of violent
incidents to prevent recurrences. Nevertheless, the
critical mobility gaps that continue to face the Mission
make timely responses to early warning a significant
challenge, even during the dry season.

Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2109 (2013),
UNMISS has deployed more forces in high-risk areas.
As noted in the Secretary-General's report, the Mission
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations are
also currently planning to implement the geographical

reconfiguration of the Mission's military to focus
more of its forces in those areas, while at the same
time maintaining the strategic flexibility to respond
to emerging threats elsewhere. The reconfiguration
will be subject to full consultation with the troop-
contributing countries and will be implemented in
sequenced phases, subject to periodic review, based on
threat assessments and political milestones.

Meanwhile, regarding the significant mobility
challenges facing the Mission, it is imperative that force
multipliers be identified with requisite capabilities
to augment the Mission's early warning and rapid
response capability to enable timely access to hotspots.
A reconfiguration that increases the presence in high-
risk areas makes such needs even more critical and
urgent.

Allow me to now turn to the performance of South
Sudan's security forces. South Sudan continues to
face serious challenges in the area of the promotion
and protection of human rights. Key issues include
prolonged and arbitrary detentions, the excessive
use of force and arbitrary killings by ill-disciplined
security forces and agencies, and individual incidents
of interference with the rights to freedom of expression,
association and assembly.

UNMISS continues to monitor and investigate
reports of alleged violations and abuses, and Will
increase its public reporting. In addition to the two
public human rights reports already issued on Jonglei
since 2011, the Mission is currently finalizing a
comprehensive report on nine alleged major human
rights-related incidents that occurred in J onglei between
December 2012 and July 2013. In addition, a report on
arbitrary and prolonged detentions, which we Will issue
early next year, is under preparation.

As noted in the Secretary-General's report, in an
encouraging sign, the highest levels of the Government
are speaking out publicly about the need to address
human rights abuses by members of the armed forces.
Partly as a result of the active engagement of UNMISS
and strong political advocacy, the SPLA has ordered
several boards of inquiry into allegations of murder
in Pibor, Bor, Boma and Manyabol in Jonglei. The
responsible commander for the Pibor operations has
been arrested and charged. Out of a total of 115 court
martial cases for contraventions of the SPLA Act,
92 were convicted. Thirty-nine SPLA officers have
been charged with murder or rape. For the first time,
the convictions are announced publicly.

To support the Government's efforts, UNMISS
continues to conduct capacity-building activities in the
area of human rights and protection of civilians. That
includes conducting human rights training for security
forces and other national stakeholders and exploring
new ways to galvanize the security forces to take on
their responsibilities to protect civilians. The Mission
is also providing technical assistance to strengthen the
legal framework for the promotion and protection of
human rights.

In his recent reports to the Council, the Secretary-
General has repeatedly raised his concerns about
continued violations of the status-of -f0rces agreement
in South Sudan, particularly with regard to incidents
involving staff members. The most serious incidents
have been reported to the Council.

The recent security incidents involving United
Nations personnel, especially in Juba, are of deep
concern. The diplomatic community and ordinary South
Sudanese citizens themselves are also affected. The
Council has already received a more detailed briefing
from the Secretariat on that issue on 6 November. In the
past six months, a total of 67 violations of the status-
of-forces agreement have been recorded, including
threats, assaults, arrests and the detention of United
Nations personnel, mostly in and around Juba. That is
unacceptable.

During a briefing to the new Cabinet a fortnight
ago, I expressed grave concern over that worrying
trend. I urged the Government to take immediate and
concrete action to bring to an end those incidents and
to hold perpetrators to account. Separately, I also raised
such issues directly with President Kiir, who expressed
dismay at the reports of abuse and harassment of United
Nations and diplomatic personnel.

Thanks to our collective pressure and the
engagement of the Security Council, violations of
the status-of-forces agreement and the security of
United Nations and diplomatic staff were addressed
by the Council of Ministers. The President instructed
the Ministers of Defence, National Security and the
Interior to issue clear orders to the security forces to
respect the violations of the status-of-forces agreement
and the diplomatic immunity of the United Nations
and the international community. Written orders to
the SPLA and the police were issued last week. The
Minister of Defence has reiterated the regulation to all
SPLA members that off-duty personnel are not allowed
to wear uniforms or carry weapons, which must be
kept in safe storage. The Minister also promised that
ill-disciplined members of the security forces would
be held accountable for violating those directives.
UNMISS will closely monitor the implementation of
those commitments.

Key to a durable solution to such problems, however,
is security sector reform and the transformation of the
armed forces. I am pleased to report that the South
Sudan National Police Service (SSNPS) continues to
make progress on its transformation. With UNMISS
support, the SSNPS has undertaken a comprehensive
institutional needs assessment to identify institutional
gaps and to determine the way forward for police
transformation. The recommendations for major
reform measures have been endorsed by the Council of
Ministers and all governors, and have galvanized donor
support.

The Government, supported by UNMISS, has also
completed the registration and screening of the South
Sudan National Police Service, which verified the
existence of 35,633 police officers after weeding out
more than 16,000 "ghost officers", with an additional
11,000 whose status needs clarification. That has
resulted in savings of approximately 160 million South
Sudanese pounds, to be re-allocated to the police for
infrastructure and training. The Mission is supporting
the transformation process at all levels.

Following the example of the police, the
National Prison Service is also undertaking a similar
registration and screening of its personnel. Elsewhere,
UNMISS training of senior SPLA officers on command
responsibility and military justice processes has
intensified.

With UNMISS support, the authorities also
continue to address cases of prolonged and arbitrary
detention. Following extensive consultations with
authorities and civil society at the national and state
levels, the draft national security policy is now under
review by the presidency, and it is expected to be
adopted by the National Legislative Assembly before
the end of the year.

Let me now finally move to the political situation
in the country. Despite initial concerns over the risk
of instability following President Kiir's decision to
dismiss his Cabinet and restructure the Government on
23 July, a smooth transition took place within both the
executive and the legislative branches of Government
following these changes. Members of the new Cabinet,
with more technocratic ministers in key positions, have
shown commitment to reform and are determined to
improve performance and service delivery.

Last month, an executive order was issued
pardoning key opposition leaders, including Lam Akol,
chairman of the largest opposition party, the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement for Democratic Change.
Akol has since returned to Juba from his self-imposed
exile and was accorded a State welcome. He is giving
public statements on political issues, including the need
for constitutional review and timely elections. These
trends are promising signs in the light of approaching
key transitional political milestones for South Sudan's
progress. These include the constitutional review
process and national elections.

A key determinant for developments on this front
will nevertheless be the management of divisions
within the ruling party, the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement (SPLM). The way the preparatory process for
the national convention of the SPLM. is being handled
will give an indication of this. Consultations within the
SPLM. on the convening of the party organs preparing
for the Convention are still ongoing. The internal party
dynamics will need to be monitored very carefully.

Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2109
(2013), the United Nations undertook an electoral
needs assessment in September. Public debate and
the announcement on 15 November by the President
indicate that South Sudan is committed to holding the
national elections in 2015, as constitutionally mandated.
The needs assessment mission has formulated
recommendations on the scope and nature of United
Nations support to facilitate electoral preparations.
Donor programmes are also being launched to provide
support for elections.

Time is running short, however, with regard to
election funding and the necessary preparations. The
Government also has to decide whether elections can
take place without a census, as the census preparations
have already fallen behind schedule. That would require
an amendment to the Transitional Constitution.

As Council members will recall, South Sudan
has volunteered to be a pilot country for the so-called
New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States. At the
economic partners forum held in Washington, DC,
in April, the Government committed to entering into a
compact of mutual accountability with its international
partners, focusing on a set of key State-building and
peacebuilding priorities. The United Nations, together
with key donors, is part of the steering committee that
has guided the New Deal process in South Sudan.
Consultations have been held in all 10 states to
enable members of civil society, the media, state
legislatures and Government to voice their views.
UNMISS has supported that process. The compact is
now well on track to lead to an agreement between
international partners and South Sudan on 3 December,
although agreement on an International Monetary Fund
staff-monitored programme is expected to precede the
compact, and time is very tight to agree on that before
the end of November.

To assist that process and the core priorities, and
pursuant to resolution 2109 (2013), UNMISS and the
United Nations country team are conducting an analysis
of their respective comparative advantages to further
synergies, complementarity and collaboration. While
significant challenges continue to confront the world's
newest country and impede progress on several fronts,
as noted in the Secretary-General's report, recent
developments still give reason for cautious optimism.

South Sudan is at a crossroads. As an international
community, we cannot afford to see the newest country
in the world fail. UNMISS and all of us have only one
option, and that is to try to help South Sudan take the
right course, consolidating peace and building the
foundation for democracy and respect for fundamental
human rights.

