Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Nickolay Mladenov for his commitment and briefing,
which highlights once again the risks posed to the
entire region by the lack of a settlement to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. The conflict has dragged on for
nearly 70 years, and the occupation of the Palestinian
territories has lasted nearly 50. The lack of a settlement
in the Arab-Israeli conflict, which is in and of itself
of particular gravity, also poses a permanent threat
to international security. By its gravity, its symbolic
dimension and its place in the collective imagination,
the scope of the unresolved conflict is foundational and
goes far beyond the borders ofIsrael and the Palestinian
territories. Any escalation in the conflict carries the
risk of uncontrollable regional destabilization. That is
why we cannot resign ourselves to a false status quo
that masks a day-by-day regression, both on the ground
and in the mind.

The endpoint ofthis path is clear. The disappearance
of the two-State solution, like a mirage in the desert,
would represent a leap into the unknown and the risk
of unleashing a worst-case scenario. The situation
is even less acceptable considering that we all know
that the best guarantee of the security of Israel and
the region is a just peace with the Palestinians, which
arises through a two-State solution that ensures the
creation of a viable and independent Palestinian State.
That is not an ideological stance but a pragmatic and
realistic observation, since there can be no denial of the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians to statehood
or the equally legitimate aspirations of the Israelis and
the Palestinians for peace and security.

It is on the basis of that observation that France
embarked on an international process that led to the
adoption in Paris on 15 January of a joint declaration
signed by more than 70 States and international
organizations. The declaration was the result of all
ongoing efforts, particularly those of the Middle East
Quartet, the Arab Peace Initiative, the initiatives of
Russia and Egypt, and the essential role played by
the United States. The declaration reinforced the
unanimous commitment of the international community
to the two-State solution and the fundamentals that
bind us, namely, the international framework of any
future settlement - the 1967 borders and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.

We reaffirmed that priority at the Paris conference
in spite of the fact that the prospects for a two-State
solution are endangered on the ground every day.
The absence of a political process, the encroaching
settlement policy - which is illegal under international
law and has fragmented the Palestinian territories
for decades - the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation, the destruction of Palestinian infrastructure
in Zone C, violence and incitement to hatred, terrorism
and rocket fire are all elements that feed a relentless
vicious circle threatening the very conditions necessary
to lasting peace between Israelis and Palestinians.
Those were the conclusions reached by the Quartet in
its July 2016 report, and it was the shared observation
that led to the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 2334 (2016).

Since early 2017, the situation on the ground has
further deteriorated. Announcements of settlements
by the Israeli Government have increased, including
concerning more than 6,000 housing units in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem in the first three months of
2017. On 6 February, the Knesset enacted a law opening
the way to the normalization of unapproved settlements,
which are illegal even under Israeli law. IN late March,
the Israeli Government decided, for the first time in
two decades, to establish a new settlement in the West
Bank and declared new private Palestinian land to be
"State lands".

As for the policy of restraint in matters of announced
settlements, it is a mere optical illusion whose
conditions are so vague that they actually give carte
blanche to the ongoing rampant settlement-building
in the most sensitive areas - the very ones that cause
despair and escalation of conflict. Those developments
are contrary to international law and Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2334 (2016), which
requires Israel to halt its settlement activities and to
respect its obligations under international law. France
also condemns with extreme firmness all acts of
violence and terrorism, which remain an almost daily
and unacceptable reality. I want to be unambiguous
on that point. France will never compromise with
Israel's security.

In this context of extreme volatility, it is more
important than ever to recall our position on Jerusalem.
Pending a negotiated settlement of the conflict and
under international law, including resolution 478
(1980), France does not recognize any sovereignty
over Jerusalem. Its status will have to be resolved by
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians, which
will have to allow Jerusalem to be the capital of the two
States, Israel and the future State of Palestine.

The elements that triggered the three wars in Gaza
over the past six years are still present today and could
once more lead overnight to an eruption of conflict.
From the perspective of a lasting settlement, the lifting
of the Israeli blockade on the territory seems more
necessary than ever.

After years of stalemate, it is our duty to re-establish
the conditions for the resumption of credible political
negotiations. The Security Council, through resolution
2334 (2016), renewed its commitment to supporting the
parties during the negotiations and the implementation
of a peace agreement. It was also the message of the
joint declaration of Paris, the purpose of which was to
remind the parties of their interest in peace and how
the international community could, without imposing
anything, help them get there. To reiterate, France will
support any effort to reopen a credible political process,
which is the only answer to despair, radicalization and
disengagement among the parties. We will spare no
effort to that end.

Let me say a few words about Syria, which is one of
the most important threats in the region. The cessation
of hostilities no longer exists. The humanitarian
situation is catastrophic because of the lack of access
to populations in need. On 19 April, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons indicated
that it had conclusive evidence that sarin gas had been
used in the attack of 4 April at Khan Shaykhun, which
constituted a war crime and whose perpetrators must be
held accountable before justice.

Chemical weapons are only one element in the work
of annihilation in Syria. In addition, there are inhuman
sieges worthy of the Middle Ages, the indiscriminate
use of barrel bombs, incendiary bombs, as reported by
the United Nations in recent days, torture, executions,
displacements and many others crimes. That appalling
record belongs and foremost to Bashar Al-Assad and
bears his signature written in blood. There will be
neither peace nor reconstruction in Syria so long as the
regime clings to power through terror and destruction.
Nor will any victory be achieved against the terrorist
threat, which will continue to feed on the violence and
misery that gave birth to it and caused it to flourish, as
we were sadly reminded by the terrible attack carried
out in Rashidin on 15 April.

More than ever, a political solution is urgent and
inevitable. We encourage the Special Envoy for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to begin on an accelerated
timetable the next round of negotiations in Geneva
for a political transition, in line with the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254
(2016). That is our top priority - an issue of national
security for France and of collective security for us all.

Finally, allow me to add a comment on the situation
in Lebanon. That country is linked to France by a
profound friendship, and its resilience to suffering
demands our admiration. The international community
will continue to stand shoulder to shoulder with
Lebanon in facing all the consequences of the Syrian
conflict, beginning with the refugee crisis. Providing
support and essential humanitarian aid is the primary
objective of the conference convened in Brussels on
4 and 5 April by the European Union.

The Lebanese people have made political and
institutional progress since the election of Michel Aoun
as President of the Republic and the establishment of a
Government by led by Saad Hariri. It is our hope that
the Lebanese parties will be able to agree as soon as
possible on an electoral framework leading to free and
fair elections, consistent with the Constitution. It will
not be possible to indefinitely extend the Parliament
that was elected in 2009. Legislative elections are
crucial to Lebanon's stability and the preservation
of its democratic tradition. Political progress must
be strengthened in order to reinforce State authority
throughout Lebanese territory and allow the country to
address its challenges.

In that context, Lebanon's disengagement from
the Syrian conflict and implementation of resolutions
1701 (2006) and 1559 (2004) remain more necessary
than ever. We therefore encourage the parties to firmly
reconfirm their commitment to that end, in the interest
of Lebanon and of the entire region.

