Mr. Cardi (Italy): Let me first thank you, Sir, and
your delegation for convening this crucial meeting
today to discuss one of the key challenges that this
Organization is now facing. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his remarks at the beginning
of the meeting.

Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union, but I would like to
add a few remarks in my national capacity.

The maintenance of international peace and security
is the core business of the United Nations. Peace is the
first and most valuable objective that an organization
of States should pursue. Nevertheless, the world has
changed since the end of the Second World War. First,
the contexts within which our peacekeeping operations
are conducted have radically changed. As underlined
in the concept note (S/2014/384, annex) submitted by
the Council presidency, and 1 quote, "the vast majority
of crises in which United Nations peacekeeping
operations are deployed or their mandates extended
are non-international armed conflicts, often referred
to as internal or intra-State conflicts". Secondly,
United Nations peacekeeping efforts have now reached
numbers, in terms of troops as well as financial
resources engaged, that cannot be compared to What
they were, let's say, only 10 years ago. And thirdly, but
no less importantly, conflicts today are no longer just a
matter of sending troops to the front line, but they call
for cutting-edge military and civilian capacities, such
as technology and skilled soldiers.

Italy is the first troop contributor in the
Western European and other States Group and the
seventh financial contributor to the United Nations
peacekeeping operations. An Italian general is leading
the operation of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon. Through that engagement in the field,
we, together with the rest of the membership, learn
lessons every day that help us make our commitment
to the service of peace more effective. Troops cannot
operate without proper equipment and skills in conflict
situations where most of the parties involved have
at least the basic technological tools. As the Under-
Secretary-General for Field Support, Ms. Haq, said at
the opening meeting of the recent session of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,

"providing for the safety and security of deployed

personnel in volatile environments is an absolute

necessity... Applying new technologies needs to

become a more standard feature of our modus

operandi".

That was in reference to the security of the United
Nations Blue Helmets. Nevertheless, we also noticed
with satisfaction that, this year, the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations agreed to mention such
technological tools in its report in the context of
military capacity, encouraging

"the Secretariat to support the agreed use of
modern technology consistent with the basic
principles of peacekeeping, to enhance, among
others, situational awareness and force protection"
(14/68/19, para. 80).

Italy agrees with the Special Committee and is
pleased that the main policy body on United Nations
peacekeeping tackled that issue successfully. My
delegation chose to engage proactively in co-facilitating
the negotiation process that led to that result.

Most of today's peacekeeping operations have
a mandate to protect civilians. That is an important
development. As an example, since the eruption of the
South Sudan conflict at the end oflast year, over 70,000
people have been rescued and hosted in peacekeeping
camps. That demonstrates humanitarian aid in action,
for which peacekeeping gains credibility and praise.
It is only normal that vulnerable civilians suffering
hardship would look to the Blue Helmets for protection
and refuge.

Owing to the reality of today's conflicts, the
disparity between the expectations imposed on the
United Nations and its capacity to respond has grown
starker. In these times of budgetary hardship and
constraints, the only possible solution is to reduce that
disparity through innovation. As Under-Secretary-
General Ladsous said in his statement to the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations at the
opening meeting of this year's session, "flexibility and
innovation at Headquarters and within our missions are
no longer an option, but an acute necessity".

The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
for example, also provides a relevant case study for
the topic. The need to provide for civilian protection
has brought about the creation of new tools, such as
the unarmed, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and
the Force Intervention Brigade. Both have delivered
so far and met the highest expectations, make their
contribution not only in the direct framework of the
peacekeeping operation, but also by saving civilian
lives, as was the case recently when a UAV spotted a
sinking boat in a river, leading to a rescue operation
that saved human lives.

Italy understands and shares some of the concerns
of Member States - especially those from the
continent that sees the highest number of operations,
Africa - about the new trends in United Nations
peacekeeping, as highlighted in this meeting's concept
paper. It is not by chance that Italy actively participates
in and promotes discussions and negotiations on
this sensitive matter in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and other venues. In the
recent panel we organized outside the United Nations,
information was presented on how missions could
benefit from satellite imaging to locate water, to dig
wells, as well as to determine appropriate sites for solar
and other renewable energy systems. We also learned
how information communications technology is crucial
to providing mission staff with up-to-the-minute data;
how biometric handheld devices can be used to gather
basic health and identifying information of refugees;
and how water generators can pull moisture from the
air to provide up to 4,000 litres of drinking water a day.
Here, I would also like to mention the project funded by
Italy and the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research that uses satellite images to verify compliance
with resolution 2139 (2014) concerning humanitarian
access in Syria.

In closing, we should never forget that, at the end
of the day, peacekeeping is a moral imperative. It is a
duty that rests on the shoulders of all Member States.
All of the aforementioned concerns - from the use
of data collected by recognition devices to the effects
of inter-mission cooperation, the level of budgetary
discipline, issues that must be discussed with troop-
contributing countries and the training of peacekeepers,
which must be enhanced - are more than legitimate.
Nevertheless, we feel that, if the new trends in
peacekeeping can help, as they have shown that they
can, to do a better job in the service of peace, we
should continue to explore state-of-the-art solutions to
meet those concerns. United Nations peacekeeping has
entered the twenty-first century. Let us work together
with that objective in mind.

