Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to join
my colleagues in welcoming the new Ambassador of
C6te d'Ivoire and assuring him of our full support in
his endeavours.

Bolivia regrets that the Security Council has not
been able to maintain unity on this issue just when South
Sudan needs it most. The gravity of the situation in the
country is clear, and we deeply regret the suffering of
the South Sudanese people.

Our decision to abstain in the voting on resolution
2428 (2018) is based on various elements that have gone
unheeded regarding the imposition of an arms embargo
and sanctions on the persons identified in annex 1 to the
resolution. Bolivia believes that the only way to achieve
stable and lasting peace in South Sudan is through a
serious, inclusive and carefully constructed political
process between the parties to the conflict and above all
with the support of the region. That is exactly what the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the African Union have been developing over the
past year and that could be seriously compromised by
today's decision.

We regret that the express request of IGAD, the
African Union, Uganda, the Sudan and Ethiopia
that punitive action not be taken at this stage of the
negotiations was not heeded, considering that positive
progress has been made in recent weeks in the dialogue
between the country's top leaders, who had not met
in person for more than two years. The region has
also set aside divisions that seemed irreconcilable in
order to provide unanimous support to South Sudan.
We believe that the best decision would have been to
support the region until the conclusion of the ongoing
talks, particularly since they are at a crucial stage, and
to consider appropriate measures against those not
demonstrating the necessary willingness to commit
only if the parties failed to reach a genuine commitment.
We must not underestimate the capacity of the region
to resolve its conflicts, since they more than anyone
want to achieve peace and stability. Unfortunately, we
once again find ourselves making decisions over the
recommendations of the region. We insist that such
measures should be agreed on in principle with the
relevant regional organizations.

In conclusion, I would like to commend the
tireless work of the members of IGAD, the African
Union and especially Uganda, the Sudan and Ethiopia,
which have been essential stakeholders in mediating
the reconciliation and agreement processes in their
region, and with whom we are grateful to work on a
daily basis in the Council. We are witnesses to their
efforts and commitment to peace, and we reiterate our
unconditional support for the work they are doing for
their region.

