Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to begin by
joining others in expressing our deep condolences and
sympathy for the victims and families of those recently
struck by natural disasters in the United States, the
Philippines, China and other countries. As a nation that
suffers often from natural disasters, Japan feels very
strong solidarity with the victims and their families.

I begin my remarks today by thanking you, Madam
President, for convening this important meeting, and
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.

The world witnessed a historic summit meeting
between the United States and North Korea. Japan
welcomes that undertaking and strongly hopes that
momentum will lead to the resolution of the nuclear,
missile and abductions issues. We are at a critical
juncture. Japan hopes that North Korea will seize this
opportunity and take concrete steps to achieve the
complete, verifiable and irreversible dismantlement of
all weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles
of all ranges, as required under the series of resolutions
adopted by the Security Council. We believe that only
those steps will help North Korea realize a bright future.

While engaging with North Korea we must fully
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions,
for North Korea to understand that there is no other
way but to change its policy. We must not waver in
that determination.

I would also like to underscore that now is not a
time to ease or lift any of the sanctions. If North Korea
believes it can get sanctions relaxed while keeping its
nuclear weapons, it would certainly reduce the incentive
for North Korea to achieve complete denuclearization.
Japan will spare no effort to ensure the effectiveness
of the relevant Security Council resolutions. We must
maintain the solidarity of the international community
to stop sanctions-evasion activities.

In that regard, Japan shares the United States
view that North Korea has breached the 2018 annual
cap for refined petroleum products established by
resolution 2397 (2017). It is important that all Member
States immediately stop supplying refined petroleum
products to North Korea. Japan will work closely with
the countries concerned, including the United States.
As already announced, some countries, including Japan
and the United States, are engaging in monitoring and
surveillance efforts against illicit maritime activities,
including ship-to-ship transfers, with patrol aircraft
stationing in Japan.

In order to achieve a comprehensive solution to
the issues related to North Korea, we ask the Security
Council to maintain its unity in fully implementing
the relevant Security Council resolutions. We should
neither lose sight of our common cause of achieving
the complete denuclearization of North Korea nor allow
the very authority of the Council to be challenged by
diverting our attention away from cynical attempts
to flout the existing sanctions regime. Japan will
continue to accelerate efforts to ensure their effective
implementation, together with all countries.

Finally, we sincerely hope that the inter-Korean
summit meeting to be held this week will lead to
concrete actions towards the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula.

