Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank Robert Serry for his briefing this morning
and the Permanent Observer of the Observer State of
Palestine and the Permanent Representative of Israel
for their statements.

The Government of the United Kingdom warmly
welcomes United States Secretary of State Kerry's
19 July announcement that Israel and the Palestinians
have reached an agreement that establishes the basis
for resuming direct final status negotiations. We pay
tribute to the efforts of Secretary Kerry and his team
and commend the leadership shown by both Prime
Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas. The United
Kingdom stands ready to do all that we can over the
coming months to support the parties and the United
States in their efforts to achieve a lasting peace for the
Israeli and Palestinian people.

The European Union set out clearly its full support

for United States efforts at yesterday's Foreign Affairs
Council. There was also a vital role for Arab States to
build on the constructive steps taken so far to reiterate
the strategic importance of the Arab Peace Initiative.
Friday's announcement is, of course, only a beginning,
not an end. We welcome the clear commitment of Prime
Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas to a two-State
solution and to working to achieve peace for the Israeli
and Palestinian peoples. Now more than ever it is vital
that both show bold and decisive leadership. With the
new momentum, the Israeli and Palestinian people must
be able to trust that progress is possible. That would
be undermined by a repeat of recent events, such as
further settlement announcements, the use of live fire
and demonstrations by the Israeli Defense Forces, and
rockets shot from Gaza into Israel. We urge all sides to
exercise restraint and to look forward.

As talks resume, we should not forget Gaza. Gaza
must be an integral part of any two-State solution.
As our Minister for the Middle East saw last month,
for ordinary Gazans the Strip remains a desperately
difficult place in which to live. In the heat of summer,
Gazans face very poor living conditions, including
regular and sustained power cuts. It will be important
for Gaza to benefit fully from any economic package
that is being prepared to accompany the political
track, including the easing of Israeli restrictions on
movements of goods and people. The United Kingdom
believes that an improved economy is not only essential
for the people, including the children of Gaza, but
firmly in Israel's own security interests.

Current United States efforts and the strong
commitment shown by the parties themselves reflect
the best chance in many years of securing peace. We
must all unite to reach our shared goal of a negotiated
two-State solution, where a safe and secure Israel can
live in peace with an independent and viable Palestinian
State.

Turning to Syria, it was with great dismay that
we heard Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs Valerie Amos's briefing before the Council last
week. It is truly shocking that more than 6 million people
require humanitarian assistance and that 4 million
people are no longer able to meet their basic food needs.
Yet the Al-Assad regime continues to prevent the
United Nations from delivering aid effectively inside
Syria. With the death toll now well over 100,000, the
situation in Syria gets worse by the day. Since last July,
an average of nearly 200 people have been killed every
24 hours. What started off as peaceful protests over two
years ago has become a protracted conflict waged by
a murderous regime, aided and abetted by Hizbullah
and Iran. The Al-Assad regime has continued to ramp
up its brutal military offensive over recent months, as
witnessed today in Homs, where thousands of innocent
civilians are currently trapped in their homes with
limited access to food, water or electricity.

The countries of the region have already provided
sanctuary to 1.7 million Syrians. More will come. We
urge all neighbouring countries to keep their borders
open for Syrians to escape the tragic and dangerous
situation they are facing at home. In response,
the United Kingdom has doubled its support for
humanitarian assistance, bringing the total to over
$500 million, including support for Syrian refugees and
host communities in Jordan and Lebanon. The Group
of Eight (G-8) countries last month committed over
$1.5 billion, yet the United Nations $5.2 billion Syria
appeal for 2013 is only 35 per cent funded. The needs
for aid in Syria will, sadly, only grow. Without help,
Lebanon and Jordan risk being destabilized. Member
States need to contribute more and encourage others to
do more now and in the long term.

The continuing deterioration of the human rights
situation is also of grave concern. The independent
international commission of inquiry's latest report
found that the conflict had reached new levels of
brutality. War crimes, crimes against humanity and
gross human rights violations continue at a frightening
rate. We remain at the forefront of the international
community in calling for full accountability for all
those responsible for human rights violations and
abuses. The Council should refer the situation in Syria
to the International Criminal Court without delay.

There is a growing body of limited but persuasive
information showing that the regime has used and
continues to use chemical weapons, including sarin gas.
The use of chemical weapons is a war crime. We call on
Syria to allow the United Nations unfettered access to
investigate incidents of chemical weapons use in Syria.

On 17 June, the G-8 reaffirmed support for a
second conference in Geneva, leading to the creation
of a transitional governing body with full executive
powers. Yet the regime's offensive of recent weeks has
made it even harder for this conference to take place.
We continue to support the expanded Syrian National
Coalition and its new President Ahmed Assi Al-Jarba.
The coalition remains the most legitimate and credible
representative of the Syrian people. It has made clear its
commitment to a future democratic Syria in which the
rights of all Syrians are respected. We must not conflate
this moderate opposition with terrorist groups. We must
not accept what Al-Assad wants us to believe - that
the only alternative to his brutal regime is extremists
and terrorists. There are millions of Syrians who want
a peaceful and democratic future and legitimate forces
that are fighting for their interests. We should be on
their side.

Despite our differences, the Council shares some
fundamental aims: to end the conflict, to stop Syria
fragmenting, to let the people decide who governs
them, and to prevent the growth of violent extremism.
As a Council, we need to recommit to working with the
parties in a meaningful way towards a viable political
settlement, based on last year's Geneva communique
(S/2012/523, annex).

