Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, at the outset, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I am confident that under your
capable and wise leadership the Council will enjoy
success in its efforts. I would also like to congratulate
Ambassador Joy ngu, Permanent Representative of
Nigeria, for the excellent way in which she led the
work of the Council over that past month.

I also wish to thank you, Mr. President, for giving
me an opportunity to address the Council at this
meeting. Allow me also to reiterate my gratitude to the
Security Council and the international community for
their continued support to the Libyan people in their
struggle for freedom, democracy and a life of dignity.

I would like to associate myself with the
statements made by previous speakers in welcoming
Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). I thank him for his
valuable briefing and for the ongoing efforts by him
and his team to implement the mandate of the ICC as
set forth in resolution 1970 (2011).

It has become evident to the Security Council and
to the entire international community that since
15 February thousands of Libyans have been the
victims of grave and horrible atrocities and crimes at
the hands of Al-Qadhafi's forces and mercenaries.
According to the Rome Statute, such crimes should not
be allowed to go unpunished, their perpetrators should
not escape prosecution and impunity must be put to an
end.

In that context, I would like to reiterate yet again
that the new authorities in Libya, which have emerged
as a result of the revolution of the Libyan people
against injustice, will give the highest priority to the
achievement of justice, for there can be no security
without justice, and democracy, development and
prosperity cannot be achieved without security.

To that end, the national transitional Government
will take the appropriate legal measures to ensure that
all those involved in crimes not covered under the
jurisdiction of the ICC are subjected to transparent
investigations and given fair and just trials in Libyan
courts. That will also include any transgressions or
crimes that may have been committed against citizens
of other countries in Libya.

The National Transitional Council and the future
Government will continue to maintain consultations
and close cooperation with the Office of the Prosecutor
of the ICC concerning the individuals against whom
the ICC has issued arrest warrants, especially in efforts
to gather and preserve evidence.

The second report of the Prosecutor, which has
today been submitted to the Security Council, contains
a summary of various important activities, including
the issuance of arrest warrants, continued
investigations and other future judicial actions. Libya
greatly appreciates all those efforts, and calls on the
Security Council to continue supporting them. We also
ask for the cooperation of all States party and
non-party to the Rome Statute of the ICC, in
compliance with resolution 1970 (2011) and
specifically paragraph 5 of that resolution. The report
mentions that the Office of the Prosecutor continues to
receive international assistance. All that my country
asks is that everyone, especially Libya's neighbouring
States, continue to comply with the resolution and
refrain from providing safe haven for any fugitives
from Libya, whether they are wanted by the ICC or the
Libyan judiciary.

In his briefing to the Council in May (see S/PV.6528), the Prosecutor emphasized the importance
of international cooperation in the conduct and
progress of judicial measures in Libya. Current judicial
procedures include orders for the arrest of those
involved in war crimes or crimes against humanity.
Every State has a duty to assist in arresting such
individuals and extraditing them for trial.

Libyan authorities have also found that other
serious crimes were committed by members of the
Al-Qadhafi family, high officials, mercenaries and
members of Al-Qadhafi's security forces. Those crimes
include theft of public funds, rape and extra-judicial
killings and assassinations. Libyan judicial authorities
are gathering evidence concerning these crimes, and
will take the necessary legal steps against their
perpetrators.

The Libyan authorities are determined to
maintain the rule of law, fulfil all their obligations and
arrest those charged with crimes who are on Libyan
territory and bring them to justice. We are certain that
this can be done through Libyan efforts. Nonetheless,
11-57695

as stated in the Prosecutor's report, Libya's efforts
must be supported with appropriate coordination and
information-sharing, as well as by efforts by every
State to support the ICC and Libyan authorities in
achieving that goal. I assure the Council that the new
Libyan authorities have nothing to hide. They believe
that achieving justice is a fundamental element in the
creation of a secure, stable and prosperous democratic
State. No one in the new Libya will have impunity for
any crimes they may have committed.

It has often been said in the Chamber that justice
cannot be separated from peace, and that peace,
security and social stability cannot be achieved without
subjecting those involved in grave crimes to
transparent investigations and fair trials, with all due
process and legal guarantees. We will work to achieve
that. The establishment of peace in Libya, and indeed
in the entire region, requires continued efforts on the
part of the Security Council and all States to support
efforts to achieve justice for the thousands of innocent
Libyan victims. Primary among those efforts are those
of the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC. The Libyan
authorities will continue to cooperate with the
Prosecutor and provide him with all possible assistance
and support in fulfilling his mandate.

