Mr. Katti (Algeria) (spoke in French): Let me
say, Mr. Secretary, how very pleased we are to see you
among us, presiding over our meeting. We wish also to
congratulate you and your delegation for having
organized this debate on a very relevant and timely
topic.

The extreme complexity of post-cold-war
conflicts has inevitably led to a radical reversal both in
what we do and how we do it. Of course, there are no
textbook cases and every situation has its own
specificities. We must, however, recognize the
conceptual and operational efforts made thus far by the
United Nations and in particular by the Security
Council in the search for effective responses to the
challenges of peace and security. In fact, sustained
attention is now being given to the issue of what might
be termed the emergence of civil society in the search
for lasting peace.

Without venturing into a legal and political
debate on the definition of civil society, this can be
considered to encompass, inter alia, religious groups,
traditional communities, councils of elders, trade
unions, human rights defence groups, women's and
youth organizations, the media and the academic
world. Those segments of civil society have been
recognized as useful actors in conflict prevention and
in the search for peace and its consolidation.

Thus, before elaborating on those thoughts I
would like to refer to the Cardoso report (A/58/817) on
future relations between the United Nations and civil
society - a report which we believe constitutes an
ambitious platform for partnership setting out ways and
means of better integrating civil society into the overall
work of the United Nations. As members know, the
report recommends that the Security Council improve
the planning and effectiveness of Arria formula
meetings, which can further strengthen the dialogue
between the Council and civil society and which my
delegation will of course continue to encourage. It
seems to us useful, in addition, when a specific
situation requires it, for members of the Security
Council on mission in the field to meet with leaders of
local civil society.

We have also noted that civil society
organizations, in particular in Africa, participate in
peace initiatives that have been established by public
authorities or by international institutions.
Considerable work is also done by civil society in
raising awareness, in strengthening community
dialogue and in building local capacity for the pacific
settlement of disputes through the organization of
seminars, conferences and training workshops on the
culture of peace and through providing human rights
education. There are also situations where the use of
traditional conflict settlement mechanisms, for
example, working with councils of elders and religious
or tribal chiefs, has defused crises, avoiding otherwise
inevitable humanitarian tragedy. Finally, one cannot
fail to mention the joint initiatives by States and local
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) for civil
harmony and national reconciliation, along with those
that are transborder in nature or that involve major
international NGOS.

Those are a few examples of participatory
conflict management that the United Nations system
and the Security Council could encourage.

Crisis prevention requires coherent and
coordinated action by all actors involved, State and
non-State alike. At the global level, the contribution of
the United Nations, and of international financial
institutions in particular, remains fundamental. From
that standpoint, we believe that the effectiveness and
sustainability of measures to tackle the root causes of
conflict necessarily depend on the continued
involvement of the various local and international
actors. Such involvement can make it possible to
strengthen State structures, the rule of law and
democracy; to create or consolidate national crisis
prevention infrastructure; to develop the economy; and,
above all, to create the conditions for the flourishing of
civil society and the strengthening of its potential to
promote peace and stability.

In fact, a greater involvement of civil society in
preventing conflict, social tension and all other
phenomena that can jeopardize civil peace and the
security of citizenry is to be encouraged. However,
respect for the law and the legal framework by
representatives of civil society remains fundamental.

Along the same lines, we believe that the
contribution and involvement of international actors
must strictly respect the United Nations Charter and
the underlying principles of international relations -
cooperation, respect for national sovereignty and non-
interference in the internal affairs of States in
particular, but also those that guide humanitarian
action - universality, neutrality and non-selectivity.

