Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian Federation came forward with the
initiative to have the Security Council adopt a new
resolution on Afghanistan designed to give an assessment
of the present phase of the Afghan conflict.

Disregarding the will of the international community
that they cooperate for a peaceful settlement of the conflict
in Afghanistan and the aspirations of the Afghan people for
national concord and the preservation of the integrity of the
country, the Taliban have made yet another attempt to
resolve the Afghan problem by force of arms, to expand
their control over the entire territory of Afghanistan and to
impose upon the people of that country a regime based on
religious fanaticism, extremism and intolerance of dissent.
Russia views the escalation of military activities in the
north of Afghanistan by the Taliban as a real threat to the
southern borders of the Commonwealth of Independent
States and, together with other members of the
Commonwealth, reserves its right to take all necessary
measures to ensure the proper protection of its borders,
including measures in accordance with existing international
legal commitments.

The Taliban's military expansion in northern
Afghanistan is being carried out with the direct involvement
of foreign military personnel, in planning and in logistical
operations, as well as in fighting on the side of the Taliban.
This is borne out by concrete facts, including the capture by
the forces of the Islamic Government of Afghanistan of a
large number of non-Afghan prisoners of war. Massive
military assistance brings to naught the efforts of the
international community to establish an inter-Afghan
negotiating process, strengthens the Taliban's pretension to
unilateral control over the country and leads them to scorn
the elementary norms of civilized conduct and to commit
large-scale crimes.

The refusal to accept a durable ceasefire; the repeated
undermining of negotiations and the final withdrawal from
negotiations; the unwillingness to cooperate with the
representatives of other political forces; the killing of
foreign diplomats, journalists and staff of international
organizations; mass persecutions, forcible displacements and
even executions for national or religious reasons, including
the massacres in Mazar-e-Sharif and Bamyan; systematic
and flagrant violations of human rights, including
discrimination against girls and women; encouraging the
spread of illicit drug-trafficking and supporting international
terrorism - this is but an incomplete list of the Taliban's
activities, which are well known to the entire international
community. There have even been reports that Hazara
elders were taken prisoner, transported to Kabul and put
on display in a cage.

It is high time for the Taliban leadership to
acknowledge that there can be no military solution to the
Afghan problem and to forbid such conduct. Those
leaders must immediately halt military activities and, on
the example of the Government coalition, agree to the
establishment of a long-term ceasefire and the
commencement of serious negotiations regarding ways
and means to establish peace and national concord in the
country. Only through the Taliban's steadfast
implementation of United Nations decisions, including
decisions on key issues of the Afghan settlement, can
there be a basis for constructive interaction with other
Afghan parties and the world community to establish a
lasting peace in Afghanistan.

A decisive, coordinating and integrating role in the
drafting of any plan for an Afghan settlement must belong
to the United Nations. In that connection, we support the
efforts carried out by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi on the basis
of the resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council. We also support the activities of the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan. We find
the Secretary-General's proposal to create a civil affairs
unit within that Mission justified.

We continue to attach great hopes to the activities of
the "six plus two" group, which remains the fundamental
international forum for negotiations on a settlement in
Afghanistan. We attach great significance to a thorough
preparation of the Tashkent meeting of representatives of
that group of States in order to work out a uniform policy
with respect to the Taliban and other Afghan parties.
Among other things, the members of the group could
assume the responsibility of refusing to provide military
support to the parties to the Afghan conflict and of not
allowing their territories to be used for that purpose. This
would undoubtedly give further impetus to all work done
on the Afghan front.

We support the appeal of the Secretary-General to
render comprehensive assistance to the Afghan
population. We welcome the fourth meeting of the
Afghanistan Support Group, which began yesterday in
Tokyo with the participation of representatives of donor
countries - including Russia - and a number of
international and non-governmental organizations. We

 

hope that the outcome of that meeting will foster the
mobilization of international efforts to respond to the acute
humanitarian situation in central and north-eastern
Afghanistan.

We demand that the Taliban ensure the safety and
security of international humanitarian staff and grant them
unimpeded access to all regions under their control so that
they can render assistance to all people in Afghanistan who
need it.

The Russian Federation, despite its domestic economic
difficulties, continues to render humanitarian assistance to
Afghanistan. Last year and this year, Russia's Ministry for
emergency situations provided various forms of
humanitarian assistance, worth about $600,000, to assist the
Afghan population suffering because of the continuing
hostilities, as well as because of the earthquake.
Russia is prepared to continue constructive cooperation
with all Afghan factions and interested States in order to
resolve the conflict in Afghanistan on the basis of the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council.

