Mr. Verhofstadt (Belgium) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to say that I am very happy
that we adopted resolution 1778 (2007) this morning. I
can also announce that Belgium will participate in the
joint peacemaking mission in Chad and the Central
African Republic. Why? Because I believe that Africa,
more than any other continent, needs particular and
concerted attention from us. One out of every five
children born in Africa today dies from a simple
curable illness, hunger or malnutrition. Out of the four
children who survive, two must do so on a dollar a day,
and the third will never learn to read and write. That is
the reality. Moreover, the chances are great that he or
she will also have to engage in child labour. That is
why we must act together for Africa.

However, the effort that we must make to
improve the plight of all these children has never been
so enormous. In fact, we must provide €60 billion.
With such a sum, we could resolve all the basic
problems in Africa. We could guarantee to each African
access to clean drinking water, sanitation, basic health
care and education.

But we must recognize - and this is why it is
very important that we are having this discussion here
this afternoon - that the major obstacle to progress in
Africa is war. So I am pleased that we have decided to
send new peacekeeping forces to Darfur and the
surrounding countries, as we did in, for example, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo with the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC). And it is also
thanks to MONUC that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for the first time in its history, was able to hold
democratic elections. However, the battle is never over.
The international community must remain vigilant
regarding the resurgence of Violence, which is
currently raging in the Kivus.

(spoke in English)

But I want to use - or abuse; I do not know
which is the better word to use - this meeting to talk
about one of Africa's greatest outrages: the problem of
child soldiers in Africa. Today, there are 300,000 child
soldiers in Africa, each of whom has his or her own
horror story. If members will allow me, I should like to
tell them one of those stories: that of Christine from
Uganda, one of the children whom I have adopted
financially. Kony's rebel army forced her to kill her
own uncle when she was 14 years old. After that, she
was kidnapped, presented as a gift to an army
commander and taken to the Sudan. They abused and
raped her, and in the end she found a way to escape. In
doing so, she shot one of her guards dead. The other
guard shot her in the head, but she managed to get
away. Finally, she was taken in by the army and treated
in a hospital for her bullet wound. There, she was also
found to be pregnant.

I can tell you that Christine's story is just one of
the many thousands of tragic, shocking tales of child
soldiers on the African continent today. I believe that
each one of them is a stain on the soul of human
civilization - an unacceptable stain that politicians
cannot and must not ignore. And I have three measures
in mind to deal with the problem. First and foremost,
what is needed is an embargo on the export of weapons
to all the countries with child soldiers by means of a
new international treaty on the arms trade. That is the
best way to do it and to deal with it. Secondly, the
international community must reach an agreement on
stopping development aid to countries that use child
soldiers in their army.

The current naming and shaming system that
exists inside our Organization is not enough. Offending
countries must not only be named, or shamed, but must
actually be punished. But above all, the offenders
themselves must be put on trial. Take, for example,
Kony, the so-called leader of the Lord's Resistance
Army of Uganda. He alone has been responsible for the
abuse of almost 70,000 child soldiers on the African
continent. An international arrest warrant has been
issued by the International Criminal Court in The
Hague. We know where he is, but nobody arrests him,
while his activities continue to this day and the terror
continues. Now, from the Congo, he and his troops
regularly invade the southern Sudan, where more
children are again kidnapped. The time for talking is
over. Certainly, on this question - child soldiers - a
time for action is here. We know what Kony has done;
we know what he is doing and we know where he is,
and there is not any possible pretext for him not to be
arrested.

I therefore ask individually, the members of the
Security Council to do just that. We have the
possibility; MONUC is in east Congo, and we know
where Kony is. Let us arrest him and put him on trial
and make an example of him, as a warning to all
criminals that the exploitation of children in armed
conflicts is not possible in this modern world.

