Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I wish to thank Mr. Modibo
Toure, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his briefing on the latest developments in
Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS). I would also like to express appreciation
to Ambassador Mauro Vieira in his capacity as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) for his remarks.

The continued political stand-off and institutional
paralysis in Guinea-Bissau remain a source of serious
concern. The consequent socioeconomic difficulties
over the past two years have impacted the people of
Guinea-Bissau and will eventually undermine the peace
and stability of the country. We appreciate the important
role of the PBC and welcome the approval of useful
projects to be financed under the Immediate Response
Facility of the Peacebuilding Fund to the amount of
$7.3 million. Such projects will certainly contribute
to easing the socioeconomic difficulties of women and
young people, as well as to promoting stability.

The centrality of the Conakry Agreement to
sustaining peace, security and development in Guinea-
Bissau cannot be overemphasized. We reiterate our
call for all stakeholders in Guinea-Bissau to respect
and to comply with the Agreement in addressing their
differences and the challenges facing their country.
We urge them to create conditions for the holding of
legislative and presidential elections in 2018 and 2019,
respectively. All parties should also refrain from
actions or statements that could escalate tensions and
incite violence. It is indeed vital that the security and
armed forces of Guinea-Bissau continue to uphold the
country's Constitution and desist from interfering in
the political and institutional crisis.

Those who continue to obstruct the implementation
of the agreement must be given clear signals that
their actions will not be tolerated. In that regard, we
commend the role of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the high-level
delegation it dispatched to Guinea-Bissau two weeks
ago. We support its decision on restoring democratic
governance and ensuring respect for the rule of law in
Guinea Bissau, as endorsed by the African Union (AU)
Peace and Security Council communique issued today.
The Council should reinforce the decision by ECOWAS
and the African Union and convey a clear and united
message to all the parties in this regard. We believe the
concerted efforts by ECOWAS, the African Union, the
United Nations and other relevant partners continues
to be indispensable to finding a durable solution to the
political crisis in Guinea-Bissau.

We express our support to UNIOGBIS for its
continued provision of necessary support to Guinea-
Bissau, with the objective of resolving the current
political impasse and creating an environment for of
dialogue among all of the country's actors. Accordingly,
we fully agree with the recommendation of the
Secretary General that the current UNIOGBIS mandate
be extended for another year, until 28 February 2019.

Finally, we echo the appeal of the AU Peace and
Security Council for financial support towards the
continuation of the mandate of the ECOWAS Mission in
Guinea-Bissau - whose mandate has been extended to
31 March - until the necessary training of the national
security forces of Guinea-Bissau is completed. I wish
to conclude by supporting the draft press statement
proposed by Cote d'Ivoire, and express our readiness to
work closely on the draft resolution that will renew the
UNIOGBIS mandate.

