Mr. Corr (Ireland): Ireland would also like to
express its appreciation to Mr. Annabi for his very
helpful briefing this afternoon, particularly his
assessment of the elections of 17 November and the
next steps to be undertaken. Ireland, of course, agrees
fully with the European Union statement which will be
delivered later by Belgium.

My delegation welcomes the peaceful and orderly
manner in which the elections were held on 17
November, as well as the significant participation of all
communities. We believe that these elections mark an
important step in the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999) and in the development of a democratic
society in Kosovo, based on respect for human rights
and the rule oflaw.

The participation of all communities was
essential to ensure wide and effective representation in
the institutions of provisional self-government. We join
others in commending very warmly the United Nations
Secretariat, Special Representative Haekkerup and
everyone in the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for their excellent work
in ensuring the success of the elections. This was a task
well done. We also appreciate the efforts of KFOR and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, and consider that the elections provided an
excellent example of inter-institutional cooperation.

The support of the Belgrade authorities and of
President Kostunica was important in encouraging
many in the Serbian community to vote, and we very
much welcome this. We hope that the participation of
all minorities in the election will help to facilitate a
new phase of cooperation and prepare the ground for
the development of a tolerant and multi-ethnic society
which safeguards the interests of all communities. It is
important that the Serb-controlled areas in the north of
Kosovo be integrated into the new framework so that
all representatives can focus on representing their
communities through constructive participation in the
new institutions. This will require close coordination
between the Serb community, UNMIK, KFOR and
Belgrade.

We hope that all sides will approach with
sensitivity and wisdom the negotiations regarding the
future coalition and the President. Whatever the
outcome of these negotiations, elected leaders will
have to assume major responsibilities for the political,
economic, social and cultural life of the province. They
must display a responsible attitude vis-a-vis its future
status, which includes refraining from making
unhelpful public statements. We believe strongly that
their new authority must be exercised in strict
compliance with resolution 1244 (1999) and with the
Constitutional Framework. The provisional institutions
should focus immediately on important issues -
tangible results, as Mr. Annabi said earlier - such as
developing the economy and tackling ongoing crime,
and we consider that the training of local
administrative staff should be a priority.

Ireland encourages the Special Representative
and UNMIK to continue their efforts to implement
resolution 1244 (1999) and to make further progress in
their work in relation to the important issues of
security, justice, refugee returns and missing persons.
Ireland is particularly concerned that work in relation
to political prisoners, as outlined in the common
document of 5 November 2001, should be concluded as
rapidly as possible. The newly elected authorities
should cooperate fully with UNMIK and engage
constructively with the Belgrade authorities, in
accordance with the common document.

We believe that the successful development of
Kosovo will help to ensure peace and stability in
South-Eastern Europe. Along with its partners in the
European Union, Ireland will continue to support
greater regional cooperation and European integration
through the Stability Pact and the Stabilization and
Association Process.

