Mr. Bishnoi (India): I am privileged to participate
in this debate of the Council being presided over by
you, Madam. I also thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Nicholas Haysom and Ambassador
Mahmoud Saikal for their briefings.

We are happy that Afghanistan's historic political
transition remains on course. India is proud to call itself
Afghanistan's first strategic partner, and stands ready
to do whatever is within its capacity and means to work
with the Afghan Government and its people to realize
our common ambition. We share the Afghan people's
desire for a strong, independent, united and prosperous
Afghanistan. India will continue to support a truly
Afghan-led and Afghan owned reconciliation process
within the framework of the Afghan Constitution and
the internationally accepted red lines.

During the recently held Heart of Asia ministerial
meeting in Islamabad on 9 December, our External
Affairs Minister said that

"democracy is taking roots in Afghanistan and we
acknowledge the role of President Ghani and CEO
Mr. Abdullah in building on the strong foundation
created by former President Karzai to ensure
peaceful, democratic and inclusive governance for
the whole of Afghanistan".

In that context, we would like to inform the Council
that India will be hosting the sixth ministerial of the
Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process in 2016.
Our main concern remains that of the security
situation in Afghanistan. The Secretary-General's
latest report (S/2015/942) substantiates our view that
it is terrorism which is the main source of insecurity
and instability in Afghanistan. What is alarming is the
revelation in recent reports, including the Secretary-
General's report, of the presence of Daesh-affiliated
groups, particularly in Nangarhar province. The
deteriorating security situation is reflected in the
Secretary-General's report, which states that there
were 3,693 civilian casualties in the reporting period,
reflecting an increase on6 per cent over the same period
in 2014. We strongly condemn the dastardly terrorist
attacks attack on the Kandahar airport and the Spanish
Embassy in Kabul on 8 and 11 December, respectively,
as well as the attack outside Bagram airbase today. This
is indeed alarming, and the Council must act against
this threat with a sense of urgency.

We would like to take this opportunity commend
the Afghan National Security Forces and the Afghan
people for countering the forces of terrorism and
extremism with courage and resilience. They need the
continued support of the international community to
defend Afghanistan's unity and security. For its part,
India is ready to work with Afghanistan to strengthen
its defensive capability. India has always maintained
that any peace talks have to be Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned and should only be with those Taliban
sympathizers who are willing to accept and work within
the Constitution of Afghanistan. .

Afghanistan will be able to achieve its optimal
economic potential only if it is allowed freedom of
transit to major markets in South Asia. We have formally
indicated our willingness to join the Afghanistan-
Pakistan trade and transit arrangement. India is
also working with Afghanistan and Iran to develop
trilateral transit. Participation in the development of
the Chahbahar Port will augment our connectivity with
Afghanistan and beyond. India's engagement in the
trade, commerce and investment confidence-building
measure within the Heart of Asia Process as the lead
country complements our bilateral development
cooperation with Afghanistan, including in the spheres
of infrastructure, connectivity and capacity-building.

In conclusion, it is our view that UNAMA
must continue to play a leading role in shaping and
coordinating the efforts of the international community
to support Afghanistan's political and economic
reconstrucitonprocess.

