Mr. Sannoh (Liberia): It is an honour and privilege
for me to address the Security Council as it considers
the twenty-ninth progress report (S/2015/275) of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL).

Liberia has come a long way since the end of the
conflict, forging ways and means to address the root
causes and consequences of the civil conflict in a
comprehensive and holistic manner so as to consolidate
peace, promote national reconciliation and create an
enabling environment for political, economic and social
development in Liberia. Significant progress has been
made in this regard under the leadership of President
Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, but we must remain ever mindful
that Liberia would not be where we are today without the
tireless support of the international community. I should
therefore like to express my thanks and appreciation to
the Secretary-General, the successive members of the
Security Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and
the members of the Liberia configuration, as well as all
other bilateral and multilateral partners, for the support
that they have given us over the years.

Let me also register the appreciation of the
Government of Liberia for the work of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia and the leadership demonstrated
by Ms. Karin Landgren, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, during her tour of duty. Both
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Ambassador Olof Skoog of Sweden, Chairman
of the Liberia configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, have commented eloquently and truthfully
on the situation in Liberia, the challenges that we face
as a nation and people, and the need for international
support. We could not agree more.

The Secretary-General's report fairly represents the
situation in Liberia as of 15 April. However, some of the
concerns raised and the incidents reported do not give
a holistic picture of the situation in Liberia and appear
more to be isolated events, which the Government has
not condoned.

The first is the issue of corruption. The lapses
mentioned in regard to corruption and impunity in
Liberia are more a manifestation of capacity challenges
than a lack of political will to fight this menace. It
could be recalled that the President in her most recent
address to the Legislature urged it to amend the act
establishing the Liberia Anti-Corruption Commission
so as to give the Commission full prosecutorial powers.
What is not being said is that prosecuting corruption
cases requires capacity and resources that are not
readily available. Hence the Ministry prioritizes cases
that have pervasive impact, such as the National Oil
Company case involving the bribing of legislators,
the illegal issuance of logging contracts involving
officials of the Forestry Development Authority, and
the National Drug Service of the Ministry of Health,
among others. An Anti-Corruption Division staffed by
experienced and seasoned prosecutors is in the process
of being established in the Ministry of Justice; when
fully operational, it will speed up the prosecution of
cases of corruption. New legislation is also being
drafted to establish an additional court dedicated to
cases of corruption.

The Government is currently working on
decongesting the police beyond Montserrado county
into the counties so that the level of deployment is
linked to population ratio. Concerns about police
brutality are troubling. The Professional Standards
Division of the Liberia National Police routinely
investigates acts of police misconduct and disciplinary
actions, including dismissals and prosecution, are
taken. The Transnational Crimes Unit, which includes
representatives from all the security agencies, is
functional although the meeting of its Board remains
erratic. The Minister of Justice has directed the Board
to meet regularly. The Government has also embarked
on vigorous steps to reform the Liberia National Police
and instil discipline and professionalism among its
rank and file. Four senior police officers were recently
dismissed by the President in this regard. Two separate
independent probes are currently in progress involving
allegations of police misconduct, which may warrant
criminal prosecution.

The review and reform of the laws relating to the
security sector is a dynamic and ongoing process. The
draft police act was recalled by my office with the view
to providing a clear direction on a number of policy
issues. This exercise is expected to be completed by
the end of this month, and thereafter submitted to the
President for onward transmission to the legislature.
The draft firearms act is still in the Legislature, and we
are informed that it will soon be passed into law.

On the human rights situation, the Government
does not condone violations by any of its institutions
and remains committed to fulfilling its obligations
under local and international law. The Government
routinely investigates incidents of human rights
violations and abuses, and, consistent with due process,
brings those responsible to justice. The events referred
to in the report of the Secretary-General, including in
particular the use of excessive force in the violent clash
between the community of West Point and the Armed
Forces of Liberia (AFL) during the state of emergency,
was an isolated incident that the Independent National
Commission on Human Rights swiftly investigated.
The Commission's findings did not conclude that the
AFL was responsible for the shooting, so no criminal
investigation was triggered.

We recognize the need to establish a military
tribunal consistent with the uniform code of military
justice, which the Government is working on, but the
fact that criminal proceedings did not result from the
incident was not due to the absence of such a tribunal.
Other procedures exist that allow for AFL soldiers to
be prosecuted in civilian courts if found responsible for
criminal misconduct involving civilians.

Regarding the media, there is no restriction on or
prior censorship of the press in Liberia. However, the
media are not above the law but remain subject to it,
so much so that where there is a clear and deliberate
violation of the laws of Liberia by journalists or media
institutions, the Government has a duty to bring those
responsible to justice in order to preserve the integrity
of the law and for the greater good of society.

Sexual and gender-based violence remains a
challenge, even in spite of an increase in prosecutions
and long prison terms. What is now clear is that
criminal justice alone cannot address the challenge.
In addition to prosecutions, we must now look at other
factors, including sociological and cultural dimensions,
and embark on concerted efforts through sensitization
to fight this scourge. The Government is committed to
this process.

The Government also remains committed to
concluding the constitution review process in a way
that further contributes to rather than undermines
Liberia's peacebuilding efforts and respect for
freedom of religion. We recognize the slow pace of the
implementation of the Palava Hut programme as part of
the road map for national healing, peacebuilding and
reconciliation, but we nonetheless remain committed to
fully implementing the programme.

In response to resolutions 2190 (2014) and 2215
(2015), which call on the Government of Liberia to
assume fully its complete security responsibilities from
UNMIL no later than 30 June 2016, and for UNMIL
to resume its drawdown, the Government, in close
collaboration with UNMIL and partners, has formulated
a concrete plan, with timelines and benchmarks, for
building the capacity of the security sector to assume
those responsibilities.

However, the plan formulated by the Government
goes beyond the UNMIL transition. It is a peace
consolidation strategy designed not only to assume
responsibilities from UNMIL but also to consolidate
the gains made over the years, and to address the
remaining challenges that pose a threat to the peace and
security of the country in a more structured manner.
The plan has now been disaggregated along these lines.

The plan emphasizes, among other underlying
benchmarks, a holistic Government approach for both
ownership and implementation, focusing on State
and human security; efficiency, transparency and
accountability; democratic and civilian oversight; and
coordination, collaboration and partnerships within the
security sector and among Liberia and its regional and
law-enforcement partners.

The plan also calls for capacity-building and for
key legal and regulatory policies and frameworks to
be strengthened and established where they do not
exist, and calls for the review and enactment of legal
frameworks, including passage of the police act and the
firearms act, among others. The plan is incorporated
into the post-Ebola recovery programme.

The implementation of the plan is costed at
$104.8 million, spread over a period of three or
more years. While the plan recognizes that it is the
responsibility of the Government of Liberia to mobilize
the required amount, it also emphasizes the need for
increased donor support to the security sector, given
the enormity of the challenges.

In March 2014, the deadly Ebola virus disease
struck Liberia, revealing several vulnerabilities across
the service-delivery systems, especially the health-
care system. I would like to report that with the robust
support of the United Nations and the global community,
matched at the national level by strong leadership and
a resilient people, Liberia is now on the verge of being
declared an Ebola-free society.

Liberia has developed an economic stabilization and
recovery plan to address a number of the vulnerabilities
revealed by the Ebola virus and a subregional plan

with Sierra Leone and Guinea. The Government very
much looks forward to a continued partnership with
the United Nations and the global community, so as
to reach zero infections and to sustain an Ebola-free
Liberia and subregion.

The steep decline in the Liberian economy due to
the Ebola crisis remains the greatest inhibiting factor
for the Government in terms of delivering services
to its people. The situation will continue to have an
impact on all sectors, especially the justice and security
sector. The Government will continue to exert efforts to
improve socioeconomic conditions, especially among
restive youth; strengthen relations between the State
and society; and build trust and confidence among the
citizenry, the Government and its institutions.

Finally, Liberia remains committed to its obligations
under the statement of mutual commitment with the
Peacebuilding Commission, and we will continue to
forge increased engagement with the members of the
configuration in order to solidify peace in Liberia,
especially given that the pace of resource mobilization
in support of Liberia has slowed considerably in recent
years. The Government emphasizes that support for
the peacebuilding architecture of the United Nations is
particularly critical during the process of transition in
Liberia.

