Mr. Marzooq (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of my country would like to thank Peru's
delegation, the President of the Security Council for
this month, for organizing this constructive debate
on youth, peace and security. Young people make up
the most important segment of society. They are the
ones who achieve the desired objectives when it comes
to reconstruction, peace and countering extremism
and violence.

My country believes that the main threat facing the
world and youth today is the scourge of terrorism and
extremism, which represents a serious challenge to all
the societies. In its modern history, Iraq has suffered
from war tragedies that have depleted much of its
potential, especially the potential of its youth. Young
people are the mainstay of our nation and the source of
creativity and development. Iraq therefore has sought
to invest in its youth to ensure their participation
in decision-making, liberating our land, countering
extremism and terrorism and preventing terrorist
groups from recruiting young people in order to fuel
hatred and destruction. We have sought to make young
people agents for peace and security. A collective
international commitment to a long-term strategy is the
most effective solution for eliminating extremism and
violence and addressing their causes.

My country has supported its young people and has
been committed to the implementation of resolution
2250 (2015). Our national youth strategy for the
period 2013-2020, developed in cooperation with the
United Nations Population Fund, includes plans and
programmes to promote constructive mindsets among
Iraq's youth and strengthen cooperation, brotherhood
and anti-violence efforts. We have also sought to
encourage sports among Iraqi youth as an alternative
to violence and terrorism. Since 2003, Iraq has been
attempting to rectify the mistakes made by the previous
dictatorial regime with regard to our young people by
inviting and encouraging sports teams to visit Iraq. We
have established the conditions necessary to assure all
international parties that Iraq can now host sporting
events at the international level by providing the
appropriate environment for that.

Iraq has also encouraged the participation of
young people in elections and electoral campaigns. We
encouraged the establishment of a youth parliament,
which held its first session on 10 October 2017, to create
a genuine nucleus for free and sound political thinking
that promotes the objectives of Iraq and the international
community towards achieving security and peace.
My country has adopted a governmental programme
focused on strategic priorities to promote youth
services and well-being. It includes the establishment
of youth facilities and sports clubs to promote young
people's athletic, cultural and scientific talents.
The Iraqi Government has issued a national human
development report entitled "Iraqi Youth: Challenges
and Opportunities", which focuses on the concept of
joint prosperity and well-being, which is at the heart
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Iraq is also seeking to adopt plans to eliminate youth
unemployment and to encourage the employment of
young people by providing them with short-term loans,
supported by the State, in order to improve their income
and well-being. The visit by the Secretary-General's
Envoy on Youth to Iraq in August 2017 was in support
of our national youth strategy.

Iraq has realized the real potential of youth in
its fight against terrorism. That is why we adopted
a strategy to liberate our country and to ensure
reconstruction based on young people as active force
that believes in the spirit of challenge and patience. Iraq
is currently encouraging its diaspora to return to the
country and to invest their potential and experiences
in the country's reconstruction. My country is aware
of the need to rebuild a new society with young Iraqi
hands, and eliminate the phenomenon of wasting the
potential of young people in crime and violence.

In conclusion, the Government of Iraq reiterates
its rejection of all forms of violence, extremism and
terrorism. We support the efforts of the international
community to eliminate those phenomena. We must
focus on young people and their future by combating
terrorism and its dangers. They have the right to enjoy
life. We must respond to their ideas and meet their
needs, as well as continue talking with them about their
role in building the future.

