Mr. Skoog (Sweden): First, I would like to thank
Mr. Miroslav Jenca for the useful briefing this morning.
I would also like to thank the observer of Palestine and
the representative of Israel for their participation and
contributions here today.

Sweden aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later today by the observer of the European
Union, including with regard to the Iran nuclear deal.

Recent months have been extremely busy for the
Security Council. However, despite the proliferation of
new and re-emerging crises, we must also maintain our
commitment to resolving one of the longest-standing
conflicts on our agenda: we must continue to seek an
end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict by reviving the
peace process. In that regard, we welcome the efforts
by the United States to achieve a return to meaningful
negotiations, based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions, international law and prior agreements.
That is the only path towards realizing a two-State
solution, ending the occupation and resolving all
final-status issues.

A unified Palestinian leadership is critical for
a return to meaningful negotiations. We therefore
commend the efforts in recent weeks to further
intra-Palestinian reconciliation. We welcome the
agreement signed by Fatah and Hamas in Cairo on
12 October, as well as Egypt's crucial engagement in
that regard. This is an important step in enabling the
full return of the Palestinian Authority to Gaza. We
encourage all parties to seize this opportunity and to
fully implement agreed provisions in order to reunite
Gaza and the West Bank.

The people of Gaza have lived in intolerable
conditions for far too long. The population continues
to suffer from the impact of only having electricity for
a couple of hours per day and a lack of access to basic
services, including water and sanitation, as we have
just heard this morning. The return of the Palestinian
Authority to Gaza should swiftly lead to actions that
improve the grave humanitarian situation.

In addition, an immediate end to the Israeli policy of
closure and a full opening of the crossings, in line with
resolution 1860 (2009), are needed, while addressing
Israel's legitimate security concerns. We also underline
the need for unimpeded humanitarian access, as well as

access for all international donors, to Gaza. My country
is the sixth biggest donor to Palestine, including Gaza,
in order to support the Strip's growth and stability, both
within the European Union framework and through our
own development cooperation, with between $40 and
$50 million per year.

Last month, we heard from Special Coordinator
Mladenov that "Israel's illegal settlement activities
have continued at a high rate - a consistent pattern
over the course of this year" (S/PV8054, p. 2). More
than 10,000 settlement units have been announced
so far this year, which is more than twice as many as
during the whole of 2016. We reiterate that settlements
constitute a flagrant violation of international law and
are contrary to numerous Security Council resolutions,
including 2334 (2016).

The Israeli Government announced yesterday,
and even today, decisions to advance thousands of
settlement units, including in East Jerusalem and Area
C, deep inside the occupied West Bank. The fact that
two days ago - for the first time in 15 years - the
Israeli authorities issued permits for 31 new settlement
units in the Palestinian city of Hebron is of particular
concern. This represents a new, deeply worrying trend
in a place where tensions are already running high.

Settlements are resulting in the gradual
fragmentation of the West Bank and have a negative
impact on Palestinians' enjoyment of human rights,
including freedom of movement, thereby severely
impeding the right to education, health, work and
family life. Our position and that of the European
Union remains clear. We strongly oppose Israel's illegal
settlement policy. Settlements dangerously threaten the
viability of the two-State solution and destroy hopes for
peace. This is why we condemn these Israeli decisions
and we urge the Israeli Government to reverse them.

In the context of achieving a two-State solution, we
would like to recall that resolution 2334 (2016)

"Calls upon all States to distinguish, in their
relevant dealings, between the territory of the State
of Israel and the territories occupied since 1967"
(resolution 2334 (2016), para. 5).

In line with this, the European Union has a policy

regarding settlement products. Furthermore, all
agreements between the State of Israel and the European

Union must explicitly indicate their inapplicability to

the occupied territories. This policy does not constitute
a boycott of Israel. We hope that the United Nations
will be able to report on developments regarding this in
the next reporting period related to the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016).
Next month marks the seventieth anniversary
of the adoption of General Assembly resolution 181
(II), which recognized the two-State solution. The
Israeli-Palestinian conflict has lasted far too long.
Countless Palestinians and Israelis have lost their lives.
Fortunately, fatalities on both sides are at lower levels
so far this year; however, a few weeks ago an attack
in a settlement in the occupied West Bank led to three
Israeli fatalities. Sweden unequivocally condemns this
attack and all other acts of violence.

The international community must do everything
in its power to realize the two-State solution. The
peoples of Israel and Palestine deserve no less.

