Mr. Lewicki (Poland): First of all, allow me to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco,
Ambassador Lauber of Switzerland and African
Union Commissioner Chergui for their very valuable
contributions to our discussion.

We agree with the other delegations that have
stressed that it is fully justified for the Council to
discuss the situation in Burundi, particularly in the
context of preparations for elections to be held in 2020
and therefore Burundi's crucial importance in terms of
peace and security in the region. Let me underscore that
we are here in the Council in order to assist Burundi
in strengthening peace and stability in its territory and
improving the well-being of its people.

As has been highlighted by many delegations,
including the delegation of South Africa, regional and
subregional organizations continue to play an essential

role in dealing with the challenges faced by the
Burundian people. In that context, Poland commends all
efforts made thus far by the East African Community
to enable the inclusive Burundian dialogue. We also
further encourage all regional partners, including the
African Union, to engage in the mediation process,
which could lead to a widely accepted road map, setting
the path towards credible elections in 2020.

Several delegations have also raised the important
issue of the human rights situation in Burundi. Again,
let me reiterate that we see human rights as one of
the pillars of the United Nations system. Human
rights are strictly interlinked with peace and security
and development and therefore should be treated in
a comprehensive manner. That is why we call on the
authorities of Burundi to resume cooperating with the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and all mechanisms of the Human Rights Council. We
also urge the authorities of Burundi to fully cooperate
with the Commission ofInquiry on Burundi established
by the Human Rights Council.

Let me also add that the Burundi authorities are
obliged to respect and promote human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including the freedoms of
expression and assembly, as provided for in the African
Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights and other
relevant international and regional instruments to
which Burundi is a party. This is not a matter of values
or choice; it is simply a legal obligation, as once a State
is party to a legal instrument it is obliged to implement
its provisions.

We are also concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Burundi. As we have just heard from
Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco,
almost 2 million people are at risk of food insecurity,
which is very troubling information to us.

The political impasse continues to hamper the
humanitarian situation and development in the country.
In this context, we commend the efforts of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and its
Chair, Ambassador Lauber, to bring about a sustainable
improvement to Burundian society and the lives of
its people.

We urge the Burundi authorities to improve good
governance, as without good governance and strong,
reliable institutions it is extremely challenging to
advance development and implement all human rights,
including economic and social rights. We also urge them
to ensure media freedom and to open up democratic
space ahead of the elections scheduled for 2020.

In conclusion, allow me to stress that inclusive
dialogue among all parties involved is the only possible
way to find a lasting solution to the political crisis.
It is crucial to address the current challenges on a
sustainable basis and enable the elections to be held
in 2020 in satisfactory conditions. Burundian society,
horribly affected by many years of conflict, deserves to
voice its preferences on its national leadership in free,
fully inclusive and fair elections, in the letter and spirit
of the Arusha Agreement.

