Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this emergency meeting
of the Security Council. We also very much appreciate
the presence of the Secretary-General and the
statement he made earlier this evening.

My delegation would like to begin by expressing,
in the clearest manner possible, its outrage at and
strong condemnation of the continued military
onslaught by Israel in the Gaza Strip. For days now, we
have all been witness to the excessive and
disproportionate use of force by Israel and the
collective punishment of innocent civilians in
contravention of international law, including the
Geneva Conventions. One and a half million
Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip are living in a
state of constant fear. Innocent civilians, including
women and children, have been killed and injured.
International humanitarian workers risk death and
injury as they carry on their vital mission.

We must not allow this situation to continue. The
violence must end, and it must end now.

At this critical juncture, there should be no lack

of clarity about what needs to happen. Israel must

immediately end its attacks against innocent civilians

in the Gaza Strip and comply with international

humanitarian and human rights law. There is a need to

cease hostilities and put to an end the cycle of
violence.

The continuing violence in the Gaza Strip can
only worsen the already dire humanitarian situation
there. Civilians in Gaza have been suffering as the
illegal blockade and the closure of the Gaza crossings
by Israeli authorities continue. We are aware that at
some points Israel has allowed humanitarian assistance
to enter Gaza. However, we believe that humanitarian
access should be provided continuously and
permanently order to achieve tangible improvement of
the humanitarian situation in Gaza. We therefore once
again call on Israel to immediately lift the blockade
and the closure.

My delegation also underlines that movement of
persons, including humanitarian workers, and goods
into Gaza should be immediately normalized in order
to facilitate economic activity and to meet
humanitarian needs.

The continued provision of emergency and
humanitarian assistance by the international
community to the Palestinian people in Gaza remains
critical. In this regard, we commend the United
Nations agencies, including the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, and other humanitarian organizations for their
work in the Gaza Strip.

To help ease the suffering of the Palestinian
people in Gaza, Indonesia will send humanitarian
assistance in the amount of $1 million.

Indonesia commends the Secretary-General for
his personal engagement on the unfolding crisis in the
Gaza Strip. In this regard, we welcome the intensive
efforts that the Secretary-General is making with all
parties concerned in order to end the violence and
restore calm.

Indonesia also recognizes the important role that
countries in the region, individually or collectively
through the League of Arab States, can play in
promoting peace in the region. We welcome, therefore,
the convening of the meeting of Foreign Ministers of
the League of Arab States in Cairo earlier today to
contribute constructively to the response to the ongoing
crisis in the Gaza Strip. We believe that the Quartet
also has an important role to play. Not least, the
Security Council is called upon to remain seized of the
unfolding crisis.

The Council's call in its statement of
28 December 2008 remains unheeded by Israel. Thus,
the Security Council should consider the possibility of
pursuing stronger measures to end all violence and
military activities and to restore the ceasefire. In that
connection, we therefore fully support the draft
resolution which has just been introduced by the
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, as it
stands.

