Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to begin by thanking Australia and by expressing
my gratitude to Ms. Julie Bishop for presiding over
this meeting of the Security Council. I also thank
Ambassador Gary Quinlan, in his capacity as Chair
of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee. We are grateful
to Australia for organizing this meeting and for
contributing to the fight against terrorism. We believe
that to be the most significant and direct threat to the
security of people around the world. Terrorism has
repercussions for both international peace and for
security. I also thank the Ambassador of Lithuania in
her capacity as Chair of the Security Council Sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) for her considerable efforts. And I would like to
thank the members of the Security Council for having
adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23 earlier
today.

Iraq today is on the front lines against terrorism.
Each day, that confrontation exacts a heavy toll. We
are extremely concerned at the fact that the terrorist
ranks continue to swell, now numbering approximately
15,000 individuals from more than 80 different
countries. Those individuals are active on the ground
in both Iraq and Syria.

Those statistics point to the existence in a number
of States of international networks that are very well
organized and meticulously coordinated. Those
networks facilitate the transfer of foreign terrorist
fighters across borders. We would therefore like to
invite the Security Council to take firm measures
against the organizations and States that authorize
such networks to exist within their territory and that
facilitate the transit of foreign terrorist fighters across
their borders. We would also like to invite the Security
Council to fully and strictly implement the provisions of
resolution 2178 (2014) and demand its implementation
by all States.

The terrorist acts perpetrated against Iraqi civilians
clearly illustrate the brutality and savagery of the
terrorist group called Daesh, or the so-called Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), which has once again
shown that it is nothing more than a killing machine
that is willing to commit any type of crime against
those who do not share its extremist takfiri views.
Daesh killed more than 1,700 Iraqi civilians in June
at Camp Speicher; executed hundreds of Iraqi Sunni
tribespeople, including some from the Al-Bunemer
tribe; they also killed and displaced members of the
Christian and Yazidi minority groups and Shiite,
Turkmen, and Kurdish minorities. It also sold young
Yazidi girls into slavery. That provides ample proof that
that terrorist group, with its absolutist rhetoric and view
of the world, constitutes a threat to all of the religious
and ethnic segments of Iraqi society. That is why the
Iraqi armed forces, the Peshmerga, the police, popular
movements and heroic tribal factions have responded
to the call by the legitimate Iraqi Government and the
religious authorities to fight against the Daesh terrorist
entity.

Drying up the sources of terrorist financing is a
key step in the fight against terrorism. As long as ISIL
is able to sell oil, it will maintain its presence in Iraq.
We deplore the fact that Iraqi and non-Iraqi individuals
from countries in the region and even European States
have been involved in the illegal trade in oil, buying it
from Daesh. Iraq welcomes the Manama declaration,
adopted at the international meeting on combating
terrorist financing held recently in Bahrain.

Iraq would like to once again thank and recognize
the efforts made by all Member States to fight terrorism.
It reiterates that terrorism is an persistent global
phenomenon, and greater solidarity and coordination
are required in order to eradicate it. Iraq believes that
drying up the sources of terrorist financing is a crucial
element in that fight. Success in defeating terrorism
remains dependent on efforts by all Member States
to implement resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014),
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter, and all
relevant resolutions that seek to address the root causes
of terrorism in order to eliminate it.

For its part, the Government of Iraq is engaging in
intensive diplomatic activities and efforts to mobilize
Arab, regional and international cooperation, as we
believe that coordination and cooperation with Arab
countries and countries of the region are essential
in order to implement the provisions of international
resolutions on counter-terrorism efforts. The Arab and
international actions undertaken to eliminate Daesh
and affiliated terrorist organizations in Iraq must
also combat that entity in Syria, given the nature of
terrorism, which knows no geographic borders, in order
to deny it the resources that it requires to reorganize
itself.

The report ofthe Monitoring Team (see S/2014/815)
submitted pursuant to resolution 2170 (2014) and its
recommendations are very important. We would like
to invite the Security Council to implement those
recommendations and to ensure that Member States
comply with them.

Finally, we would like to thank the international
coalition led by the United States, which includes over
40 Arab, regional and European countries, for their
efforts and their support to Iraq in its fight against
terrorism.

