Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM), I would first like to express to you our
pleasure at participating in this very important debate,
launched by the French presidency in conjunction with
the delegation of the United Kingdom. I would also
like to assure you, Sir, of our ongoing commitment to
enriching this debate.

(spoke in English)

The Non-Aligned Movement has long-standing
positions regarding peacekeeping operations in all their
aspects, and in this respect would like to outline its
views on the issues under consideration today. The
challenges posed by the evolving nature of
peacekeeping brings to the fore its multidimensional
complexity, which requires a genuine and concerted
response by the entire membership of the United
Nations. NAM. would like to express its willingness to
engage in the proposed collaborative process and, as a
first step, to provide its views on effective strategic
oversight.

From the outset, we wish to stress that, in the
context of taking a comprehensive approach to and
with the objective of ensuring success in peacekeeping,
United Nations peacekeeping operations should be
accompanied by a parallel and inclusive peace process
that is well planned, carefully designed and supported
by the consent and adherence of the parties concerned.

In order for the operational planning process for
any peacekeeping operation to be successful, political
planning should be of utmost importance, since what is
at stake is not the planning per se, but what to plan for.
It is therefore time for the Organization to rethink the
planning process itself.

The 2006 integrated mission planning process is
an effort to provide a much-needed integration
framework for a full United Nations presence in the
field. However, such efforts are hampered by the major
and interrelated challenges of limited financial and
human resources that impair the managerial and
organizational capacity of the Organization.
Difficulties also arise from the way the deployments
are mandated or planned, especially where there is
little or no peace to keep, which is a fundamental
existential test for peacekeeping. Such an environment
requires not only adequate measures to guard against
higher risk in planning and budgeting, but also
improved engagement, communication and cooperation
among the Secretariat, the troop-contributing countries
and the Security Council.

Indeed, the NAM. troop-contributing countries
provide more than 80 per cent of United Nations
peacekeeping personnel, which entitles them to be
fully involved in the planning process in all aspects
and stages of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
More frequent and substantive interaction among the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the troop-
contributing countries continues to be key to the full
and effective implementation of the existing
mechanisms set forth in resolution 1353 (2001) and in
the Note of the President of the Security Council dated
14 January 2002 (S/2002/56).

NAM. wishes to underscore in particular that the
experience and expertise of troop-contributing
countries can be drawn upon when the Security
Council implements, extends or adjusts United Nations
peacekeeping mandates. Troop-contributing countries
are best placed to contribute to an objective assessment
of the situation on the ground. In this regard, enhanced
and better interaction between troop-contributing
countries and the Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations could also contribute to a
more inclusive consultation and decision-making
process.

To meet the political, operational and managerial
challenges of peacekeeping operations, NAM. would
like to reiterate that United Nations peacekeeping
operations should, from the outset, be provided with
political support, sufficient human, financial and
logistical resources, and exit strategies. Mandates need
to be achievable and therefore clearly defined. United
Nations peacekeeping operations must be part of a
comprehensive approach that addresses the root causes
of conflict in a coherent, well-planned and
comprehensive manner, with relevant political, social,
economic and developmental instruments at their
disposal. NAM. further stresses that the United Nations
should give special consideration to ways of ensuring
that those efforts can continue without interruption so
as to facilitate a smooth transition to lasting peace,
security and development.

The primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security rests with the United
Nations, and the role played by regional arrangements
should not lead to the fragmentation of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, should be in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter, and
should not in any way substitute for the role to be
played by the United Nations or circumvent the full
application of the guiding principles of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. In this context, the Non-
Aligned Movement wishes to express its support for
continuing efforts to strengthen African peacekeeping
capabilities and to emphasize the importance of the
continued implementation of the Joint Action Plan for
United Nations support to African peacekeeping
capacities in the short, medium and long terms.

NAM. reiterates that peacekeeping operations
should strictly observe the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations as well
as the guiding principles that have come to govern
peacekeeping, namely, the consent of the parties, the
non-use of force except in self-defence, and
impartiality. NAM. believes that the principles that
have guided United Nations peacekeeping operations
over the last five decades remain valid and relevant,
both politically and militarily.

NAM. believes that the United Nations must
better manage its peacekeeping operations, focusing on
key areas such as the planning, deployment, decision-
making and monitoring processes, which will allow
peacekeeping operations to succeed in the complex
environment in which they are being asked to deploy.

Finally and in conclusion, and looking back on 60
year of peacekeeping, NAM. is proud to have been
represented by its members in almost every
peacekeeping operation since 1948. We will remain
engaged in advancing our common objective of
strengthening United Nations peacekeeping operations.

