Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Uruguay's initiative to hold this open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and welcomes Uruguay's Vice-Minister for Foreign
Affair to New York to preside over our meeting. I
wish to thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for
his briefing, and I listened carefully to the statements
by Ms. Beerli, Vice-President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and the representative of
Oxfam.

Protecting civilians in armed conflict, especially
women and children, has become an important part ofthe
mandates of the relevant United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The question of the safety and security of
humanitarian workers has also attracted ever-greater
attention on the part of the international community.
China supports the international community in its
efforts to take practical and effective measures to
promote the effective protection of civilians in armed
conflict. In that connection, I wish to emphasize the
following four points.

First, all parties to an armed conflict should
fulfil their responsibility to protect civilians. National
Governments bear the primary responsibility for
protecting innocent civilians from the harm caused by
conflicts and wars. Conflicting parties should exactly
follow international law and international humanitarian
law, as well as the relevant Security Council resolutions,
and commit themselves to protecting civilians. As
for violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law committed during armed conflicts,
the countries concerned should investigate and punish
such acts pursuant to those laws.

Secondly, it is necessary to strengthen conflict-
prevention and resolution, so that civilians will
not suffer from armed conflicts. The international
community should pay great attention to resolving the
root causes that breed conflicts and to easing tensions,
controlling conflicts and lessening contradictions,
realizing socioeconomic development and advancing
inclusive political dialogue and national reconciliation
in order to try to create an environment of peace and
stability. At the core of our collective security system,
the Security Council should strengthen preventive
diplomacy, prevent armed conflicts and curb their
escalation. It should also work energetically to push for
political settlements, so as to minimize the impact of
armed conflicts on civilians.

Thirdly, in protecting civilians, peacekeeping
operations should strictly abide by the mandates
assigned to them by the Council, maintain objectivity
and neutrality and avoid becoming a party to the
conflicts. The implementation by peacekeeping
operations of their mandates to protect civilians
should be aimed at assisting the countries concerned
in strengthening the protection of civilians, and it
cannot replace the national Governments and parties to
conflicts in their efforts to fulfil their responsibilities
and obligations to protect civilians. In formulating
protection-of-civilians mandates, the Council should
take into consideration, in a comprehensive manner, the
situation on the ground and the capacity and conditions
of peacekeeping missions, in order to ensure that the
mandate is clear, realistic and achievable and provides
sufficient and strong guarantees in terms of resources
and equipment.

Fourthly, humanitarian relief operations in armed
conflict should be carried out in an appropriate manner.
All parties to conflict should strictly abide by their
obligation to protect humanitarian workers and avoid
attacking them or other acts that might harm them. In
carrying out humanitarian relief operations in armed
conflict, the United Nations and other international
agencies should follow the Charter of the United
Nations and the guiding principles on humanitarian
relief operations, fully respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the countries concerned and
work to enhance communication with the countries
concerned and engage in dialogue and consultation
with them on humanitarian access. All parties to armed
conflict must ensure the timely access to assistance for
affected civilians.

