The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Argentina.

At the outset, I would like to thank the members
of the Council who positively responded to my
delegation's proposal to hold a debate on the important
issue of small arms. Secondly, on behalf of my country,
I would like to express my gratitude to the Government
of Peru for the presence of Minister Oscar Maurtua.

I should also like to say that Argentina endorses
and associates itself with the intervention to be made
by the Ambassador of Guyana on behalf of the Rio
Group. I would also like to thank Ms. Hannelore
Hoppe for her extensive presentation of the Secretary-
General's report. The report highlights in detail the
progress made and the tasks ahead.

On many occasions, we have heard in this forum
how, in many places throughout the world where it is
very difficult to find a meal or a comfortable bed, it is
easy to find a weapon, a machine gun or a grenade. We
know that armed conflicts may originate in many
causes, but if they are to take place, they require one
indispensable element: access to significant amounts of
small arms and light weapons.
The international community has seen how the
phenomenon of war has become a way of life for
combatants. It does not matter whether they are on the
side of the insurgents or of any particular Government.
Wars of that kind do not recognize a real ideological
context. Worse yet is the fact that, for many people,
especially teenagers, joining militias is the only
profitable employment available.

That terrible situation, which affects us all, was
graphically described to us by the representatives of
non-governmental organizations who participated last
Thursday in the first Arria formula meeting on this
issue, organized by Ambassador De Rivero of Peru. We
thank him and his mission.

The Programme of Action adopted in 2001 reified
the political will of the international community to
address the issue, while laying the foundations to
address the humanitarian and economic dimensions of
the problem caused by small arms and light weapons.

At the same time, Member States agreed to
cooperate with the United Nations system effectively
to implement arms embargoes adopted by the Security
Council under Chapter VII of the Charter and urged the
Council to consider in each case the possibility of
including in the mandates and budgets of peacekeeping
operations, when appropriate, provisions regarding the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants.

Today, almost seven years since the Security
Council first addressed the issue of small arms and in
View of the forthcoming first review conference of the
Programme of Action, we remain convinced that both
the Security Council and the General Assembly should
study ways to improve their interaction on issues
linked to small arms in order to promote and elaborate
long-term strategies in the framework of preventing
armed conflicts and peacebuilding, as well as to
identify the links between the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons, the exploitation of natural and other
resources, and armed conflict.

In its presidential statements, the Council has
recognized that the accumulation and uncontrolled
spread of small arms and light weapons compromise its
effectiveness in discharging its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
It would therefore seem evident to us - and, it would
seem, to many members of the Security Council that
have spoken here - that the time has come for the

Council to send a strong political message by adopting
a resolution calling for the resolute and timely
implementation of arms embargoes.

We trust that, when such a decision is adopted,
we will speak as one, since the strict observance of
embargoes undoubtedly contributes to combating and
eradicating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, which is nothing but a criminal activity.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

As a measure to optimize the use of our time in
order to allow as many delegations as possible to take
the floor, I will not individually invite speakers to take
seats at the table or to resume their seats at the side of
the Council Chamber. When a speaker takes the floor,
the conference officer will seat the next speaker on the
list at the table. I thank speakers for their
understanding and cooperation.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Austria.

