President Fischer: Today, the Security Council
pronounces its commitment to a world without nuclear

weapons. For more than half a century, this goal has
been pursued by concerned citizens and political
leaders around the world. The international community
has undertaken efforts to contain the threat, but many
have adjusted to it, almost accepting the nuclear
shadow as part of life. But any such complacency is
ill-founded; we have arrived at a fork in the road. We
can maintain our course and hope that nothing
happens, or we can seek real change. Future historians
will assess whether today is a turning point. That will
not depend on words spoken but on the deeds that
follow.

In May 2010 the international community will
convene in New York at the Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT). There we will have to agree
on measures that enable progress towards a nuclear-
weapon-free world. For Austria, the following points
are particularly paramount.

First, the prospect of a world without nuclear
weapons must become a goal shared by all States.
Austria supports the idea of a nuclear weapons
convention equipped with a sophisticated verification
mechanism. In the meantime, the NPT remains the core
of the global nuclear disarmament and non-
proliferation regime. But to fulfil its functions
effectively it must be strengthened, it must be
institutionalized, and it must become universal.

Secondly, the nuclear weapon States must reduce
their arsenals. As you, Mr. President, noted in Prague,
"Words must mean something." The words enshrined
in article VI of the NPT must be taken seriously. There
have been positive developments, yes; but nuclear
weapon States must do more.

Thirdly, we must devise a process for entry into
force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty.
Austria and Costa Rica, as Co-Chairs of the Article
XIV Conference, worked hard over the past two years
to promote entry into force. That will be possible,
however, only with the political commitment of the
States that still need to ratify the Treaty.
Fourthly, we must enable the Conference on
Disarmament, in Geneva, to negotiate the fissile
material cut-off treaty. As current President of the
Conference, Austria will make every effort to promote
this goal. But to achieve progress, the support of all the
members is necessary.

Fifthly, our capabilities to prevent nuclear
materials from proliferating to States and to non-State
actors must improve. Security Council resolution 1540
(2004) needs better implementation. Austria welcomes
its comprehensive review next week. Most importantly,
we must enhance the monitoring and verification
capabilities of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) and ensure strict export control for sensitive
materials and technologies. In view of the presence of
Director General ElBaradei here today, I wish to thank
him warmly and very outspokenly for his excellent
work as head of the Agency over the last 12 years in
Vienna.

Sixthly, finally we must strengthen trust and
confidence. Nuclear-weapon-free zones contribute
significantly to sustainable stability. Regions like the
Middle East would benefit from such a regime.
Ensuring that arms control mechanisms operate in a
fair and transparent manner is crucial. Austria's
proposal to multilateralize the nuclear fuel cycle under
the control of the IAEA could help to avoid a crisis of
trust, such as those with regard to the Iranian and
North Korean nuclear programmes.

For clarification, I would like to underline that
paragraph 11 of the resolution just adopted refers to
those countries that have decided to use nuclear energy
for peaceful energy reasons, but this is not the case in
Austria.

Austria is very satisfied that this resolution is a
strong text, a positive contribution to the ongoing
disarmament process. But resolutions are not enough.
Every State must accept responsibility and active
participation. I promise that Austria's support will be
there. The Council can also count on the European
Union, with its well-known position on these issues
and its deep commitment to strengthening the
multilateral system. And we can rely on civil society,
which throughout the years has remained the motor
behind disarmament efforts.

Today we have identified our goals for the future.
We now need the energy, the commitment and the
persistence to move forward. The support by heads of
State and Government at this table today makes me
confident that all together we can reach our goals.

