Mr. Cunningham (United States): I would like to
welcome you, Foreign Minister Passy, to the Security
Council and to express our appreciation to you for
chairing this meeting. I also want to thank Mr. Annabi
for his briefing.

I wish to address briefly the three main categories
of issues that Mr. Annabi raised, because they are all-
important at this stage of developments in Kosovo.

The first is the question of the rule of law. We
have long called for and supported the efforts of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) to strengthen the rule of law. We
believe that that is a fundamental project that needs to
be realized. We believe that UNMIK handled the recent
arrests and prosecutions fairly, without prejudice to any
group, and we strongly expect all leaders in Kosovo
and the region to cooperate in efforts to prosecute
serious crime. We regretted Prime Minister Rexhepi's
initial statements criticizing UNMIK in speaking of
political prisoners, but we welcome his call to end
protests and his expressed commitment to work with
UNMIK. I note there was considerable support from
many of Kosovo's political leaders and intellectuals in
support of the arrests. Some called for Kosovo's
leaders to act responsibly through the provisional
institutions of self-government, and not through mobs
in the street. We were encouraged by these statements,
which reflect a commitment to the benchmark process
launched by Special Representative Steiner, which we
strongly support. As for Mr. Ivanovic, we trust that he
will be apprehended in the near future.

With regard to political process and elections, in
our View much more needs to be done to deepen
Kosovo's provisional institutions of self-government.
For example, we would like to see the Assembly meet
on a set schedule and forego the temptation to react on
an ad hoc basis to the latest headlines. We are pleased
that preparations for elections seem to be on track and
that there are positive signs that support continues to
grow in Kosovo for a democratic Government that
represents all communities. We are pleased that 72
parties and other political entities, including more than
30 representing Serb and minority communities, have
already registered for the Kosovo municipal elections
in October.

Regarding refugees, we are also encouraged by
continued progress on the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons. Providing real
opportunities for returns, together with sustainable
solutions for these vulnerable populations, is a
necessary component of long-term stability.
Unfortunately, we are all aware that this will take some
time. We are concerned about calls for unorganized
mass returns that would be irresponsible and
destabilizing. This is not the way to promote multi-
ethnic democracy in Kosovo, and I agree completely
with Mr. Annabi that this would be counterproductive
and harmful to the return process. We need careful
preparation and sustainable returns in order to create
the kind of stability that I am sure we all want to see.

In sum, we believe that the focus in the months
ahead should be on making progress on the
benchmarks, continuing the important work that has
been done on returns and supporting participation by
all groups in Kosovo's municipal elections in October.

