Mrs. Nguyen Phuong Nga (Viet Nam): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
successful chairmanship of the Security Council this
month and thank you for convening this timely session
on United Nations peacekeeping operations and their
potential contribution to sustaining peace. Our thanks
go also to the Deputy Secretary-General, the Senior
Adviser at the International Peace Institute and the
Chair of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review
of the Peacebuilding Architecture for their informative
briefings on this important topic.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
deliveredby the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Peace and security are the prerequisites for
sustainable development and vice-versa. We are now
implementing the two important United Nations agendas
for sustaining peace and sustainable development.
It is our common understanding that peacekeeping
operations need to be reformed so as to adapt to the new,
changing and complex security challenges and to better
realize our goal of a world of sustainable peace - a
much needed factor for socioeconomic development.

First and foremost, we should increase the
effectiveness and efficiency of peacekeeping missions.
It is necessary to clearly define the mandates of each
mission according to the unique context in each country
and the adequacy of our resources. Viet Nam commends
recent reviews on peace operations, especially the
greater focus on preventive diplomacy and mediation.

Interconnection and coherence between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding are crucial. Peacekeeping must be
accompanied by the promotion of economic recovery,
reintegration and capacity-building in order to address
the root causes of conflicts, rebuild the social fabric
and cohesion, and ensure a smooth transition to lasting
peace and security. We therefore call for enhanced
coordination between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission in the development of long-
term policies for sustaining peace.

Likewise, we believe in the need for more
inclusive consultations between the Security Council,
the Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing
countries in areas such as policy formulation and
decision-making on the mission mandates. Importantly,
every effort by peacekeeping missions to assist national
Governments in sustaining peace must be made with
the consent of the parties involved. We also underline
the importance of cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, given their significant
stakes and practical experience on the ground.

While the multidimensional and integrated aspects
of peacekeeping operations should be emphasized
in prospective reform measures, any peacekeeping
operation must be carried out in accordance with
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
respecting the basic principles of political impartiality,
non-intervention in the internal affairs of sovereign
States, the consent ofthe parties and the non-use offorce
except in self-defence and in defence of the mandate. At
the same time, safety and security, as well as the conduct
and discipline of United Nations personnel, must be
better ensured and promoted through comprehensive
policies and commitments, predeployment training and
the development of new cost-effective technologies.

In recent years, Viet Nam has joined hands with
the international community and has proactively
participated in United Nations peacekeeping operations
in South Sudan and the Central African Republic.
We commit to contributing more liaison officers and
to preparing for the future deployment of a level-2
hospital to the United Nations Mission in South Sudan,
in line with United Nations standards and requirements.
We look forward to the continued assistance and
cooperation of the Secretariat and Member States in
those endeavours.

