Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Thank you, Sir, for having convened this
meeting. We would like to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We would also like to congratulate the
representative of Chile on the way in which he
conducted the presidency last month.

My delegation welcomes the work of the Security
Council mission to Central Africa, in which we
participated. The mission's report was clear proof of
the importance of such Security Council missions.
These missions truly play an important role,
particularly when they are followed by real efforts to
implement their recommendations.

We welcome the implementation of many of the
recommendations of the mission that visited Central
Africa from 7 to 16 June 2003, in particular those
related to the establishment, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, of transitional institutions in a
number of crucial and sensitive areas. We welcome the
appointment of members of the transitional
Government representing the eight components and
entities of the inter-Congolese dialogue. We also
welcome the adoption by the Council of Ministers of a
set of important policy goals, in particular the
formation of a national army and a national police
force. The Council of Ministers also adopted a series of
draft decrees on reorganizing the Government and the
various ministries.

The Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General have made commendable efforts, in particular
in rehabilitating the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in reforming the security sector. While we
congratulate them on their efforts, we would like to
recall that the road ahead is long, particularly when it
comes to reforming the security sector and extending
the authority of the Government throughout the
country. There must be an end to impunity; here, of
course, the rule of law needs to be strengthened. To
achieve this, the transitional Government must play its
role, particularly in strengthening the rule of law and
creating institutions and entities that can reinforce that
principle.

We all know that the regional dimension of
conflicts in Africa is of crucial importance. Meetings in
which heads of State of the region participated have
made it possible to ease tensions in the region and
strengthen understanding among neighbouring
countries. We believe that such efforts should be
continued in order to strengthen good-neighbourliness
and to implement such agreements as the declaration
signed by heads of State or Government in New York.

My delegation believes that special attention
should be paid to disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and resettlement or repatriation (DDRRR)
programmes in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo,
since these will have an important impact on peace in
the region. That country should also make every effort
to put an end to the illegal exploitation of its natural
resources.

It is important that the work of the African
Mission in Burundi (AMIB), in which South Africa and
other countries participate, be completed. We agree
with the Secretary-General that AMIB faces difficulties
that possibly could jeopardize its significant
contribution to the peace process. We also support the
Secretary-General's appeal to the donor community to
generously provide funds to the mission.

The Government of Burundi has taken some
positive steps to carry out the DDR programme. United
Nations agencies in Bujumbura have also supported the
efforts of the African Mission in Burundi and of the
transitional Government. Top priority should be given
to disarming child soldiers. During the Council
mission's visit to Bujumbura, President Ndayizeye said
that his country sorely needed financial support to
cover all areas. Funds promised by donors at the
conferences in Paris and Geneva must be disbursed in
order to tackle the priority matter of establishing
programmes and projects to restore peace in Burundi.
We also support the appeal of the Secretary-General to
bring about reconciliation between the transitional
Government of Burundi and the Conseil national pour
la defense de la democratie-Forces nationales pour la
defense de la democratie.

My delegation believes that the international
conference on the Great Lakes region will be a unique,
historic opportunity that will make it possible to bring
about peace and end the conflict in the region and to
achieve the subregion's integration. We believe that the
efforts of Mr. Ibrahima Fall in this connection deserve
all support and appreciation. At the end of his report,
the Secretary-General made a number of observations
that the Security Council and the relevant parties
should take into consideration.

