Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Mr. Michel Kafando, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Burundi; Ambassador
Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations; and Ambassador
Jiirg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings.

At present, calm and stability are prevailing in
Burundi overall. The Burundian Government has
been actively implementing the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement, moving the political
process forward and promoting reconciliation among
the country's political groups. It has drawn up a road
map in preparation for the general elections in 2020
and established the National Independent Electoral
Commission. China welcomes the fact that Burundi
refugees have also begun returning home. We
congratulate Burundi on its election to the African
Union Peace and Security Council.

Burundi is an important country of the Great Lakes
region of Africa. The aforementioned developments
fully attest to the assured ability and commitment ofthe
Government and the people of Burundi to resolve the
country's internal political issues and maintain national
peace and stability on their own. The international
community should fully acknowledge the efforts of the
Burundian Government to maintain peace and stability
in the country. In that context, China would like to
underscore the following two points.

First, we should respect Burundi's sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity and
genuinely support the Burundian Government's
prerogative to take charge of managing the country's
domestic affairs. The international community should
take a comprehensive, impartial and objective view
of the current situation in Burundi and contribute
constructively to the long-term stability and
development of the country and of the region at large.
China welcomes the efforts of regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union and the East
African Community, to mediate in the political process
in Burundi. We hope that those regional organizations
will continue to strengthen engagement and consultation
with the Burundian Government and provide assistance
to the Government, as needed.

China notes that the Burundian Government has
time and again stated that the situation in Burundi is
not a threat to regional peace and security and that
the issue should not remain on the Council's agenda.
The Security Council should heed the sentiments
voiced by the representatives of Burundi and make
the necessary adjustments promptly in the light of
the latest developments, with a view to sending a
positive message.
Secondly, we should continue to increase
humanitarian assistance and economic support for
Burundi. China notes that, in recent years, Burundian
refugees abroad have begun returning to the country
in large numbers. The number of returnees may
peak in 2019. We hope the international community
will provide the necessary and timely assistance
to help the Burundian Government accommodate
returning refugees.

Development is a guarantee of peace. We hope the
international community and international partners can
meet their commitments in a timely manner and, in line
with development plans of the Burundian Government,
focus on supporting agriculture, infrastructure,
education, environmental protection and so on. We
call on the international organizations and institutions
concerned to resume economic cooperation with and
development assistance to Burundi as soon as possible.
China commends and supports the continued efforts
of the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission and
the United Nations country team to promote Burundi's
reconstruction and socioeconomic development.

As a long-standing supporter of Burundi's peace
process, China stands ready to continue playing a
constructive role in helping Burundi to achieve peace,
stability and sustainable development.

