Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate the delegation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina on having assumed the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. As this is the first
time I have addressed the Council since the new year, I
would also like to congratulate the new non-permanent
members of the Security Council, namely, Colombia,
Germany, India, Portugal and South Africa, and wish
them great success.

The question of Palestine is undoubtedly the
greatest problem facing humankind since the Second
World War. The occupation of Palestine, in terms of
both its root causes and its consequences, is the
greatest and most painful tragedy that has afflicted
humankind in modern history.

More than six decades of massacre, home
demolitions, food and medicine embargos, abduction
and imprisonment; the threatening of its neighbours in
various ways, including with nuclear weapons; the
waging of numerous wars against Palestine and
Lebanon; the assassination of people, political and
religious figures and elites; overt and covert
interference in the political, economic and cultural
affairs of other States; violations of international law
and international humanitarian law and all-out
violations of human rights, including the killing of
children and women - all of this should be reason
enough for the international community to take
decisive measures to stop these brutalities and grant the
people of Palestine the legitimate rights of which they
have been deprived for decades.

Despite strong international condemnation, illegal
settlements are expanding much faster than ever and an
ever greater number of Palestinian homes, including
historical sites, are being demolished. The orchestrated
construction work is undoubtedly intended to alter the
demographic composition and character of the
Palestinian territories, particularly in Jerusalem and
surrounding areas. It is exactly for this purpose that the
Israeli regime has expedited its construction work and
is preparing itself for yet another major settlement
expansion in occupied East Jerusalem. According to
this newly revealed plan, some 1,400 homes will be
added to the Gilo settlement near the West Bank town
of Bethlehem. This would be the occupying regime's
largest known settlement expansion since the plan to
add 1,600 homes unveiled last March.

It is very urgent that the international community
take this issue more seriously than ever. We therefore
welcome the initiative of the League of Arab States,
supported by the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of Islamic Conference, in preparing a
draft resolution on the necessity to cease all settlement
activities by the Zionist regime. Regarding this draft,
we would like to state that we wholeheartedly support
the spirit within which it has been presented, aiming at
securing the rights of the Palestinian people and
preventing the aggression and brutality of the
occupying force against the people of Palestine,
particularly at this crucial moment.

Of course, the support of the Islamic Republic of
Iran for the draft resolution is without prejudice to its
principled position of not recognizing, implicitly or
explicitly, the legitimacy of the Israeli regime. Our
position is clear: while the Islamic Republic of Iran
stands together with all other nations and States that
support the people of Palestine and calls on all others
to support a final solution to end this great historic
tragedy, it believes that the only solution for Palestine
is the holding of a general referendum with the
participation of all Palestinians regardless of religion
or where they live in order to determine the system of
Government they wish to have.

Today we need to act collectively to demonstrate
our unqualified support to the cause of the Palestinians,
and to rally to the aid of those who have been deprived
of their rights.

Allow me to take this opportunity to say a few
words on developments in Lebanon and the issue of the
indictment by the so-called Special International
Tribunal on the assassination of the former Lebanese
premier, the late Rafiq Hariri. We believe that using
political pressure to issue a totally politically motivated
verdict in the name of justice not only discredits the
international judicial system, but would also create an
unhealthy situation with ramifications for peace and
stability in the region. We strongly believe that we
should let regional initiatives, along with internal
political mechanisms in Lebanon, seek and attain a
solution to this issue, without the intervention of any
other major Powers.

