Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing
today. We congratulate Chad, Chile, Jordan, Lithuania
and Nigeria for assuming membership of the Security
Counci. We especially thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Jordan, His Excellency Mr. Nasser Judeh, for
presiding over the morning portion of today's meeting.
I am especially pleased to see Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid
Al-Hussein preside over the Council this month.

This year is an important oner for locking in a two-
State solution. Last week, on 16 January, the United
Nations formally launched the International Year of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People, expressing the
hope that in coming months Palestine, Israel and the
international community will intensify their efforts
to find a lasting peace. The resumption of the peace
process in August 2013 was a true blessing, but talks
for the past six months have lingered on without
producing any results. Let me add that even a halting

process of engagement between the two sides is better
than complete breakdown and estrangement.
We all hope that this year will be a year of decisions
and an enduring political solution that will lead to an
independent, viable and contiguous State of Palestine,
based on pre-1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as
its capital, living side by side with Israel, and both sides
recognizing each other's legitimate rights. I would
hasten to add that vacating occupied Lebanese lands
and the Syrian Golan is equally essential.

However, talks should not drag on forever; they
must produce results. Decades have already been lost,
and that has kept the region in a maelstrom of conflict.

To achieve results, both sides will have to move
with courage and avoid steps that scuttle the talks. Four
steps by the Israeli Government can stem the downslide
on the ground. First, it must stop the settler attacks.
Secondly, it must halt illegal settlement activity.
Thirdly, it must repeal the law passed late last year that
effectively annexes approximately 29 per cent of the
occupied West Bank. Fourthly, it must ease the blockade
of Gaza and end demolitions and displacement there
and in the West Bank.

We welcome the release of Palestinian prisoners,
which is an important confidence-building measure.
However, prisoner releases should not be linked to the
announcement of massive settlement construction and
create a false quid pro quo.

We endorse the call of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights to all the parties in Syria to allow
free passage to the humanitarian convoys to Yermuk
carrying foodstuffs and bringing medical assistance
to the besieged Palestinian refugees. At the twentieth
session of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation's
Al-Quds Committee, held in Marrakech last week,
Pakistan once again expressed its consistent and
unflinching support for the Palestinian cause and the
full realization of the Palestinian people's right to self-
determination. Mr. Sartaj Aziz, Pakistan's adviser to
the Prime Minister on national security and foreign
affairs, during his call on President Mahmoud Abbas,
offered assistance to Palestine for capacity-building
programmes and education and training in the fields of
medicine, engineering and diplomacy.

This is an important week for Syria. The planned
talks in Montreux come after a long and vexing
waiting period. This moment is precious; it must not
be squandered. The destiny of the people of Syria
and peace and stability in that country will be in the
hands of the Syrian interlocutors from Government
and opposition. It is high time for the Syrian nNation
to turn a new leaf. The latest diplomatic problems
arising on the question of participation at Montreux
should be resolved urgently so that the entire process
is not imperilled or derailed. We should harness all the
ingenuity at our disposal to salvage the talks.

The brutal Syrian conflict, which has left more
than 100,000 dead and some 9 million in need of
humanitarian assistance, has made one point abundantly
clear - there is no military solution. The struggle to
get an upper hand in the battlefield kills Syrians. It does
not bring peace. It is also clear that no political solution
is possible without the mutual consent of all sides. We
urge all participants at the Conference in Montreux to
commit to engagement and dialogue until they produce
a blueprint for peace and transition.

We pay tribute to Secretary-General Ban Ki-
Moon, Joint Special Representative Lakhdar Brahimi,
the United States, the Russian Federation and regional
Powers for investing their political capital in the Geneva
process. We support the call of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights for the immediate
cessation of mass executions and killings by some
armed groups committed in violation of international
law.

Finally, we call on all sides in Syria to cease, or at
least pause, all military operations for the duration of
the Montreux talks.

