Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank President
Ouattara for travelling to be with the Security
Council today.

I would join other speakers in expressing
my personal condolences as well as those of my
Government and ofthe Queen on the death of President
George H.W. Bush, whom I had the honour to meet a
number of times. He was indeed a great statesman.
As the President and Mr. Faki Mahamat did, it is also
worth noting once more the passing earlier this year of
Kofi Annan, another great statesman who worked very
closely with President Bush. Both of them had at the
heart of what they were trying to achieve everything
that this debate is about today. I therefore thank the
Cote d'Ivoire delegation for putting it on our agenda.
I thank the other Ministers for coming to join us at the
Security Council.

I think that it is very good that we have been able
to have the benefit of C6te d'Ivoire's own experience.
Too seldom in the Security Council do we hear of its
successes. We wish the Government of Cote d'lvoire
well in everything it has achieved, and long make it
continue. We salute all the reforms that Cote d'lvoire
has brought in.

Another piece of good news that the Council was
able to participate in recently concerned the lifting of
sanctions on Eritrea. This kind of success in Africa is
very much welcome.

A number of speakers have drawn attention to
the fact that two-thirds of the armed conflicts that
ended in the early 2000s relapsed within five years. It
is therefore vital that we remain focused, not just on
resolving conflicts, but on sustaining peace in the long
term.

I would like to focus my remarks on three key
lessons today. First, and as other speakers have noted, a
political settlement needs to include the full spectrum
of society, including women, including the Polish focus
on human rights, including what the Dutch Minister
said about women and girls and education. All of this
is vital if peace is to be sustainable. We need to be
bold in this approach. We recognize that it can often
be extremely difficult in the aftermath of a conflict to
be magnanimous and reach out to all sectors of society.
Nevertheless, it is a very critical element. In the British
experience in Northern Ireland, we believe that we
were able to accommodate the interests of diametrically
opposed armed groups in the political process that has
brought two decades of peace.

It is important also that we engage with elites and
that we encourage them to take the lead, rise above
political, ethnic and religious divides, and take tough
choices for the benefit of all of their citizens. It is all
on our minds that the peace talks in Yemen are about to
start. We look to all participants to approach these talks
constructively and in a spirit of compromise.

Secondly, post-conflict power structures and
institutions need to be fully representative and
legitimate. Fair power structures that broaden inclusion,
accountability and transparency over time are more
likely to reinforce a sustainable peace. That said, there
must be a political agreement. We are all aware that in
Iraq, Libya and Afghanistan unresolved power struggles
undermined ambitious State- and institution-building.
Syria becomes even more important in this context. We
will not be able to consider providing reconstruction
assistance absent a political settlement.

It is also worth pointing to the virtues of patience.
The World Bank estimates that making meaningful
improvements to institutions takes a minimum of 10
years. The Peruvian representative spelled out the
vital importance of getting things like infrastructure
right. The conclusion from this idea is that long-
term, predictable and coordinated support from the
international community as a whole is obviously going
to be critical if peace is to last.

Bosnia represents a successful example in that
particular context. The success of its transition to a
peaceful State over 20 years after the Dayton Accords
is noteworthy. This is due in part to the collaboration
and support of the Security Council, the European
Union, NATO and many others, including civil society
and non-governmental organizations. In fact, Paddy
Ashdown, who was the High Representative in Bosnia,
had three particular lessons for managing the end of a
conflict. The first was "Do the rule of law first." His
second rule was "Have a plan and stick to it." And his
third rule was "Be prepared for it to take a long time."
We often approach things in haste, and obviously do
not condone backsliding, but the key is to keep moving
forward with patience.

Thirdly, we need to ensure that basic needs are
provided in the short term, and support economic
development in the long term. The provision of basic
needs is vital to the alleviation of immediate post-
conflict humanitarian needs, but also to ensure
political processes have the capacity to develop and
thrive. Development itself needs to be inclusive and
create widespread benefits to ensure groups are not
inadvertently left behind.

The International Labour Organization's Decent
Work Agenda and its Programme on Jobs for Peace
and Resilience rightly emphasize the importance
of employment-centred recovery and accessible
opportunities for society to grow and for cohesion.
That all helps to reinforce the Sustainable Development
Goals. If we want to ensure that the 2 billion people,
who live in countries affected by conflict are not
trapped in a cycle of violence, then we must address
instability head-on. It was very good to learn of the
African Union's Agenda 2063, which will clearly have
a key role to play in that regard.

It is impossible to touch on all the ramifications
of this important subject, but I thank you again,
Mr. President, for sharing Cote d'lvoire's experience
with the Council and for starting a very thorough
discussion of the issue.

