Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I would like to join other
colleagues in thanking President Pocar and President
Byron, as well as Prosecutor Del Ponte and Prosecutor
Jallow, for their presentations to the Council. Italy
commends the tremendous progress, as President Pocar
has called it - or, as Prosecutor Del Ponte has referred
to them - the impressive achievements made recently
in pursuit of the completion strategy through various
modifications to the rules of procedure and evidence
and the strong commitment of the judges, prosecutors
and staff of both Tribunals.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank
President Mose for his leadership of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) over the past
four years. I also wish to thank Prosecutor Del Ponte
for her passionate commitment, determination and
consistency in her prosecutorial activities during her
long tenure at the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and in her previous
work at the ICTR. In addition, I wish to extend my
congratulations to President Byron on his election.

Italy is pleased that respect for human rights,
with particular emphasis on fair trials and due process,
is at the core of the concerns of both Tribunals in
completing their work, as respect for human rights and
the rule of law is crucial to the work of international
tribunals established to hold accountable those
responsible for the worst international crimes.

The valuable contributions of both Tribunals to
the codification and progressive development of
international humanitarian law is beyond any doubt. As
regards the ICTY, that contribution was recently
confirmed by the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations, namely, the International Court of Justice
(ICJ). In its judgement last February in the case on the
application of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and Herzegovina vs. Serbia and Montenegro) the ICJ made
several references to the ICTY's decisions and based
some of its conclusions on the judicial activities of the
Tribunal. Furthermore, it is well known that the
Tribunals' case law served as a basis for the drafting of
key provisions of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court.

The recent apprehension by the Bosnian
authorities of one of the most prominent fugitives -
General Tolimir - and the arrest yesterday in
Montenegro of Vlastimir Djordjevic, illustrate that the
international community is fully engaged in the capture
of those allegedly responsible for international crimes
in the former Yugoslavia. We hope that similar actions
will lead to the apprehension of other major
fugitives - especially Ratko Mladic, Radovan
Karadzic and, as regards the ICTR, Mr. Kabuga. We
should not forget that respect for the victims and their
loved ones implies that the perpetrators of the gravest
international crimes must not go unpunished.

As to the future endeavours of the ad hoc
Tribunals in their completion strategies, Italy believes
that the crucial issues should be to finalize the
numerous cases the Tribunals are dealing with and to
conduct trials against fugitives once they are
apprehended. In that regard, I wish to commend the
ICTY and the ICTR - and especially their Presidents,
Judge Pocar and Judge Byron - for their reports, in
which a precise timeframe for the remaining judicial
activities was given for the first time. Their
assessments show once again how determined the
ICTY and the ICTR and their Presidents are to fulfil
the completion strategies.

Other aspects of the strategies that we wish to
underline here are the ongoing referrals of intermediate
and lower-ranking cases to competent national
jurisdictions by the Tribunals, provided that the
national jurisdictions fulfil the human rights
requirements referred to in resolution 1534 (2004); the
reshaping of judicial activities, which will focus on
appeals and on the possible revision of judgements;
and the expansion, if possible, of the Tribunals'
outreach and capacity-building activities, which have
proved to have an enormous impact on the civilian
population.

Finally, we would like to recall that the Tribunals'
legacy is under serious consideration within the
Council. Many delicate issues, both judicial and
administrative in character, are at stake. We are
confident that important decisions will be made to
reaffirm the purpose for which the Tribunals were
established, namely, the punishment of those
responsible for the most horrific international crimes in
the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda. International
criminal justice in those areas, as in the rest of the
world, does not expire in 2010. I would like to join
other colleagues who have spoken before me in
emphasizing the absolute need to consider a
transitional mechanism that goes beyond 2010.

