Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): Let me also begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting to consider a serious development
that comes to all of us as a shock.

We all saw the pain-ridden face of that small
child lying at his father's side as the last breath of life
slipped out of him. This was only one glimpse of the
fate that is suffered by thousands of children in
different parts of the world that are under foreign
occupation or in conflict situations. This tragedy is a
grim reminder that a part of humanity dies each time an
innocent life is snuffed out by violence.

The Security Council meets today in the wake of
the tragic events in Palestine, resulting in the deaths of
scores of innocent civilians, including children, and
injuries to many others. With these events, the hope
that peace was finally taking root in the Middle East
has fast evaporated.

We share the international outrage and concern at
the high-handedness of the Israeli forces' actions
against defenceless Palestinian civilians in the very
vicinity of Al-Haram Al-Sharif, the third most holy
place of Islam. The immediate reason is the misplaced
determination of certain elements in Israel to
undermine the Middle East peace process. The Security
Council must send an unequivocal message that such
provocative actions and the bloodshed of innocent
Palestinians are unacceptable to the international
community.

The excessive force used by the Israeli security
forces is simply unjustifiable. Grave breaches of the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949 have
been committed. The first article of that Convention
emphasizes that

"The High Contracting Parties undertake to
respect and to ensure respect for the present
Convention in all circumstances."

Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) continue to provide a viable and just framework
for a comprehensive peace in the Middle East. The
status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, Holy Jerusalem, remains
central to any comprehensive settlement of the Arab-
Israeli conflict. No lasting peace in the region will be
possible without the realization of the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people. These include their right to
establish their independent State with Holy Jerusalem
as its capital and the exercise of their full sovereignty
over Al-Haram Al-Sharif. Pakistan extends its
unequivocal support to the just struggle of the people
of Palestine for their inalienable rights. This has been
our policy in respect of all peoples struggling against
foreign occupation and repression.

The peace process had recently been making
steady, if agonizingly slow, progress due to realistic
approaches of the leaders of the two sides. It has now
been dealt a severe blow and has been pushed to the
verge of collapse. Continuation of the violence
threatens to wreck the peace process. Immediate steps
are therefore needed to prevent any further
deterioration of the situation. The peace process must
be urgently put back on track on the basis of
agreements reached and full compliance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions. At stake are the
authority and credibility of the United Nations.

Prompt action is therefore required by the
international community, in particular the Security
Council, to put an end to the present round of violence
against the Palestinians, secure Israel's compliance
with United Nations resolutions, ensure the safety and
sanctity of Al-Quds Al-Sharif and facilitate the
realization of the national rights of the Palestinian
people. The prospects for peace in that region, and
indeed the future prosperity of the Middle East, now
rest with this body.

