Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me too join others in
thanking the briefers: Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui and my brotherly
colleague Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We welcome the 1533 Committee Chair's visit
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in May. We
were a part of the visit, and we fully endorse the report
of the Chair.

I have taken note of Ms. Zerrougui's briefing this
morning and would like to take this opportunity to
welcome the appointment of the new Prime Minister,
Mr. Sylvestre Ilunga Ilunkamba. I hope that the
Government will be appointed as soon as possible,
because that is an important factor in paving the way
for a transition and moving forward in developing the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

As of March, the Council has unanimously adopted
resolution 2463 (2019) and resolution 2478 (2019) on
the extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo sanctions, respectively. We
look forward to the independent strategic review of
MONUSCO and urge that such a review be done in
close consultation with related parties, including
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and
police-contributing countries.

The Secretary General's report of 17 July
(S/2019/575) provides food for thought for our discussion
today. To that end, I will try to focus my comments on
the following points.

First, we urge the international community to
provide sustainable humanitarian assistance to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We express our
solidarity with our brothers and sisters who are affected
by Ebola and commend the swift response of the World
Health Organization (WHO) in leading the international
effort through that crisis. In that regard, we welcome the
WHO's recent declaration of an international emergency
and support the work of the newly appointed Emergency
Ebola Response Coordinator, Mr. David Gressly. It is
critical, now more than ever, for the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and WHO to enjoy
the support needed to prevent further outbreaks of
Ebola. We are also concerned after hearing the report
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
the increasing number of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and pressure on humanitarian actors.

Secondly, on the security situation, which is
also related to the issue of IDPs, Indonesia is deeply
concerned by the continued presence of armed groups
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. For
far too long, the country has suffered from recurring
cycles of conflict, persistent violence and the loss
of innocent civilian lives. We are concerned that the
illegal exploitation and trade of natural resources,
which goes beyond the Great Lakes region, remains
one of the funding sources for those armed groups. We
have seen the report of the Group of Experts on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on that matter (see S/2019/469) and will continue to monitor and support
its work. We are also concerned over the increasing
intercommunal violence.

Thirdly, we commend the critical work of
MONUSCO in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including its approach to the protection of civilians
and the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes. We are encouraged to know that former
combatants in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have begun disarming and returning to the community.

On our part, Indonesia is continuing to play its part
in keeping the peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo as one of the largest TCCs to MONUSCO. We
currently have 1,044 personnel, including 28 women
peacekeepers, in the country and we hope to increase the
number of women peacekeepers. Our contribution also
includes an 850-person rapidly deployable battalion,
which was deployed at the end of last year.

The Indonesian contingent, through its close
community engagement, has facilitated since last year
31 weapon handovers, the reunification and certification
of 1,803 former combatants and the mediation of
communal conflicts, which is an important task. To
that point, we favour the continuation of community
engagement in peacekeeping as an important factor,
particularly in addressing the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In closing, we are here to save lives. Peace is a
luxury that the Congolese have desired for far too
long. Let us now work together to support the people
and their new Government to ensure lasting peace
in the country. I would also like to join others in
appealing to the international community to continue
to lend its support for the economic development of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

