Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Madam President, for convening today's
meeting. I should also like to thank Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Hilde Frafjord Johnson, Deputy Executive
Director of UNICEF, Mr. Atul Khare, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Ms. Manju Gurung, a child from Nepal, for their
briefings.

China attaches importance to the issue of children
and armed conflict. We condemn and oppose the
recruitment and use of child soldiers and other
violations of children's rights in armed conflict. We
support the efforts of the United Nations, including the
Security Council, to promote the protection of children
in armed conflict. In that regard, I would like to
emphasize the following points.

First, in order to ensure the protection of children
in armed conflict, it is necessary to begin at the source
and pursue a comprehensive approach. The Security
Council bears the grave responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It
should attach greater importance to the prevention,
suppression and elimination of armed conflicts, so as to
prevent the occurrence of tragedies. The international
community should redouble its efforts to eliminate
poverty, universalize education and promote
sustainable development, so as to create a security and
social environment conducive to the healthy growth of
children. That would be the best way to protect
children.

Secondly, in considering the issue of children and
armed conflict, it is necessary to take into account
local conditions and to proceed accordingly. The nature
of conflict situations varies, as do situations both on
and off the agenda of the Security Council. In that
regard, it is always necessary to attach importance to
the protection of children. However, there should be
differences in the actual approach. It is necessary that
we not disregard existing differences or apply a single
approach to every situation. China is not in favour of
the frequent use or threat of use of sanctions by the
Security Council. It is in particular necessary to use
caution when it comes to the issue of children and
armed conflict.

Thirdly, in addressing the issue of children and
armed conflict, it is necessary to fully utilize the role
of the Governments of the countries concerned. The
relevant resolutions of the Security Council stipulate
that Governments bear the primary responsibility for
the protection of the children of their countries. The
Security Council and its Working Group should have
more communication with the countries concerned and
endorse and support the positive measures adopted,
continually increase mutual trust and avoid politicizing
children's issues. In gathering information and carrying
out field work, it is necessary to cooperate with the
Governments of the countries concerned, so as to
improve efficiency and generate synergies.

The efforts of the Security Council alone are not
enough to truly to change the situation of children and
armed conflict and give them a good future. We
encourage United Nations bodies, regional
organizations, the World Bank, other international
agencies and non-governmental organizations to
strengthen their coordination and cooperation, adopt an
integrated strategy, exploit their own strengths and
work together to help countries in conflict to increase
their capacity to protect children. China will continue
to work together with the rest of the international
community and to make its due contribution to the
protection of children.

