Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
welcome the Foreign Minister since that was not
prohibited in the list of things you said we could talk
about, Mr. President.

With respect to the briefing, I think that it is a
very good thing that we have Ms. Salamanca here
today because it is an important reminder of the role
that women's organizations have played in the peace
process. What we have heard today from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General shows that the
peace accord continues to set a positive example for the
rest of the world. The commitment of the Government
is very welcome, as are the steps taken towards the
reintegration of former fighters and rural development
crop substitution. The Government is clearly trying
very hard to find national consensus on issues that are
deeply polarizing. There are three areas we would like to
highlight, which we believe deserve the Government's
urgent attention.

The first is one is the transitional justice system.
We agree with the Secretary-General that the
discussion surrounding the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace has become more polarized. We hope now that
the Jurisdiction will get legal and political support to
build on the progress it has made. We also hope there
might be a stronger legal footing for it in order to
boost public confidence in the peace process and bring
about the national consensus to which President Duque
Marquez is rightly committed.

Secondly, I would like to echo the concerns about
human rights defenders and social leaders and the
fact that they continue to face killings and threats at
the hands of armed criminal groups competing for
territory. That is something in which the Council has
been interested before. The recent regional sessions
of the National Commission on Security Guarantees
are a positive step forward, but I think we need to see
more concrete actions in order to improve security on
the ground. That might include the views of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General with regard to
stronger State presence in rural areas.

Thirdly, we welcome the initial successes of the
territorially focused development plans and crop-
substitution initiative. But I think that our overall point
is that we would like to see the pace of implementation
of the peace process increase across the country. There
have been some delays, as set out in the Secretary-
General's report ( S/2019/265). I think that everyone is
very well aware that the sustainability of peace depends
on transforming the Colombian countryside and
meeting citizens' needs for viable and legal livelihoods.
But it is also important the international community
support Colombian efforts.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
commend the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General because the areas of progress identified in
the Colombian peace process are a very important
part of how we view these regular meetings. For the
British Government's part, we recognize the progress
the Government has made and are fully committed
to working alongside it as it builds sustainable peace.
We will continue to support it. The Foreign Minister
was here a few weeks ago and we talked about the
recent objections that the President had outlined (see S/PV.8450). I know that there have been developments
on that issue, on which I am sure the Foreign Minister
will update the Council on.

