Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): My delegation would
like to begin by paying a tribute to Ambassador Qin
Huasun of China and his delegation, who steered the
Council so skilfully and smoothly in the presidency during
the month of April. My delegation also takes this
opportunity to assure Ambassador Elaraby of Egypt, whose
eminent leadership and expertise in international affairs are
highly admired, of our readiness fully to cooperate with
him so that the Council can discharge its challenging tasks
in the most efficient manner possible.

Like many other members of the Council, my
delegation has held a deep interest in and concern over the
sanctions on Iraq, especially since they bear serious
humanitarian consequences. For this reason, we welcomed
the recent conclusion of the memorandum of understanding
on the implementation of Security Council resolution 986
(1995). Supporting the view of the Secretary-General in his
introduction to the Blue Book on the Iraq-Kuwait conflict,
we had also hoped that a positive outcome would emanate
from the talks on resolution 986 (1995), thus opening a new
and promising chapter in the relations between the
international community and Iraq.

Given our optimistic expectations, the incidents of 11
and 12 June near Baghdad, which prompted the Council to
act through the draft resolution before us, have been a
source of great disappointment and alarm. It was our strong
hope that the pragmatism and realism that had prevailed
throughout the talks on resolution 986 (1995) would be
reflected in all aspects of Iraq's external relations, including
its interactions with the Special Commission. We are
confident that Iraq's full cooperation with the Special
Commission, in accordance with the relevant resolutions,
including resolutions 687 (1991) and 707 (1991), will point
the relationship between Iraq and the community of nations
in a more desirable and mutually beneficial direction by

 

contributing to the restoration of Iraq's standing as a
responsible member.

In the circumstances, my delegation finds it
necessary to vote in favour of the draft resolution.

Lastly, I would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate our support for the Special Commission and to
commend Ambassador Ekeus for his discretion and
patience, which have been indispensable in carrying out
the mandates entrusted to it by the Council.

