Mr. Wittig (Germany): As the issues on the agenda
ofthe Security Council become increasingly complex, so
do its day-to-day work and decision-making processes.
Other United Nations organs and institutions, regional
organizations and non- governmental organizations -all
of them - make important contributions to the work of
the Council and the fulfilment of its Charter-mandated
role. The media and wider public are also important,

particularly in times of the Internet and Twitter. All of
that should be seen as an opportunity, not as a burden,
to the Council. It requires enhanced transparency and
efficiency of the Council as well as interaction with
the wider United Nations membership and the relevant
stakeholders.

The Council has come a long way, most recently
with the adoption of the presidential note contained in
document S/2013/515. The note contains many useful
aspects, including on the increased use of the Arria
Formula, closer involvement of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the use of wrap-up meetings by the
presidency. We encourage the members of the Council,
especially the permanent members, to ensure that
the commitment made in the note also translates into
action.

Other issues remain to be addressed. As that is
an ongoing process, improvements must be sought
on multiple fronts. In that context, we encourage the
States members of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group to continue their important efforts
in that regard.

We also highly appreciate the proposal made by
French Foreign Minister Fabius to refrain from using the
veto in situations of atrocity crimes. During Germany's
recent Council membership, I witnessed first-hand the
deadlock in the Council caused by three double vetoes
and, more important, the terrible consequences they had
for the Syrian people. The French proposal is therefore
an important initiative of a permanent member of the
Council and should contribute to fostering the overall
discussion of the reform of the Security Council.

As important as the improvement of the Council's
working methods may be, only comprehensive,
structural reform will enable the Council to more
effectively tackle the challenges of today's world. Such
a reform is long overdue. As the United Nations nears
its seventieth session of the General Assembly in 2015,
the time has come for action.

We therefore welcome the initiative taken by the
President of the General Assembly, Ambassador John
Ashe, to task an advisory group with the drafting of
a negotiation text that adequately reflects current
positions on Council reform and provides options on
the way forward. We hope that such a text will finally
enable Member States to engage in real give-and-
take negotiations. Germany stands ready to engage
constructively in those negotiations.
