Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too would
like to begin by extending sympathy on behalf of my
country, France, to Egypt and Sweden, which have both
suffered reprehensible terrorist attacks in recent days,
and reiterate my Government's full support.

I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Honore, for her briefing.

I align myself with the statements that will be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
by the representative of Peru, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.

I would like to address two points in my statement.
First, I should like to express our satisfaction about
the recently concluded election process in Haiti, which
heralds the restoration of constitutional order and
provides new opportunities for meeting the challenges
that the country faces. I would also like to convey our
support for the Secretary-General's recommendations
with regard to the dynamic nature of the United Nations
presence in Haiti, which gives us the opportunity
to evaluate the achievements of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and move
towards the establishment of another peacekeeping
mission that is more lightweight and better suited to the
country's needs.

France welcomes the recent conclusion of the
electoral cycle that began several years ago in Haiti,
and the subsequent restoration of constitutional order
on 7 February. We believe that that was a major
development in the process of stabilizing the country.
Such developments are particularly noteworthy
because the elections took place in a generally peaceful
environment. Their success can be attributed primarily
to the Haitian Government and, in particular, to the
Provisional Electoral Council and the Haitian National
Police, which all played a key role in organizing
the elections and in providing security. We would
like to take the opportunity to welcome the spirit of
accountability demonstrated by former provisional
President Jocelerme Privert, who kept his promise to do
all in his power to conclude the electoral cycle as soon
as possible. Once again, France warmly congratulates
Mr. Jovenel Moise on his election as President of
Haiti, following a transparent, inclusive and credible
election process, as well as on the swift inauguration
by Parliament of Jack Guy Lafontant as Prime Minister.

Haiti has turned over a new leaf following several
months of uncertainty caused by successive election
delays, and once again now has strong institutions that
are fully vested with democratic legitimacy, which can
effectively meet the daily challenges that its people
face. The Haitian population and the international
community have every reason to welcome that outcome.
Haiti and its leaders can count on France's ongoing
support during this new phase, which will allow for
deepening relations and enhanced cooperation between
our countries.

France welcomes the recommendations contained
in the most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/223), which addresses the outcome of the
strategic assessment review conducted in Haiti early
this year. More than 13 years after the establishment
of MINUSTAH, we fully support the idea that it is
now time to evaluate the Mission's achievements in
stabilizing Haiti and move towards developing a new
approach to the United Nations presence in Haiti that
is more suited to the country's needs and conditions
on the ground, which have changed dramatically.
The work of MINUSTAH, which continues to be
supported by the Security Council, as well as by the
troop-contributing countries - whose efforts we
commend here today - has enabled Haiti to emerge
from the emergency situation it faced until recently by
restoring a relatively safe environment, taking part in
the rebuilding efforts after the 2010 earthquake and
providing considerable support to the Haitian National
Police, whose growing authority is an indicator of
stability in Haiti. I would also like to point out that it
is important for the Haitian National Police to remain
a professional, apolitical and independent institution,
as underscored by the Special Representative, and the
backbone of Haiti's security chain.

In spite ofthe gains made, France remains convinced
that the United Nations has not yet completed its work
in Haiti. That is why we support the establishment,
on the day after MINUSTAH'S termination, of a new
peacekeeping operation that is more lightweight and
focused on strengthening Haiti's institutions in a few
key areas, with a mandate and specific exit timeline,
in keeping with the good practices we encourage in
the area of peacekeeping. The new operation will
have to consolidate the progress achieved in the past
few years, particularly by ensuring that the Haitian
National Police can function independently, but also by
working on some major new projects in the area of the
rule of law, such as combating impunity, strengthening
the judiciary's professionalism and independence and
establishing a prison system that is compatible with the
country's needs and respects the rights of prisoners.
The human rights situation, various aspects of which
continue to be a cause for concern, will also have to
be carefully monitored and accompanied by regular
recommendations. We expect to see the Haitian
authorities cooperating fully in that regard, and we are
willing to continue our bilateral dialogue on that subject.

Lastly, the new operation will have to work closely
on the ground with the United Nations country team,
which from now on will be the actor in the forefront in
dealing with the country's other challenges, especially
where the Secretary-General's new approach to
combating cholera is concerned. France is supporting its
first phase in particular, including through a voluntary
contribution of €600,000. We encourage all of Haiti's
partners and friends to translate their words into deeds
and to contribute to that collective effort to benefit the
Haitian people.

For a long time now France has been urging the
Council to shoulder its responsibilities towards Haiti by
taking the decisions needed to ensure that the United
Nations engagement on the ground can continue to be
as appropriate and effective as possible. The Secretary-
General's recommendations for closing MINUSTAH as
soon as possible, and establishing a successor mission
focused on issues related to the police, the rule of law
and human rights, give us the opportunity to do that.
They combine the execution of a responsible transition
designed to maintain the results achieved in the past
few years with a demonstration of the Council's ability
to make sure that the United Nations modalities of
action on the ground continue to evolve and that their
chief goal is finding the best response to the needs
of the populations involved. France fully supports
that approach.

