Mr. Mekel (Israel): Madam President, at the
outset, please allow me to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency for the month of January
and to express our satisfaction with your efforts in
initializing this debate. We would also like to extend
our congratulations to your predecessor and to the
newly elected members of the Council.

In spite of numerous developments, aptly detailed
in the report of the Secretary General (5/2003/1053) on
children and armed conflict, the general situation for
children remains grave and unacceptable. Placing
children on the front lines as active participants in
violence, as aggressors or as victims, has dire short-
term and long-term consequences for children, for the
societies they live in and for the hopes and dreams of a
stable peace.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
contains shocking information about the abuse and
harm to which children continue to be subjected. We
cannot allow ourselves to be desensitized to it.
Unfortunately, many of the gains described in the
report relate to developments on paper rather than in
the field. In this regard, the deployment of child
protection advisers in peacekeeping missions and the
practice of naming parties to armed conflict that are
recruiting or using children, if properly implemented,
seem to us to be of particular importance because of
their potential for bringing about positive change on
the ground.

In word and in deed, Israel has supported
international initiatives aimed at protecting children
from the devastation of armed conflict, including the
landmark Convention on the Rights of the Child and its
protocols, to which we became a signatory two years
ago. Israel's accession to the Convention was followed
by our adoption of "Basic Law: Human Dignity and
Liberty", a law that ensures that the rights of the child
are guaranteed constitutional protection. The adoption
of the Basic Law sparked a flurry of judicial and
legislative activity that broadened the commitment of
Israeli society to the principles of the Convention.

It goes without saying that the formal practice of
forced conscription of children is abhorrent and must
be outlawed. But the participation of children in armed
conflict is not limited to formal military service.
Children have also been recruited for roving militias,
armed gangs and terrorist groups. In our region,
children have been recruited and exploited by terrorist
organizations as human shields, for the placing of
explosives, as gunmen and even as suicide bombers. It
is regrettable that the Secretary-General's report fails
again to make specific mention of this reprehensible
tactic in our region. We regret also that the report does
not address in more direct terms the plight of Israeli
children suffering from a relentless terrorist campaign.

Both Israeli and Palestinian children continue to
be the greatest victims of the terrorism that plagues our
region. Over the last two years, Palestinian children
have been increasingly used as human shields and have
been mobilized for terrorist attacks, while the average
age of suicide bombers has dropped significantly. For
an ever-increasing number of Israeli children as well,
growing up is becoming a painful experience.

Indeed, Israeli children are often the intended and
preferred victims of terrorists. Palestinian terrorist
groups, such as Hamas, Islamic Jihad and the Al-Aqsa
Martyrs Brigade have directed many terrorist attacks
specifically against children, including attacks on
school buses, discotheques, pizza parlours and other
locations where large numbers of children are known to
gather.

In the conflict that plagues our region, as in any
conflict, no one has a monopoly on the status of victim.
The suffering of Israeli and Palestinian children must
be acknowledged. If we deny the suffering and
victimhood of the other side, we undermine the
prospects of mutual understanding and tolerance that
are the foundations of any lasting peace.

Recently in the General Assembly, unfortunately,
there was an attempt to do just that. The General
Assembly adopted for the second year in a row a
resolution pertaining specifically to the situation facing
Palestinian children. While Israel shares this concern
for the plight of Palestinian children, we continue to
believe that the issue of children should not be
politicized and the situation of any group of children
should not be singled out in this way, let alone
distorted. Once this resolution was adopted and in
order to rectify this imbalance, Israel reluctantly
introduced a mirror resolution to draw attention to the
suffering of Israeli children from terrorism.
Unfortunately, a group of delegations, determined not
to acknowledge that Israeli children were also victims
in this conflict, sought to distort this resolution beyond
recognition. As a result, Israel was compelled to
withdraw its text. In doing so, we expressed the hope
that Member States would see this unfortunate incident
as a wakeup call to end the politicization and double
standards in United Nations debates on issues of
universal concern, such as the plight of children. We
continue to hold to that hope today.

In conclusion, Israel welcomes the discussion of
specific issues concerning the protection of children in
armed conflict and the opportunity to express our firm
support for the continuation of the monitoring process
to that effect. We yearn for the day when peace is the
prevailing global condition and there is no longer any
need to deal with the specific impact of armed conflict
on children. But, until that day, the international
community must continue to act with resolve in
extending protection to those who are most vulnerable
and confronting with courage the factors that continue
to feed this ugly phenomenon.

Madam President, in concurrence with your
desire, I have read only a shortened version of our
statement, and a full version is being distributed.
