Mr. Mutaboba (Rwanda): Thank you, Sir, for
giving me the floor. I also take this opportunity to
welcome you to New York and to extend our warm
congratulations to you and your delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of this organ and for
putting this important item on the agenda of the
Council.

The United Nations Charter gives us all sorts of
guidelines in searching for and maintaining peace and
guaranteeing international security the world over.
However, experience shows that the Security Council,
despite its numerous efforts - if efforts have indeed
been collectively made - has for the most part failed
to prevent the armed conflicts that disrupt peace and
security in the world. While it has recorded success -
success that we commend- the number of failures
goes far beyond the number of successful
achievements. This should incite it not to shy away, but
to do more and better.

My delegation believes that such an imbalance of
achievements is due to the conservatism of approaches,
as if the world had not evolved since the creation of
our Organization. People are sometimes scared of
being told the truth and of innovations and therefore
bluntly refuse to recognize their errors and to rectify
their course of action. Much as those who generate
conflicts do so in attempting to cling to power and
vested interests, this organ's membership sometimes
cannot let go of the principle of preserving the status
quo, no matter what the consequences. Resistance to
change is unfortunate and should not be taken lightly if
we genuinely want to change, and for the better, in our
endeavours to prevent armed conflicts.

Under paragraph 1 of Article 1 of the Charter,
also quoted by Secretary-General Kofi Annan this
morning, this Organization has

"to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace,
and for the suppression of acts of aggression or
other breaches of the peace".

Where collective measures have had to be taken to
prevent disasters, divisions have occurred among
members - we are all human - and where measures
have been taken, they have been limited to the mere
adoption of resolutions without action. Where blatant
evidence of threats to peace and security has been
brought to light, action has either not been taken in a
timely manner or has been taken shyly and
indecisively. This is a grim reality. These series of
events have set precedents and we should keep them in
mind as our daily checks and balances, rather than
reacting, and reacting loosely and defensively, when
they are raised and when it is too late. We need to
support each other, but we must first accept such
change under the leadership of the Security Council.

Maintaining peace and security in the world is
nothing but keeping momentum. Billions of bits of
information are generated every day for policymakers
and decision-takers to work with. What counts is not
the volume of information produced, but rather what
you do with the information and how you do it.

The tragedies of Rwanda and Srebrenica could
have been prevented on the basis of the information
available. The situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo today could have been avoided before it
even broke out. Kosovo is another example among
many. Preventive diplomacy has its merits and a lack
of political will, often ascribed to the international
community simply because we do not dare to point a
finger at those responsible, has become, unfortunately,
the excuse of the century. The political will is there,
but it is shaped by the interests of the actors. You
therefore cannot prevent conflicts without addressing
the issue of double standards, because peace and
security are as contagious as conflicts. You harvest
what you have sown.

We prevent on the basis of what we know. The
knowledge we have becomes the source of inspiration
for us to work with and to use imaginatively and from
all angles. Failure to use our imagination and
collectively to take corrective action will hamper the
future prevention of conflicts. I wish to refer to the
example of the reports commissioned by this body: the
Srebrenica report and the Carlsson report. Both clearly
show how the Council could have prevented what
happened. Since the day the Carlsson report was
deposited with the Security Council, no action has been
taken and nothing has been said regarding the
recommendations in the report. There has been total
silence.

Lessons to be learned cannot be conveniently
avoided or further delayed, but should assist in
preventing similar mistakes from happening elsewhere.
But all signs, actions and reactions show that we still
have a long way to go in taking seriously the
preventive measures needed to ensure peace and
security in the world. Self-criticism should be accepted
as a good means of reminding one another that we all
care and that every Member of this Organization
counts. Catering to all and not just to some will lead us
in a more collective way of addressing world issues as
they arise and dealing with them appropriately for the
sake of international peace and security. This should be
a constant and consistent modus operandi for this
Council, for which my delegation wishes to reiterate its
full support.

