Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Wejoin others in expressing
appreciation to the Kuwaiti presidency for organizing
this high-level debate and we are pleased to see you,
Sir, presiding over the meeting. At a time when we
are facing unprecedented challenges and threats to
global peace and security, the need for multilateralism
has never been more indispensable to ensuring a
collective response.

That is why reaffirming the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations is
imperative to preserving the current global order on the
basis of renewed partnership, in the spirit of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. We know from
history that the League of Nations, the predecessor
of the Organization, failed to prevent the outbreak of
the Second World War mainly because its members
remained indifferent to the blatant disregard of the
purposes and principles of international law governing
inter-State relations.

Of course, no one can speak better, more forcefully
and with authority on this issue than the Secretary-
General himself and his predecessor, Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
and we thank both of them for their important remarks.
We are truly pleased to see Mr. Ban Ki-moon here with
us today.

In spite of so many challenges and shortcomings,
the United Nations has been and continues to be an
indispensable Organization. Its Charter principles and
purposes also remain as relevant today as they were
70 years ago in safeguarding international peace and
security, promoting respect for human rights, and
ensuring sustainable development for all. The issue is
how we can apply them in a manner that is consistent
with the realities of our time in order to meet the needs
and aspirations of current and future generations. That
is why we support the reform agenda, in the words of
the Secretary-General,

"to make the United Nations more able to respond
to the needs and aspirations of we, the peoples, that
generated this Organization".

We are indeed living in an increasingly
interconnected and interdependent world, and what
happens in one corner of the world can easily affect us
all, whether it is terrorism, the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, climate change or a health
pandemic. No one can be immune from these problems,
nor can anyone claim to have the panacea to address
them alone. We can do so only if we collectively work
together, in line with the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations.

That requires us to carry out our obligations in
good faith, and there have no doubt been instances of
failure that have tarnished the image and credibility of
the Organization and given enough reason to sceptics
to be critical. But we should also not forget that there
have indeed been instances when the Organization has
proved its mettle and defended its principles with vigour.
Because of that, a country whose territorial integrity
was aggressed 27 years ago, in flagrant violation of
the Charter, not only was able to regain its sovereignty
but can now contribute its part to the promotion and
maintenance of international peace and security.

How symbolic is it, therefore, that today this
country is presiding over the work of the Security
Council, 27 years after its liberation? We wish to take
this opportunity to congratulate the people and the
Government of the State of Kuwait on this important
occasion. It is indeed a historic coincidence that Ethiopia
was a member of the Security Council at the height
of the Gulf War and took a principled position based
on the United Nations Charter to stand in solidarity
with Kuwait, not only to condemn its invasion but
also to fully support all the relevant Security Council
resolutions aimed at restoring its sovereignty. We should
certainly draw lessons from some of the achievements
of the United Nations and also have the courage to
admit shortcomings and make all efforts necessary to
replace them.

The Security Council has a number of tools,
envisaged in the Charter, at its disposal to address the
multifaceted problems that the world is facing. Chapter
VI ofthe Charter is clear on the primacy of the peaceful
settlement of disputes while being strong on the need
to take preventive measures in order to avert conflicts
before they erupt.

Chapter VII provides the parameters for action
with respect to threats to the peace, breaches of the
peace and acts of aggression, while Chapter VIII
provides for regional arrangements. Unfortunately,
we have yet to take full advantage of what the Charter
can offer to help us overcome the constraints of self-
defeating policies based on narrow national-interest
calculations, which, ipso facto, lead to double standards
that in turn undermine the credibility of the Security
Council as the organ with the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.

Here the most critical issue is the need is to be
consistent in our fidelity to the principles ofthe Charter:
sovereign equality, territorial integrity, political
independence, non-intervention and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Failure to do so can have grave
consequences; my own country is witness to this. It is in
this respect that I wish to quote Emperor Haile Selassie,
who appealed for justice when Ethiopia was aggressed
in 1935 but who nonetheless remained unwavering in
his commitment to the international collective security
system in spite of the utter failure of the then League
of Nations. What he said in his address to the General
Assembly in October 1963 still resonates today, and it
is with those words that I wish to conclude my remarks:

"The Charter of the United Nations expresses
the noblest aspirations of man: the abjuration
of force in the settlement of disputes between
States [and] the safeguarding of international
peace and security. But these, too, as were the
phrases of the Convenant [of the League of Nations]
are only words; their value depends wholly on our
will to observe and honour them and give them
content and meaning This Organization and
each of its Members bear a crushing and awesome
responsibility: to absorb the wisdom of history and
to apply it to the problems of the present, in order
that future generations may be born, and live, and
die in peace." (A/PV1229, p. I)

