Mr. Khan (Indonesia): First of all, I would like
to convey our condolences to the Government and the
people of Turkey in the aftermath of the severe
earthquake that hit the eastern part of their country.
Our condolences also go to the Government of Saudi
Arabia upon the passing of Crown Prince Sultan Bin
Abdulaziz Al-Saud, who died last Saturday.

We further express our deep appreciation to you,
Madam President, and other members of the Security
Council for arranging this debate at this critical
moment in the history of the struggle of the Palestinian
people. We are grateful also to the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Mr. Lynn Pascoe, for his
comprehensive briefing.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made earlier by the representative of Egypt on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement and with the statement
to be made by the representative of Kazakhstan on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC).

On 23 September 2011, President Mahmoud
Abbas submitted to the Secretary-General an
application for membership in the United Nations.
Without a doubt, it was a historic occasion. Indonesia
is proud to have stood by the people of Palestine and to
continue to stand by them. Indonesia continues to be an
unrepentant advocate of the Palestinian cause because
it is the right thing to do. We call upon this Council to
expedite the process and issue its recommendation
without delay.

Indonesia supports the resumption of negotiations
between the Israelis and the Palestinians, as proposed
by the Quartet on 23 September. That means
resumption of direct bilateral negotiations without
delay or preconditions. There must be a preparatory
meeting between the parties to determine the agenda
and the method to be adopted for the negotiations, as
well as an agreement on a timeframe that will not
extend beyond the end of 2012.

We wish to express our appreciation to those
Member States who have thrown their support behind
the Palestinian bid for membership, including members
of the Non-Aligned Movement and the OIC. We do not
think it is sufficient for anyone simply to express bland
support for the two-State vision, while failing to
provide practical support for the Palestinian need to
obtain what is justly theirs.

Regrettably, the Government of Israel continues
its diplomatic offensive designed to frustrate the
progress of Palestinians. The objective of this offensive
is really to perpetuate the absence ofa peace process.

Palestinian membership of the United Nations is
not in contradiction with the two-State solution, nor
does it constitute an obstacle to peace. The true
obstacle to peace lies in the same failed policies of the
Government of Israel, beginning with its settlement
activities.

We support the recent release of political
prisoners by the parties, which we hope will lead to the
resumption of the peace process. It is distressing that
since the Israeli occupation began in 1967, at least
750,000 Palestinian civilians, including women,
children and elected officials, have been detained and
imprisoned by Israel. We draw attention, in this regard,
to last May's Declaration on Palestinian Political
Prisoners adopted by the sixteenth Ministerial Meeting
of the Non-Aligned Movement in Bali, Indonesia, in
which the Movement called for urgent attention to be
paid to the grave situation of these prisoners. We look
forward to their being set free.

ll-56143
Finally, Indonesia reiterates its fundamental
support for Palestine as well as the two-State solution.
We look forward to the resumption of the peace
process without unnecessary delay.

