Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We are delighted to see you, Madam,
presiding over this meeting of the Security Council on
the situation in Iraq. I should like to thank the
delegation of Spain for its efforts to facilitate the
convening of this important meeting. We are also
pleased to welcome the Secretary-General, as well as
his Special Representative for Iraq, Mr. Sergio Vieira
de Mello, and his team. I would like to inform him that
Syria attaches enormous importance to the role that the
United Nations is expected to play in Iraq in the
framework of the implementation of the provisions of
Security Council 1483 (2003), particularly in ensuring,
as soon as possible, the restoration of Iraq's
independence and sovereignty and its control over its
natural wealth and resources.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Vieira de Mello, visited the Syrian Arab
Republic on 16 July 2003, when he had the opportunity
to acquaint the leadership of the Syrian Arab Republic
with the efforts that the United Nations is making in
Iraq in order to restore security and stability and pave
the way for democratic elections so as to establish an
Iraqi Government that would restore Iraqi sovereignty,
maintain Iraq's unity and end the occupation of its
territory.

The President of the Syrian Arab Republic,
President Bashar Al-Assad, made it very clear that, as a
Member of the United Nations, as an elected member
of the Security Council and as an Arab country
neighbouring Iraq, Syria is genuinely concerned about
Iraq's future, its independence and its territorial
integrity. Syria holds dear the freedom, liberty and
dignity of the Iraqi people. He stressed that Syria will
support all steps taken by the United Nations leading to
the end of occupation and to control by the Iraqi people
of its own affairs.

The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic has
examined the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2003/715) - his first report to the Security Council
pursuant to paragraph 24 of resolution 1483 (2003). In
this regard, I would like to express our appreciation for
the efforts being made by the Secretary-General, Mr.
Kofi Annan, and his Special Representative, Mr. Vieira
de Mello, and his team, to implement the provisions of
resolution 1483 (2003) pertaining to the United Nations
role in Iraq.

It is important to highlight some of the
paragraphs of that resolution, which make up elements
of the framework of the mandate of the Secretary-
General's Special Representative - particularly those
relating to the coordination of assistance for
humanitarian purposes and reconstruction, as well as to
efforts being made to restore and establish the
necessary local and national institutions required for
ensuring representative governance of the Iraqi people,
including efforts made to assist in the process leading
to the establishment of an internationally recognized
representative Iraqi Government.

Our delegation has considered the aspirations and
challenges facing the work of the United Nations and
the international community in Iraq. Indeed, the
Secretary-General, in the very first paragraph of the
report, as well as in subsequent paragraphs, states that
the interests of the Iraqi people - especially the
restoration, as soon as possible, of Iraq's sovereignty
- is one of the most important elements. He also states
that Iraqis have stressed to him that democracy cannot
be imposed from outside, but that it must stem from the
aspirations of the Iraqi people and their genuine
choices. The delegation of Syria agrees in this respect
with the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative.

We would also like to express our appreciation to
Mr. Vieira de Mello for the efforts that he has been
making to end the suffering of the Iraqi people. They
have suffered as a result of the sanctions imposed by
the Security Council for well over a decade. We also
agree with the comments of the Secretary-General in
paragraph 20 of his report. He states: "Those Iraqis
with whom my Special Representative has met have
emphasized that Iraqis themselves must conduct the
constitutional process .'..'. That is, indeed, correct. That
paragraph also states that Iraqis feel strongly that the
constitutional process should be determined by
elections.

Furthermore, the substance of paragraph 23 of the
report deserves attention and support. That paragraph
states that the Authority ought to "devolve real
executive authority to a broadly representative and
self-selecting Iraqi leadership, including in policy- and
decision-making, and in the preparation and execution
of a budget".

The report also takes up the formation of the
interim authority in Iraq in the current situation. My
delegation wishes to stress that the Governing Council
should work in accordance with the wishes of the Iraqi
people by strengthening national unity, speedily
establishing an elected national Government and
ending the occupation as soon as possible. Any
assessment of the actions of that Council will be based
on the steps it takes to serve the Iraqi people and to
maintain relations of good-neighbourliness with its
neighbours and brothers.

The Secretary-General's concluding observations
in his report are fully in line with the role of the United
Nations and views thereon, particularly when he cites
his Special Representative as conveying to all
concerned

"the Security Council's resolve that the day when

Iraqi's govern themselves must come quickly"
(ibid., para. 105)
and as stressing

"the Security Council's call for a government
based on the rule of law that affords equal and
justice to all Iraqi citizens without regard to
ethnicity, religion or gender". (ibid)

We cannot but agree with the conclusions of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
expressed later in the report, with respect to the
importance

"that Iraqis are able to see a clear timetable
leading to the full restoration of sovereignty"
(ibid., para.]07)

and stressing the

"pressing need to set out a clear and specific
sequence of events leading to the end of military
occupation". (ibid.)

Allow me also to thank the Special Representative once
again for his readiness to assist in establishing such a
framework in cooperation with all parties concerned.

As to the "regional dimension" referred to in
paragraph 108 of the report, we believe it to be
extremely important. It is, indeed, thus described in the
report. It is essential that cooperation be established
with Iraq's neighbours, as the Secretary-General
emphasizes, because Iraq cannot be isolated from its
brothers or neighbours. We convey our appreciation
once again to the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative for all their efforts in that regard.

Our brothers, the people of Iraq, who are linked
to Syria by ties of geography, blood, history, culture
and common interests, have experienced many years of
darkness. They are well aware that Syria stood by them
in their time of suffering and that their pain was ours.
For decades, Syria has hosted tens of thousands of
Iraqis victimized by oppression, repression and the
consequences of siege. On the occasion of this Security
Council debate on the situation in Iraq, Syria today
reiterates its expression of concern for the future,
independence and territorial integrity of Iraq and the
freedom and dignity of its people.

