Mr. Arrocha Olabuenaga (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico thanks you, Mr. President, for having convened this important debate, which takes place in an international political environment in which the defence of the Charter of the United Nations is essential. As the Secretary-General said recently, we are living in dangerous times. It is precisely in these circumstances that we must return to the most basic premise, namely, the need to observe and defend the Charter of the United Nations. In signing the Charter of the United Nations 75 years ago, the international community took a decision that would define a new international order. The express prohibition on the threat or use of force in international relations marks a before and an after in the history of diplomacy and international law. Virtually the entire potential of the United Nations to consolidate a world of development, harmony and social equality, in the exercise of all its powers and resources, depends upon respecting that fragile and imperative principle. The Security Council, being the depositary of the primary responsibility for maintaining international peace and security, plays a fundamental role in that regard. Beyond being a body that reacts to crises, the Council must finally consolidate itself as the preventive body par excellence, while actively facilitating that all States fulfil their obligation to resolve their disputes by peaceful means. In matters involving international peace and security, States must act in a manner consistent with the Charter and general international law. If the law is ignored, it is undermined. When States fail in that obligation, it is even more important that the Security Council be up to the occasion to defend and enforce the Charter, in strict accordance with its powers and in full exercise of its responsibility. Not only is the legitimacy of the Council at stake in cases of crisis; it is the life, dignity and value of the human person that are at risk. In that context, Mexico once again calls on all States that have not yet done so, in particular the permanent members of the Council, to join the Franco-Mexican initiative on limiting the use of the veto in cases of mass atrocities. As mentioned by the representative of France this morning, the initiative has already been endorsed by 105 Member States. In our times, it is unacceptable that the protection of civilians, the fight against impunity and the granting of humanitarian assistance be held hostage to the political differences that lead to the inaction of the Council. Likewise, Mexico reiterates to the Council its concern about the continuing invoking of Article 51 of the Charter by some States to address threats to international peace and security by military means, especially against non-State actors. It is very worrisome that that practice runs the risk of de facto broadening the exceptions to the general prohibition on the use of force irregularly. Given the importance and seriousness of the issues addressed in the notes that are sent to the Council under Article 51 and the lack of transparency with which they are processed, it is necessary for the Council to review and modify its working methods in order to ensure full compliance with the Charter of the United Nations, especially when the immanent right of self-defence is invoked.
