Mr. Haysom: I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Council on South Sudan.
My remarks build on the briefing provided by Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix and cover developments
specific to the resumption of a political process in
South Sudan.

My starting point is the concluding observation
of Under-Secretary-General Lacroix: that only a truly
inclusive political process and the political will to
implement the peace agreement will bring peace to
war-torn South Sudan.

It is important to define what is meant by an inclusive
political process in South Sudan. Simply put, a genuine
and inclusive political process at the least must involve
the combatants and those political leaders with whom
combatants and communities are aligned, as well as the
signatories to the 2015 peace agreement. At the moment,
no clear, inclusive political process is in sight. There is
still the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD)-sponsored peace agreement signed in 2015, to
which the United Nations is a witness. Even though its
current status is contested, it remains the only valid
document signed by the major stakeholders. Though
originally agreed with reservations by the Government,
there is now broad understanding that the text is mostly
and widely supported and should be adjusted only to
the extent necessary to reflect new realities, including
in respect of the inclusivity requirement.

The expulsion of Rick Machar - a key
signatory - from South Sudan and his procedurally
contested replacement by General Taban Deng has
added a particular difficulty to establishing such a
process: the demand for an inclusive process contradicts
the narrative that First Vice-President Deng represents
and will incorporate all opposition groups into the
Government construct. The Government has argued that
Mr. Deng's participation in the Government meets the
inclusivity requirement set out in the peace agreement,
and, following this logic, the Government has been
required to pacify the remaining opposition-held
areas and has consistently proposed alternatives to an
inclusive political process.

However, we sense that this opposition may be
softening. In the meantime, the pacification strategy
has allowed the opposition to claim that they are
in favour of peace, while justifying their military
posture as protecting themselves against a Government
offensive. Since July the conflict has spread throughout
the country, and new actors, armed and unarmed, have
emerged. All only pay lip service to the proposition that
there can be no military solution to this conflict.

As noted by Under-Secretary-General Lacroix,
the mere introduction of the Regional Protection Force
cannot substitute for a political solution, although it
would surely contribute to an enabling environment for
a peace process.

Questions have arisen as to whether the
national dialogue could substitute for an inclusive
political process. A genuinely inclusive and credible
national dialogue would, no doubt, be an important
nation-building exercise in and ofitself. In South Sudan,
it would need to be anchored in a peace process and not
be offered as a substitute for such a process. It would
have to be preceded by a political process that creates
the security and political environment necessary for an
inclusive and credible dialogue.

The demand for the opposition to lay down
its weapons in order to participate in the national
dialogue is interpreted as a call to surrender, without
any assurance that the underlying grievances will be
addressed. Nonetheless, it is most encouraging that
the steering committee of the national dialogue only
yesterday announced its intention to consult opposition
groups outside the country, including Mr. Riek Machar.

It seems that other political alternatives have
been offered, such as trusteeship, early elections
and a return to the status quo ante, that are deemed
politically unfeasible. This realization, coupled with
the downward trajectory of South Sudan, has now led
to an increasingly broad understanding among South
Sudanese and regional and international players that
there is no way around an inclusive political process.

To that end, and following the 25 January meeting of
the Secretary-General, the African Union Chairperson
and the IGAD Chair, President Alpha Oumar Konare
engaged the South Sudanese Government and regional
players in order to revive the political process, obtain

a cessation of hostilities and create an environment
conducive to inclusive dialogue.

His engagements - which, apparently, are due,
after a three-month hiatus, to recommence in earnest
shortly - were followed at the time by a Visit of the
Chair of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki
Mahamat, to South Sudan soon after taking office.
These efforts on their own have so far not led to concrete
steps forward on a political process.
The Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, President Festus Mogae, has spoken ofthe
limits to the implementation of the peace agreement in
the face of pervasive conflict and the non-participation
ofactive combatants and has called for a unified effort to
secure those conditions. I can report that arrangements
are now being made for both Presidents Konare and
Mogae, and my office to work together on ajoint action
plan, which will in turn be promotedjointly to regional
leaders in the coming weeks.

Faced with a deteriorating situation in South Sudan
and increasing calls from the international community
for engagement, South Sudan's neighbours have also
been exploring ways and means to start a process
that could bring the conflict to an end. One of those
initiatives, led by President Museveni of Uganda, is
focused on the reunification of the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement (SPLM). Noting that the earlier
decision to exclude the SPLM. in Opposition, led by
Riek Machar, from this exercise had drawn criticism
from some participants, Uganda has now belatedly
reached out to Mr. Machar, who declined to participate
due to his present circumstances and the short notice
of the invitation. It is to be recalled that the Ugandan
initiative was faulted earlier by the former detainees
group for prioritizing party unification over bringing
the war to an end.

We understand that there have also been discussions
between President Kenyatta and the opposition parties
on the facilitation of a meeting of all the opposition
groups in Kenya. Recalling the reported abduction
of opposition figures in Kenya, some groups have
expressed anxiety about the meeting venue. Yet they
seem to see the value of establishing a joint platform
as a necessary step for full political engagement with
the Government.

The most recent initiative emanates from the
extraordinary summit of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) held on 12 June.
Reiterating that the full implementation of the peace
agreement remained the only viable way to bring about
peace, IGAD had decided to convene a high-level
revitalization forum ofthe parties to the 2015 agreement,
including what it termed "estranged groups". The forum
will address concrete measures to restore the permanent
ceasefire, advance the full implementation of the peace
agreement, and to develop a "revised and realistic
timeline" for democratic elections at the end of the
transition period. To that effect, the summit mandated
the IGAD Council of Ministers to urgently convene and
facilitate such a forum in collaboration with relevant
stakeholders, emphasizing the importance of IGAD-
African Union (AU)-United Nations collaboration.

Those proposals, as well as the appointment of an
IGAD Special Envoy, were positive outcomes of the
summit. One concern, however, remains, and that is
the lack of clear timelines for the implementation of the
proposals put forward in the IGAD communique.

There seems to be a common understanding now
that a credible political process in South Sudan is one
in which, inter alia, both President Kiir's Government
and the SPLM. in Opposition that is, the Rick Machar
faction, are represented, although not necessarily by
having the principal protagonists attend themselves.
In addition, it would require the attendance of the
new players that have come to the fore, at least for the
purposes of negotiating a ceasefire and an adjustment
to the peace agreement.

The opposition groups began meeting in April
and have started issuing joint statements regarding
developments in the country. They are reported to have
met with the Government officials of neighbouring
States to seek their understanding and support. It
remains to be seen whether the groups will overcome
the differences between them, especially on the issue of
the leadership of the Opposition. Still, the discussions
that took place in the Oslo forum last week among
the opposition groups, which I chaired, revealed more
common ground among them, and even between the
Opposition and the Government, than had been the
impression before.

I believe the demands for a resumption of an
inclusive political process are greater today than they
were a month ago, or three months ago; but much work
remains to be done for a credible political process to
be established. The international community should,
in support of those efforts, deliver a clear message
that it supports an inclusive process that includes all
significant armed groups and the political parties that
are, to one degree of another, influential in bringing the
ongoing fighting to a halt. Initiatives, including regional
initiatives that promote dialogue within the opposition
and between the opposition and the Government should
be supported. Collaboration between IGAD, the AU
and the United Nations should further be promoted.

Finally, to reinforce the common message, credible
national elections can be held only to conclude a
transition period underpinned by political inclusion
and stability - not in circumstances of insecurity and
widespread displacement. My office will continue to
engage all South Sudanese stakeholders and work closely
with the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and the
members of the international community, particularly
IGAD and the AU, in pursuit of those objectives.

