Mr. Hyseni: Thank you so much for the
opportunity to brief you, honourable members of the
Council, on the continued accomplishments and steady
progress the Republic of Kosovo has been making in
all areas, with a special focus on the achievements
made since my last statement to the Council in March.

The day before yesterday, we celebrated the first
anniversary of the entry into force of our
Constitution- the Constitution of the Republic of
Kosovo. The new democratic Constitution of my
country is a modern foundational document that
incorporates all of the minority rights protections from
the Ahtisaari comprehensive plan. The leaders and the

people of Kosovo were, in fact, very honoured the day
before yesterday, to welcome the Nobel Peace Prize
winner, Martti Ahtisaari, in Pristina, to celebrate the
first anniversary of the entry into force of our
Constitution together.

The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has been reconfigured,
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
(EULEX) achieved full operational capability on
6 April. Successful deployment of EULEX throughout
Kosovo has been widely appreciated, and the
Government of Kosovo has been cooperating closely
on all issues. Improvement of the situation in North
Kosovo after deployment of EULEX is obvious. Still,
there is a lot that needs to be done. Otherwise, the
overall security situation in the Republic of Kosovo is
very calm and stable.

As I said in my remarks in this forum in March,
for practical and pragmatic reasons we have requested
the conclusion of the mission and mandate of UNMIK.
In light of the continued positive developments in
Kosovo and the widespread deployment of EULEX, I
reiterate that request today. I also reiterate the
commitment expressed in our Declaration of
Independence and in our Constitution to respect
adherence to international law, including binding
resolutions of this body. That commitment has never
wavered.

As the Government of Kosovo has assumed full
responsibility over the organization of elections - that
means over the Central Elections Commission as
well - the new Central Elections Commission
chairperson has been recently appointed. New elections
for municipalities of Kosovo are expected to take place
late this autumn. After lengthy consultations with
political parties, His Excellency Dr. Fatmir Sejdiu,
President of the Republic, has announced 15 November
as the date of the new municipal elections.

Another very important institution has been
recently established. After adoption of the law on the
Constitutional Court, the Parliament of the Republic
has also elected the members of the Constitutional
Court of Kosovo.

State institution-building has also continued,
based on European standards. The build-up of our
security force is progressing. As I said in my March
statement to the Council, the NATO-trained Kosovo
Security Force is a democratic and civilian-controlled
security force. This multi-ethnic and apolitical force
will be focused primarily on emergency response and
generally on activities to promote development,
regional peace, security and stability.

In line with the request for an advisory opinion
submitted to the International Court of Justice (ICJ) by
the United Nations General Assembly on the question
of the declaration of independence, the Republic of
Kosovo, in compliance with the set deadlines, has
submitted to the Court its written contribution on
17 April. I have also informed the Court of our
intention to participate in all subsequent proceedings,
including in the hearings due to open on 1 December
2009. The Court has already been notified of Kosovo's
intention to present an oral contribution.

As we continue to take an active part in
presenting our case before the ICJ, I wish to emphasize
our commitment to justice and our trust in justice, and
with that, our trust in ICJ justice. We are therefore
confident that the ICJ's deliberations and ruling will be
fair and impartial. We strongly believe that our position
will be confirmed.

Recognition of Kosovo as an independent and
sovereign State has continued. Continued recognitions
are a clear testimony of progress and stability in
Kosovo. Free nations of the world continue to
appreciate Kosovo's contribution to regional peace and
safety.

I wish once again to extend our profound thanks
and appreciation to the peoples and Governments of
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Kingdom of Bahrain,
the Republic of the Gambia and the Union of the
Comoros for their recent recognition of the
independence of my country. We urge all the other
nations of the world to support the efforts of the people
of Kosovo to build their future as a free and
independent country. After having endured decades of
unspeakable occupation, terror and slavery, the people
of Kosovo deserve to be free and to join the
community of the free and democratic nations of the
world.

It is with great pleasure that I can speak today
about Kosovo's membership in two international
financial institutions of special weight and importance
to my country, namely the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) and the World Bank. On 6 May 2009, the IMF
Board of Governors approved Kosovo's application,
with 138 member States participating in the voting
process, 96 of which approved the decision. It is very
encouraging to note that 41 countries that have not yet
recognized Kosovo voted in favour of Kosovo's
membership.

On 3 June, the voting process for Kosovo's World
Bank membership ended with 139 member States
participating in the voting and 95 countries approving
Kosovo's application. The formal accession to both the
IMF and the World Bank will take place on 29 June in
Washington, DC, when the Republic of Kosovo signs
both Articles of Agreement.

Membership in these two very important financial
institutions is an additional encouragement to the
Government of Kosovo to continue its efforts to fight
crime and corruption, strengthen the rule of law and
maintain macroeconomic stability through fiscal and
budgetary discipline during the current economic
downturn.

The Government of the Republic of Kosovo has
been working very hard on the issues of the economy,
justice and security and safety for all of its citizens.
Integration of minorities and returnees has continued to
be a standing priority of my Government. Prime
Minister Hashim Thaci has been personally reaching
out to returning Serb families, and Government funds
have been allocated for reconstruction of houses for
returnees. Our Government has continued to seek ways
to improve the conditions in the minority community
areas, especially in the Serb majority areas.

Unfortunately, the Republic of Serbia has
continued to prevent the Serb citizens of Kosovo from
cooperating with the institutions of Kosovo. Belgrade
has also continued to impede our cooperation with
neighbours and the international community by
blocking our participation in regional and wider
international bodies.

Before concluding, I would like to re-emphasize
that in the new Kosovo there should be no room for
hatred and violence. Kosovo's institutions are
committed to building a multi-ethnic democracy at
peace with its neighbours and contributing to regional
cooperation, peace and safety. The future of all nations
of the Western Balkans is in European integration, and
Kosovo intends to pursue this goal very vigorously. To
achieve those goals, we in the Republic of Kosovo will
continue close cooperation with the European Union,
the United States and NATO.

In concluding, I would like to re-emphasize
Kosovo's commitment toward working with all of the
members of the Security Council to promote the shared
goals of international peace and security. Once again, I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
present the views of the Republic of Kosovo.

