Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to thank Secretary-General Guterres for coming here andproviding us with his important briefing, as well as the Secretary-General of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Dato Lim Jock Hoi, for his briefing. I believe that this is the first time that an ASEAN Secretary-General has come to the Security Council, which marks a historic moment for all of us here. Much has already been said. The ASEAN Secretary- General mentioned that ASEAN was established in 1967, at a time when South-East Asia was marred by disputes, distrust and anxiety. Today, with a total population of more than 650 million, we are among the fastest-growing economies and the engine of global growth. ASEAN member States are contributing over 5,000 personnel to various United Nations peacekeeping missions. ASEAN's collective efforts and its culture of dialogue and consensus-building - or what we call the ASEAN Way - dispelled the elements of distrust and set off a remarkable cycle of peace, trust and prosperity. I believe that the ASEAN Secretary-General alluded to that point as well. For those reasons, we believe that much can be learned from ASEAN, and that ASEAN will be able to adapt to new challenges if continuous dialogue between the United Nations and other regional organizations is strengthened. Let me highlight three pertinent points on how ASEAN complements the work of the United Nations and how we can improve synergies, particularly in the area of peace and security. First, Iwilladdress ASEAN's collective contribution to peace and security. We are a firm believer that conflict benefits no one, and that sweeping the problem under the carpet does not resolve differences. That is why in 2015 we established the ASEAN Community with its three pillars: political-security, economy and sociocultural communities. The Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia - which has been acceded to by over 40 countries - our cooperation with ASEAN partners and the ASEAN Regional Forum are among the ways in which we expand the ASEAN Way. I believe that the ASEAN Regional Forum is the only forum to which many parties, including Korea, are members. We also promote confidence-building, preventive diplomacy and conflict resolution approaches. ASEAN countries also engage with other continents - with countries of the Pacific, through the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum; the European Union, through the Asia-Europe Meeting; Latin America, through the Forum for East Asia-Latin America Cooperation; ASEAN-the Southern Common Market Ministerial Meeting and others. ASEAN also recently endorsed the Indo-Pacific Outlook. That is how we would like to strengthen ASEAN centrality and enhance our community-building process, based on several principles, including centrality, inclusivity, non-interference and others. Within the framework of ASEAN and United Nations collaboration, enhancing the capacity and capabilities of peacekeeping personnel is one area that must be strengthened. ASEAN countries have participated in peacekeeping operations since as early as the 1950s under the banner of the Blue Helmets. As both Secretaries-General mentioned, all 10 ASEAN member countries have endorsed the Action for Peacekeeping initiative. That is an important part. There are many areas on which we can work. The Secretary-General of ASEAN pointed out several of them. Secretary-General Guterres pointed out six practical areas of cooperation. We certainly welcome all of them. I would like to highlight in particular where we can work together on issues related to peacekeeping, counter-terrorism, early warning, peace and security, climate change - which is an important issue for us in ASEAN - and disaster management. I believe we are the only region that boasts having all of the world's natural disasters, from hailstorms to cyclones to tsunamis. That helped us develop expertise in those areas. My second point relates to ASEAN's contribution to emerging non-traditional security challenges. In the field of non-traditional security, ASEAN's numerous platforms of cooperation and engagement - covering issues such as counter-terrorism, violent extremism, cybercrimes, illicit drug trafficking and many more - have also contributed to making the region much safer. In the maritime domain, for instance, there is the ASEAN Maritime Forum, established to address maritime issues in a holistic, integrated and comprehensive manner. As I mentioned, South-East Asian States are also geographically prone to natural disasters. Through the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster Management, ASEAN has developed capabilities to facilitate cooperation and coordination assistance during disaster relief efforts. It is also through the Centre that ASEAN countrieshave worked together to address humanitarian issues in Rakhine state. Although there are many thematic issues addressed within the ASEAN context, I would like to highlight one important point, which is also under intense discussion in the Security Council, namely, ASEAN's contribution within the framework of the women and peace and security agenda. We believe that it is crucial to ensure the full and effective participation of women in all stages of peace processes. In that connection, ASEAN has established the ASEAN Women for Peace Registry - a pool of ASEAN women experts that seeks to promote gender perspectives in peace and reconciliation processes in ASEAN. Indonesia is also working to establish the South-East Asian network of women peace negotiators and mediators. We hope that the two forums can be part of the Global Alliance of Regional Women Mediator Networks. Those are just snippets of ASEAN's role in maintaining peace and security. It is no coincidence that, for the past 53 years, guns have fallen silent in South-East Asia. In conclusion, the region has benefited from ASEAN's existence, and we believe the organization has also contributed to the maintenance of international peace and security. As a way forward, we envisage a larger role in sharing the ASEAN Way to address issues of common concern. We are part of the global community. We will continue to contribute to finding solutions to global challenges, as responsible members of the global society.
