Mr. Atieh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, my delegation congratulates
you, Sir, on Pakistan's presidency of the Security
Council. We thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Pakistan for presiding over the morning segment of
today's meeting.
We also thank the Permanent Representative of
Germany and the members of his mission for their
tireless efforts to make the work of the Council a
success last month.

We thank the Secretary-General for his statement
this morning. We also thank Mr. Guehenno for
participating in this meeting and express our
satisfaction with and appreciation of the cooperation
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and Syrian authorities.

The Security Council is today debating one of the
most important mechanisms of the United Nations in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
United Nations peacekeeping operations have enabled
the Organization in recent decades to contain and end
many conflicts through their deployment wherever
conflicts and tensions may erupt throughout the world.
On that basis, peacekeeping operations are a very
important tool allowing the United Nations to maintain
international peace and security, play a vital and
effective role in reducing tensions and contribute to the
settlement of disputes and to post-conflict peace-
building and peacekeeping.

Over the years and decades, such operations have
proven to be effective in implementing their entrusted
tasks, from the traditional monitoring of ceasefire
agreements to addressing the huge and complex
challenges of territorial administration. They have
shown themselves to be effective bulwarks against
threats to international peace and security.

It is worth noting that the first United Nations
peacekeeping operation was launched over 50 years
ago in the Middle East. The United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization (UNTSO) is still exercising
its role in full responsibility and undertaking its
functions capably and effectively. The Syrian Arab
Republic pays tribute to the sacrifices made by the
leaders, members and units of peacekeeping operations
throughout the world and, in particular, in the Middle
East.

While they play an important role, peacekeeping
operations should not be seen as substitutes for
permanent solutions to conflicts. Peacekeeping
operations are temporary arrangements to prevent the
escalation of conflicts pending the attainment of drastic
solutions in accordance with the resolutions of
international legitimacy.

In the case of the Middle East, however, they
have endured for decades. UNTSO has existed for 56
years. Peace has been difficult to attain because Israel
has insisted on pursuing aggressive policies and
because the Security Council has been particularly
unable to exercise its role or to ensure implementation
of the relevant resolutions.

The papers submitted for discussion under the
Pakistani presidency include objective questions and
opinions of great importance. There can be no doubt
that providing our countries with the opportunity to
express their opinions would constitute a real
contribution to a collective assessment of strategic
approaches towards peacekeeping operations and their
future orientation. It is also worth mentioning here the
important role played by the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations within the framework of the
General Assembly, whether in formulating general
policies for the United Nations in the area of
peacekeeping or in finding solutions to outstanding
problems.

The Syrian Arab Republic attaches particular
importance to adherence to the principles and main
guidelines for peacekeeping operations, as well as to
rapid deployment, recruitment and the reimbursement
of initial arrears to troop-contributing countries. In this
respect, we would like to reaffirm our belief that
peacekeeping operations must abide by their mandates
and respect the basic principles set out in the Charter,
including respect for the principle of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of
States. The mandates of such operations should also be
well defined and should include a clear-cut time frame.
Security measures at the headquarters of United
Nations missions should also be strengthened in order
to ensure the safety and security of the personnel who
dedicate their lives to the goal of peace in the world.

We would like to reaffirm the need to enforce the
tripartite partnership between the Security Council, the
Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries in
planning, organizing and deploying peacekeeping
operations. We believe that the mechanism referred to
in resolution 1353 (2001) has a very important role to
play in making peacekeeping operations successful and
in achieving their purposes and objectives.

