Mr. Daeic' (Serbia) (Spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): At the outset, I thank
Secretary-General Guterres for his report (8/2018/981)
and his Special Representative, Mr. Tanin, for his
briefing. I also thank them for their dedication and
hard work on the implementation of the mandate of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), under resolution 1244 (1999). I
commend China for including this meeting, in line with
the established dynamic, on the agenda of the Security
Council, as well as the Council members who support a
continued consideration of this question.

In August, we did not have the regular meeting on
UNMIK, and I cannot but express my displeasure at
the decision of the United Kingdom not to include that
item in the programme of work of the Security Council,
with the explanation that the situation in Kosovo and
Metohija was calm and nothing was happening on
the ground. I take this opportunity to point out why
that approach is wrong and why we consider that it is
important at this moment that this topic remain high on
the Council's agenda.
We spent more than three hours - the time it usually
takes to hold a Security Council meeting - discussing
if it was necessary to convene the meeting or not.
An unnecessary adversarial atmosphere between
Belgrade and Pristina was created, as was division
among Security Council members. The adoption of
the programme of work of the Security Council was
called into question, which constitutes a situation that
is certainly harmful for both the solution of that issue
and the prevailing tone in this organ.

Membership of the Security Council, let me recall,
is a great privilege and a great responsibility, and its
members must do their best to safeguard international
peace and security. For years, the United Nations and its
Member States have spared no effort or time working to
prevent conflicts, and we are all called upon to do what
it takes to prevent, at the first sign, instability from
metamorphosing into a conflict.

In this case, we are faced with a situation of a
semi-resolved problem being neglected. The conflict is
far behind us, but we are equally far from establishing
a stable and safe situation that no longer merits the
attention of this organ. To allege that this topic is less
important at a time when extensive efforts are being
made to find a durable and sustainable solution, with
great support from important actors in the international
community, is counterproductive, to say the least.

We continue to believe that agreement should be
reached among Council members on how often this
topic should be considered in the Security Council and
that the question of frequency is not a technical matter.
I recall that Serbia tried hard to make a contribution to
achieving a solution by agreement, and we are ready
to continue the discussion of that question with all
interested parties in the same constructive spirit.

It is with regret that I note that no substantive,
positive changes have taken place since the last
meeting of the Security Council on this item (see S/PV.8254). More than 2,000 days have passed without
the formation of the association/community of Serb-
majority municipalities, which is the cornerstone of the
Brussels Agreement; no conditions have been created
for the return of 200,000 internally displaced persons
(IDPs); the Specialist Chambers have not begun their
work and almost a year has passed since the murder of
Oliver Ivanovie, while the perpetrator of that heinous
crime has not been found. None of that has happened,
and one would be hard-pressed to say that what has been
done has been positive. Resolutions of this organ have
been grossly violated and new provocations and new
incidents have occurred. Let me mention just a few.

The so-called Kosovo Assembly has adopted laws
that will make it possible, for all practical purposes,
for the Kosovo Security Force to transform into armed
forces. The constant calls of the international community
for caution and disregard for the interests of the Serbian
community in Kosovo and Metohija notwithstanding,
the authorities in Pristina are resolved to form the
armed forces. Serbia is categorically opposed to such
unilateral acts, for it is evident that those forces would
have all the attributes and competencies of a military,
irrespective of what they might be named.

Let me recall that, under resolution l244 (1999) and
the Military Technical Agreement, the Kosovo Force
(KF OR) is the only legal military formation in Kosovo
and Metohija. At the same time, it is an important
guarantor of the implementation of the Brussels
Agreement and, in practical terms, the only guarantor
of the security and survival of the Serbs, their property
and their religious and cultural heritage. Let me point
out that it is unacceptable that radical, far-reaching and
unilateral decisions be taken at a time when of ongoing
dialogue aimed at finding a solution, and I expect
the Security Council members to condemn Pristina's
decision in that regard.

During his visit to Kosovo and Metohija on 8 and
9 September, Serbian President Aleksandar Vucie
was prevented from visiting the locality of Banja, in
a Serbian enclave, because the Pristina authorities
changed their initial decision at the last moment,
regardless of his clear message of peace and calls for a
sustainable solution for Kosovo and Metohija.

The raid by the special police forces of Gazivode
reservoir was the most drastic example of provocation.
Sixty members of the special Regional Operational
Support Unit units, wearing balaclavas and wielding
long-barrel guns, descended on Gazivode reservoir and
hydroelectric plant in northern Kosovo and Metohija to
enable Hashim Thaci to make a visit. I am afraid that
the only goal of that irrational action was to provoke and
intimidate the Serbian people in Kosovo and Metohija,
and not for the first time. That too, let me point out,
was a clear violation of resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Brussels Agreement.

As the First Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia, I
personally attended, along with Catherine Ashton,
Hashim Thaci and Aleksandar Vucie, a NATO
meeting at the time of the signing of the Brussels
Agreement in 2013, at which agreement was reached
that no Kosovo security force could go to the north,
unless two conditions were met: first, advice given to
KF OR; and secondly, consent given by representatives
of the Serbian municipalities in northern Kosovo and
Metohija. Neither of those two occurred. We consider
the KFOR and European Union (EU) reactions to have
been inadequate and, to say the least, incongruent with
their role and mandate. Escalation was avoided thanks
to the calm prevailing on our side, the messages of
the President of Serbia and the restraint of the Serbs
in northern Kosovo and Metohija, who, although
alarmed, demonstrated maturity and did not take the
bait of provocation.

The message sent by the Gazivoda incident,
however, is of particular concern. The reservoir and the
hydroelectric plant are strategically important for both us
and the Pristina side, yet Pristina is not ready to discuss
substantive issues. The recent attempt to interfere
with the work of Elektromreza Srbije, Serbia's power
transmission network, and the intention of Pristina to
take over the energy infrastructure in northern Kosovo
and Metohija are also indicative in that regard. I recall
that energy is a subject matter of the Brussels dialogue
and that we have expressed our concern on a number of
occasions over the steps Pristina has taken that threaten
the energy stability of the entire region, despite its
failure to fulfil its obligation to register two energy
companies in northern Kosovo and Metohija.

Allow me to say that, according to the Brussels
Agreement, the formation of the association/
community of Serb-majority is important. What
kind of dialogue are we talking about if, 2,000 days
after the signing of the Brussels Agreement and the
commitments to the European Union contained therein
were undertaken by Pristina, none has been fulfilled,
including the formation of the association/community
of Serb-majority municipalities? That association, of
course, should be the basis for the formation of the
aforementioned energy companies and for further
discussion of the topic of energy.

Other developments also took place within the two
previous reporting periods. The Pristina authorities
decided to build a road through the special protected
zone of the Visoki Decani monastery, built in the
fourteenth century and included on the UNESCO World
Heritage List, and sent bulldozers to its courtyard.
Someone wrote "ISIL" on the gates of the monastery.
That is the kind of conditions that the cultural heritage
of Serbs must endure in Kosovo and Metohija. I take
this opportunity to thank international representatives
who prevented such unfortunate action by their
timely intervention.

Attacks on Serbs and their property have occurred
once again, including against those en route to the
graveyards of their relatives, as well as against children
in a playground. Unlike the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/981), that of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Mission in
Kosovo registers 173 incidents involving members of
non-Albanian communities from January to June alone,
and says that the overall number of incidents rose by
almost 20 per cent compared to the previous six months.

These are only some of the incidents that threaten
security in Kosovo and Metohija and burden its
already complex situation. I have to admit that I do not
understand how this situation can be characterized as
stable by anybody. Perhaps a "stable situation" implies
that Serbs are fair game, that attacks on them are
normal, that they do and will occur, and that they do
not merit attention or response.

I would remind Council members that many of
these attacks are directed at IDPs and returnees. How
are we to expect even a modicum of progress to take
place in the process of IDP returns if, in the Europe
of the twenty-first century, we continue to recognize
that the security situation is still the biggest challenge
as the returnees continue to be targets of ethnically
motivated attacks? Arbitrary arrests - that is, arrests
of returnees on trumped-up charges - physical assaults
and injuries, the stoning of the faithful and assaults
on priests, the destruction of property, disturbing
graffiti, the desecration of memorial plaques, national
and religious hatred, the destruction of graveyards,
provocations, institutional discrimination, the absence
of the rule of law and an independent judiciary, drawn-
out procedures, inadequate protection of evidence
and witnesses, failure to enforce court decisions and
other injustices are among the obstacles encountered
these days by those attempting to return home. The
latest report of the Secretary-General fails to refer to
the approximately 200,000 IDPs who - according
to a report of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees - have waited 19 years
but still do not enjoy their rights because of these
unacceptable practices.

The assertions regarding stability are most
certainly undercut as well by the number of foreign
terrorist fighters from Kosovo, concerning which the
Secretary-General also expresses concern in his report.
Reports that one group planned to carry out terrorist
attacks in Serbian majority communities and on KFOR
are particularly alarming.

Another important and sensitive topic is the
question of sexual violence in conflict. Serbia
condemns most strongly such horrific acts of violence
and believes that all perpetrators must be punished
and that victims should be provided with appropriate
protection and help. The number of Victims of sexual
violence in conflict does not diminish the dreadful
effect of such Violence on each individual victim, just
as speculation about numbers does not help justice,
leads to politicization and slows down the process of
reconciliation in post-conflict societies.

The information contained in the report and based
on the data of the Commission for the Verification
and Recognition of Sexual Violence Victim Status in
Kosovo - according to which, out of 782 complaints,
only 137 have been accepted - is indicative of the
years-long practice by Pristina of presenting falsehoods
to the Security Council and continually invoking the
World Health Organization (WHO), even though that
agency does not possess any such data. I have submitted
requests to the WHO, which has confirmed that it does
not have any such information. At these meetings of
the Council, we have heard repeated allegations of the
existence of 20,000 victims of sexual Violence, on the
basis of which attempts have been made to establish a
hierarchy of Victims based on ethnic, religious or other
attachments. It is almost as if Serbian victims were
less important and that sexual violence against Serbian
nationals were justified and unpunishable.

In this atmosphere of the justification of crimes
against Serbs, it was possible for the so-called
Government of Kosovo to nominate Fatmir Limaj
as chief of the negotiating team in the dialogue with
Belgrade. As a commander in the Kosovo Liberation
Army, he raped and killed, according to the testimony of
Albanians themselves, the Mazreku brothers, witnesses
and accomplices to the crime, and a number of Serbian
women in the village of Klecka. That is the man
dispatched as head of the team to negotiate with Serbia.
I reiterate that Serbia believes that these issues must
be addressed without politicization and with respect for
each and every Victim, and of course with recourse to
the truth and the facts concerning all parties to the war.

On this occasion, I cannot fail to mention the letter
addressed to the Secretary-General by the departing
United States Ambassador to the United Nations,
urging him to initiate a strategic review of UNMIK
and to develop an exit strategy from Kosovo. We have
heard again and again at these meetings that UNMIK
has fulfilled its mandate and that it is no longer needed,
in light of the fact that the so-called Kosovo has built
democratic institutions and that the rule of law and
human rights are being respected. I must once again
put the following questions to all those who have made
these arguments.

Do they accept that democratic institutions do not
carry out the agreements and obligations they have
undertaken? The Brussels agreement was signed but has
not been implemented by Pristina. Do they believe that
democracy is served when tear-gas grenades are lobbed
in Parliament, as we have seen occur in Pristina for years
now? Is it evidence of the rule of law when, every now
and then, Pristina pardons criminals sentenced for the
most heinous criminal offences, including members of
the Drenica Group? Can the intimidation of returnees,
attacks on members of minority communities and daily
discrimination against them be accepted as a normal
state of affairs? Has the desired standard of respect
for human rights been achieved by the return of a
mere 1.9 per cent of IDPs? Is that a sufficient number
to warrant giving up on further returns? Does that
mean that the expulsion of 200,000 Serbs is done and
dusted? Are we supposed not to mention it any more?
Whatever happened to over 1,500 missing Serbs? We
keep hearing such insinuations from other parties, as if
Serbian victims were less important.

For some, this is an uncomfortable yet undeniable
truth. Almost everyone sitting at this table supports
the international presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
where the general situation cannot be compared to that
of Kosovo and Metohija and where we can all agree
that the security of citizens is not threatened. Why
is the international presence needed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina but not in Kosovo and Metohija? Why
have some Council members not raised the issue of
removing the international presence from Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as they have with respect to Kosovo? I
can agree that the situation in Kosovo is significantly
different than it was in 1999 or 2009, but the Mission is
also different from what it was at that time. To allege,
however, that the Mission is not needed and that it has
fulfilled its purpose is far from reality. Considering
that this organ is responsible for the UNMIK mandate,
I would like to ask on this occasion whether and what
the Secretary-General replied to Ambassador Haley.

Some Council members are of the View that
the status of Kosovo is a finished story; at the same
time, many think that it is not. Many States are
now reconsidering their decision to recognize the
unilaterally declared independence of Kosovo and,
to date, 10 States have changed that decision. They
have revoked their recognition or suspended it. They
realized that they had not been sufficiently informed
of the situation and thought that it was necessary to
give dialogue a chance and that everyone would respect
the outcome of the dialogue. That number could soon
rise significantly and the number of those that have
recognized the unilaterally declared independence of
Kosovo could fall below one half of the United Nations
membership. Decisions to withdraw such recognition
are condemned by Pristina and some States, while
Serbia's petitions are disqualified as provocations.
Conversely, for such States Pristina's lobbying for new
recognitions is a legitimate exercise, not a provocation.
For them, calls to disrespect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of a full-fledged State Member of
the United Nations heard from some countries - and
which I am sure we will hear at today's meeting, since
they always do so in my presence - will openly appeal
to other countries to recognize Kosovo. What does that
mean? They can lobby countries to recognize Kosovo,
whereas Serbia may not call on countries to withdraw
such recognition. It seems that something is very wrong
in that reasoning.

In desperation, last week Pristina increased its
tariffs on goods from Serbia by 10 per cent to punish
my country for how it was conducting its foreign policy.
It did so in breach of the rules and regulations of the
Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA),
which it currently chairs, and had such an action strongly
condemned by all international actors, including the
European Union. Serbia agreed for Kosovo to take part
in the regional initiative. Serbia was asked to do so, and
it did so, and now Kosovo is not respecting CEFTA,
which it chairs. It is interesting that even Hashim Thaci
himself disagrees with that decision of the Pristina
authorities. The policy is therefore not clear to me. We
have good and bad policemen in Kosovo.

Instead on dialogue, Pristina is focusing on attempts
to become a member ofinternational organizations in the
mistaken belief that it will thereby prove its statehood,
refusing to accept that such attempts are disruptive to
any solution whatsoever. However, the lack of grounds
for its applications and their inconsistency with the
basic principles of international law are conducive to
the politicization of those organizations, their division
and an unnecessary waste of energy.

In that connection, let me give one clear example:
the application of so-called Kosovo to become a
member of INTERPOL. The argument to which
Pristina often resorts is that it cannot cooperate with
INTERPOL because it is not a member. That falsehood
is exposed by the assertion in the Secretary-General's
report that we are considering today, which states that
UNMIK continues to ensure communication between
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in
Pristina and INTERPOL. Under the memorandum of
understanding between INTERPOL and UNMIK, such
cooperation has continued for more than 15 years. In
fact, Pristina's campaign, openly aided and abetted by
some States, whereby certain countries overtly take part
in lobbying and calling on other countries to recognize
Kosovo in international organizations and to vote for
it, seeks to present so-called Kosovo's membership
of INTERPOL as a matter of security and combating
crime. That is unsubstantiated and unacceptable. It
is quite obvious that there are political aspirations
involved. Pristina does not want to join INTERPOL
in order to combat crime but to present itself as an
independent country. On the other hand, that is why
we always say that every country should bear in mind
that such issues have an inherent status. They are not
specialist issues. Pristina did not bother to extradite
Giilen's supporters to Turkey within 24 hours. It did
not matter to it that it was not a member of INTERPOL.
We are talking about Kosovo's attempt to misuse that
organization to try and enter by the back door in order
to prejudge the outcome.

The circumstances may have made the thrust of
my statement sound sombre and negative. However,
I would like to conclude on a positive note. At the
recent Security Council open debate on strengthening
multilateralism, the observer of the European Union
pointed out, inter alia, that we have learned that
sustainable peace always requires a negotiated political
solution (see S/PV.8395). Among other matters, the
Security Council often discusses that and calls on other
countries to first reach a solution on external issues
and then for the rest of the countries to consider the
situation. As I recall, President Obama also called on
all countries not to recognize Palestine until it reached
an agreement with Israel. However, in the case of Serbia
many countries did the opposite. Serbia could not agree
more and earnestly seeks to achieve a compromise on
the question of Kosovo and Metohij a. We are committed
to finding a mutually acceptable solution. Such a
solution cannot be found without agreement between
Belgrade and Pristina, just as it is not possible without
the Security Council's support.

To that end, I once again call on the Security
Council to help that process and to use the momentum
to move forward. The divisions within the Security
Council on the issue and the discussions as to whether
we need UNMIK or not clearly do not help. The answer
as to whether we need Security Council meetings
and UNMIK will be found once we find a mutually
acceptable solution. Until then, we have resolution 1244
(1999), adopted by this organ, with which we all must
comply. For its part, Serbia will make the utmost effort
to continue the dialogue and to reach a lasting solution
that respects the interests of both the Serbian and the
Albanian peoples. Let us strive to seek a compromise
for the future, a lasting peace between Serbs and
Albanians, the prosperity of both Serbs and Albanians
and peace and stability in the entire region. Once that
happens, we will not need either UNMIK or Security
Council meetings on the issue.

In conclusion, we have recently been marking the
centenary of the end of the First World War, in which
Serbia fought on the side of the allies. Serbia paid for
the great victory with many casualties. According
to data from the Paris Peace Conference of 1919,
Serbia lost 1,247,435 people. That is 28 per cent of its
population and 62 per cent of its male population aged
between 18 and 55 years old. Of those killed, 845,000
were civilians. Almost every tenth victim of the First
World War was Serbian. To honour those Serbian
victims of the First World War, the former President of
the United States Woodrow Wilson took the decision to
fly the Serbian flag over the White House and all United
States national institutions on 28 June 1918. A similar
decision was only ever repeated once in the history of
the United States, when it decided to do the same with
the French flag some years later. That is why peace and
stability in the region are among Serbia's priorities: so
that the victims are never forgotten and to avoid another
war in the future.

