Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank the United Kingdom for convening
this debate on the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH). We also thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his report, (S/2012/ 128) and
his Special Representative, Mr. Fernandez, for his
briefing.

Azerbaijan commends the efforts undertaken by
the Government and people of Haiti to achieve stability
and sustainable growth in the country. MINUSTAH
and the United Nations country team have also played
an important role in supporting the recovery and
stability of Haiti.

At the same time, as we witnessed during the
recent visit of the Council to Haiti and as the report of
the Secretary-General makes clear, more should be
done by the national authorities and the international
community in the broader interests of the Haitian
people. Political stability in the country is a key
priority for the stabilization and development of Haiti.
It is important that all political leaders responsibly
approach and engage in constructive political dialogue
to address their differences in a spirit of compromise.
We encourage MINUSTAH to continue facilitating
political dialogue among the branches of Government
and other key political actors. As Haiti approaches its
elections, the United Nations should further support the
electoral process.

We note with satisfaction that the overall security
situation has been relatively stable in recent months
and that the politically motivated violence has
significantly diminished. However, the high crime rate
remains a matter of serious concern. Therefore, the
continued close cooperation between the Haitian
National Police and MINUSTAH is vital to effectively
addressing the security challenges and to ensuring that
the former move towards reaching the capacity
necessary to handle full responsibility for the provision
of internal security. It is also important that the Haitian
National Police not only react to criminal acts but also
undertake preventive measures, including through
public information and education programmes for
youth and vulnerable groups. The development of
border security is also critical to addressing the
challenges of organized criminality.

The humanitarian situation in Haiti has shown
improvement as the number of people living in tents
has declined. However, the country continues to face
significant challenges, with more than 1 million
Haitians remaining in camps and many others
continuing to lack access to housing and basic services.
Strong international engagement is crucial to ensuring
that all pressing humanitarian needs are met. At the
same time, external assistance and support do not
release the Haitian authorities from carrying out their
responsibilities in providing at least basic services,
housing and protection to those still displaced by the
earthquake.

We are confident that, against the background of
unprecedented international support, Haiti and its
people have an opportunity to make genuine progress
in rebuilding the nation, strengthening institutions and
promoting sustainable development.

