Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too are sorry that our draft resolution
(S/2018/ 175) was not adopted today, but at the moment
neither it nor the United States draft resolution
(S/2018/321) would have had any influence on the
investigation of the alleged incident in Douma. Right
now, that is not what they are about. There is no need
to mislead anybody by saying that, or that there were
intensive consultations on the American draft resolution
but not on ours, or that most of our amendments were
supposedly taken into account. Our colleagues will
now tell the press that we vetoed their resolution, while
modestly remaining silent about the fact that just as
with the draft resolutions on the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism, they also vetoed ours.

Yesterday, during the meeting on threats to
international peace and security (see S/PV.8225), there
was an emotional discussion of the event, or the alleged
event, in Douma on 7 April. Based on the results of the
inspection conducted by our specialists, we said that a
chemical attack could not be confirmed. Nonetheless,
we advocated for the speediest possible investigation
of all of the circumstances by the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
affirmed our willingness to facilitate its work on the
ground. The Government of Syria has sent the OPCW
an official request that such a mission be dispatched to
Douma as soon as possible.

Yesterday, the Swedish delegation put forward
a fairly constructive text for a corresponding draft
resolution. Unfortunately, their initiative was
undeveloped and was trampled down thanks to the
confrontational efforts of the United States and its
closest allies, which had decided to shift the focus away
from the issue of an investigation of what happened
on 7 April. That is understandable, because they
have already identified the guilty parties. As far as
they are concerned, the so-called regime, along with
Russia and Iran, is always to blame for everything. The
investigation does not interest them. Well, sometimes it
does, but only if it is based on so-called exclusive data
from the opposition's social networks.

For the hundredth time, I would like to ask the
same question yet again. Can someone here explain
clearly and plainly why Damascus needed this alleged
chemical attack in Douma in principle, especially since
practically all of the militias had evacuated Douma by
then? And the militias who were still being evacuated
on 8 April knew nothing about the alleged occurrence
of this chemical attack. I will answer my own question.
The provocation was desperately needed by the militias
who received that very timely support from the United
States and other Western countries.

We decided to develop the Swedish initiative, and
our draft resolution notes the Syrian Government's
invitation to the OPCW Fact-finding Mission to visit
the site of the alleged event without delay. It welcomes
the decision of the Director-General of the OPCW
Technical Secretariat to send the Mission to Syria
in order to conduct investigative work in line with
Chemical Weapons Convention standards. It takes into
account the guarantees of safe access provided by the
Syrian authorities and Russian military forces. Fifteen
days later, the Secretary-General would submit the first
report to the Security Council.

This is a strictly practical, non-confrontational
and depoliticized initiative in support of the OPCW,
which would help the specialists in this area determine
what did, or rather did not, take place in Douma. And
that is the priority now, not the draft resolution on a
United Nations independent investigative mechanism,
which was hastily submitted for a vote with the obvious
aim of seeing both draft resolutions vetoed. We hope
that Council members will give this initiative their
unanimous support so that the process can begin as
soon as possible. According to our information, two
expert groups from the OPCW Fact-finding Mission
should leave for Syria by the end of this week.

Whatever the excuse that may be given, if the
experts do not reach Douma because they have been
prevented by those who continue to speculate about
the chemical issue in order to smear Syria and Russia,
that will be yet another piece of evidence showing that
behind this thoroughly false story are dirty geopolitical
games and, what is worse, aggressive military plans
capable of reversing the positive trend in the resolution
of Syria's conflict and inflicting a painful blow on a
region already tormented by adventurist assaults. We
are witnessing all of that literally in real time.

We request that you put this draft resolution to a
vote, Mr. President.

