Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We associate ourselves with the words of
gratitude addressed to the Prime Minister of Somalia
for his important statement. We also listened closely
and with interest to the instructive briefing offered by
the Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. David
Stephen.

The Russian Federation has always supported the
speedy attainment in Somalia of national reconciliation
on the basis of respect for the territorial integrity of the
Somali State. The success of settlement in that country
depends on whether it will be possible to involve in
that process all the leading forces of society, including
those that boycotted the peace conference in Arta. The
Security Council must continue to support the efforts
being made in this area, including the efforts made by
the new Somali leadership.

We welcome the point made in the Secretary-
General's report regarding the willingness of the
transitional national Government of Somalia and a
number of groups to engage in dialogue without
preconditions, and we call upon those who have not yet
done so to follow their example. The priority of this
dialogue should be to reach agreement on halting
violence and securing due security in the field.

We agree with the circumspect approach
described by the Secretary-General about the question
of establishing a United Nations peace-building
mission in Somalia. We support the idea of dispatching
to Mogadishu an interagency mission to assess the
security situation there. The job of United Nations
Members at this stage is to provide favourable external
conditions for resolving the protracted conflict in
Somalia.

As members of the Security Council, we will
follow the situation closely to see that the territory of
Somalia is not used to undermine the peace process in
that country and to destabilize the situation in the Horn
of Africa as a whole. All countries must continue to
abide strictly by the arms embargo against Somalia. We
welcome the Secretary-General's intention to stimulate
an exchange of views within the United Nations
between the main external players in the Somali
settlement, and we are prepared to participate actively
in it.

With regard to the idea of setting up a Committee
of Friends of Somalia, in principle that idea merits
attention. We deem to be long overdue the need to
work out a uniform approach on the part of the
international community to provide support for the
peace process in Somalia. In this connection, we think
it is useful that that body should help resolve the
competition between the various peace initiatives on
Somalia. Accordingly, its composition, apart from
members of IGAD and the Partners Forum, should
include other interested players as well, including
Security Council members.

While we share the concern at the complex
humanitarian situation in a number of areas of Somalia,
we welcome the work done by United Nations
programmes that provide assistance to that people
wherever security conditions exist for that work. We
call upon the Somali parties actively to facilitate the
work of United Nations humanitarian personnel for the
good of their own people. As a member Security
Council member and by virtue of its longstanding
friendship with the people of Somalia, Russia will
continue to promote the restoration of its statehood on
terms that are in keeping with the interests of the
Somalis themselves and with security interests in the
region.

