Mr. Haekkerup: I would first of all like to
convey my thanks for the support expressed by the
members of the Security Council for the mission that
we are undertaking. I would like to address some of the
questions raised.

First, on the legal framework, a question was
raised by the Ambassador of Singapore about its being
step to independence. I think that we have been very
careful, in dealing with the legal framework, to make it
clear that it does not prejudice the final political
settlement. It is important for us that we stay within
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). This means
that questions that have to do with sovereignty and the
final political settlement should not be addressed. They
should simply be left out. The way we will do this is
that those powers that are associated with the
sovereignty question will be reserve powers of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General until a
final political settlement has been found. I think I can
confirm that this is not a step to independence. On the
other hand, I think it is a very important step that might
facilitate a final political settlement.

The question about returns of the internally
displaced persons - Kosovo Serbs now living in
Serbia proper - is a very important question. As
members know, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
United Nations are committed to the return of the
displaced persons. On the other hand, this cannot be
done on a larger scale until the security situation is
right. Our job is to try to move towards that situation.
A study on returns has been made and, actually, just to
return a few thousand would demand another 1,000
soldiers of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) to protect them.
As the security situation is today, they can be protected
only in enclaves under the protection of security forces,
which means KFOR. So there are very strong
limitations on the possibility of returns now. The real
job is to establish the preconditions for returns on a
large scale later.

When it comes to the question of elections, it has
been very important for us to underline that the cut-off
day - that means, the date when people have left
Kosovo - for the possibility of voting should be set at
1 January 1998. This means that a large number of
internally displaced persons in Serbia will be able to
participate in the elections. We are engaging right now
with the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia in trying to find a way to organize
registration and participation of the internally displaced
persons in the elections. We think that this is a very
important element and sends a strong signal that we see
their ability to return to Kosovo as a future goal.

I would especially thank the representative of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia for his words about our
cooperation. I think it is very important that there be
direct consultations between authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and UNMIK. I would also like
to join the members here who have deplored the
withdrawal of the Kosovo Serbs from participation in
the Working Group in saying that we would like to see
a resumption of their participation in the Group. I
would also like to say, however, that whether or not
that happens, it will not be decisive. We would consult
with the Yugoslav authorities on these questions in any
case. As has also been underlined, we have opened the
necessary channels to do that through the UNMIK
office in Belgrade. As members know, there is also a
representative of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in
Kosovo. This is the other channel, but certainly we
would also use direct channels and meet with the
representatives of the Yugoslav Government to make
sure that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is part of
this process.

There was a question about the final text, when
the Working Group finishes its work, and I would like
to stress again, as the Secretary-General has stated in
his report, that I will have to make the final decision if
there is not total agreement in the Working Group on
the legal framework.

It has also been underlined that setting the date
for the elections is important. The United States
underlined that point, and I agree. As soon as the legal
framework is in place, I think that I should make a
decision on the date of the elections. Doing so will be
important for the Kosovo Albanians. The idea of
elections is that they should have elected
representatives who can speak for them i of course,
within resolution 1244 (1999). But I think that it is
very important that we take that step.
I also believe that there is a certain paralysis in
the political climate in Kosovo, waiting for the
elections. I think that after the elections we might see
more movement in the positions of the representatives
of the Kosovo Albanians. So I think that there are good
reasons for pressing for the elections as soon as
possible, but first the legal framework must be in place,
because, as has been underlined by many members of
the Council, we have to have a precise definition of the
bodies that we are going to elect and the powers that
are associated with those bodies.

I will do my utmost to ensure that all minorities
and communities participate in the elections, and that
participation is as wide as possible. On the other hand,
I think that we have to say that even if some minorities
do not participate, we should go forward with the
elections anyway. But we will do our utmost to avoid
that situation. We think that everyone should be on
board, if possible.

Lastly, there was a question about the security
situation as a condition for the elections. Of course, the
security situation cannot be such that elections cannot
be held, but I do not think that will be the case. I really
see elections the other way around - that that will be a
precondition for a better security situation in future. I
think that it is important, therefore, that we move on
when we have the legal framework in place.

I should also like to say a few words about the
comments made on our cooperation with the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. I have already underlined the
fact that we want to open the channels. We stated up
front that we wanted the UNMIK office in Belgrade,
and we think that an arrangement has already been
found to establish it.

Concerning the status of the mission agreement
for UNMIK and KFOR, I do not think that this is an
actual question that we have to deal with.

However, I would like once again to support what
has already been said, especially by the United States,
regarding the fact that Kosovo Serb participation is
essential in the process that we are now starting. We
are appealing for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
do everything in its power to make sure that we
achieve this goal and to support participation, first, of
course, in developing the legal framework, but
afterwards to induce the Kosovo Serbs to register,
participate in the elections and take their seats in the
municipal assemblies and, of course, after the
elections, in the Kosovo assembly. I see this as a
process, and I think it is very important. Mitrovica was
mentioned by Jamaica. It is just one aspect of the
whole process, but I think it is very important that we
get this process moving, because many of the things we
wish to do are dependent on the small steps that we are
taking now to start the process. I am very much looking
forward to cooperating closely with the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia on getting that process moving,
because I think that it is a precondition for all of the
things we want to achieve.

On the amnesty law, several countries underlined
that they welcomed the steps that have already been
taken, but also emphasized that we have to move
further, making sure that the political prisoners are
returned to Kosovo. We are certainly ready to review
the case according to international standards, if that
could be part of a solution. But also, I think that the
return of the detainees is a precondition for moving on
a very important question that also has been underlined
by many countries here, namely the question of
missing persons. Here I think that both the Kosovo
Serbs and the Kosovo Albanians have a very strong
interest in finding out the truth, and that will not be
possible unless there is very close cooperation between
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and UNMIK.

There were comments on Presevo and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. I have to say that
since this is not in resolution 1244 (1999), it is not a
direct UNMIK responsibility. But I would, of course,
like to underline - as Colombia also said - that there
is a risk of spillover in these situations into Kosovo, as
there might be some links from Kosovo into Serbia
proper and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. Therefore I think that it is important that
we address these questions, and I would like to
underline that UNMIK and KFOR want to cooperate
closely in dealing with these issues. We also look
forward, as Ireland mentioned, to cooperation with
European Union monitors in finding a solution to this
question. I think that first and foremost it has to be a
political solution, but it should be backed up by power.
I think that is important for resolving this question, and
I can assure the Council that KFOR, as it has assured
me, will do its utmost to contribute to this process.

Concerning the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, it is the same as with Presevo. UNMIK and
KFOR are committed to trying to contribute to a
solution. We think that first and foremost it has to be a
political solution, but at the same time KFOR will have
the job of sealing off the border, to the extent possible.
KFOR is doing that, and should do that, in close
cooperation with the Government of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

It is also important for UNMIK to bring pressure
to bear on the Kosovo Albanian political leaders to
condemn the extremist actions in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. But I think it is very important
that, throughout Kosovo society, condemnation of the
extremists be widespread and strong. But for us it is
also a question of avoiding any sort of spillover of a
situation, also in the form of refugees, as was
mentioned as well. We are certainly prepared to try to
solve that part of the job. But first and foremost we
must avoid creating streams of refugees into Kosovo,
and we will certainly try to contribute to that.

I should like also to mention the border crossings,
because I think that it is very important to seal off the
border. For Kosovo, the border crossings at Blace and
the road to Tetevo are the lifeline for the economy.
This means that closing the border crossings really
does not hit any terrorists or extremist action, I think,
but has a very great impact on ordinary citizens and
people in Kosovo and their economic possibilities.
Therefore I would certainly appeal to the Government
of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to open
the two border crossings again.

I would also like to say a few words about crime
and law enforcement. The United States of America
underlined, as did other countries, including Colombia,
the need to address organized crime. It is very high on
our list of priorities. A special unit has been created to
gather the necessary intelligence on organized crime. I
do not think organized crime is particular to Kosovo,
actually. It is international and knows no borders. I am
sure that one of the lines of communication - of goods
and other things - goes through Kosovo, and it is very
important that we try to address that. I am very glad for
the support that we are getting in this respect. But I
also have to tell the Council that it should not expect
quick results because fighting organized crime, as some
of the members of the Council know, is a very complex
thing. Getting the right structures in place now will be
important to our chances in the future. Terrorism
certainly does not affect only Kosovo, but also the rest
of the Balkans and Europe.

I am also thankful to those countries supporting
the idea of additional international judges and
prosecutors.

A question was raised about weapons. I can
assure the Council that there are too many weapons in
Kosovo, and we are certainly trying to address that. I
think many of those weapons predate the conflict -
especially with regard to the anti-aircraft gun
mentioned by the representative of Jamaica that was
confiscated the other day. I do not think this involves
the weapons that have arrived lately. Nevertheless, we
certainly should address this.

There is a proliferation of small arms, not only in
Kosovo but in the region, and we should try to do our
utmost to stop it. We have therefore passed a regulation
on weapons and have started a system whereby people
will have to have weapon permits. We have included an
amnesty period, but when that period ends, people who
are actually found with weapons will be subject to very
severe sentences, especially if they have a considerable
number of weapons. Basically, I do not think that there
is any great trafficking in heavy weapons through
Kosovo, but with regard to small weapons, I think that
there is.

Colombia also had a question about strengthening
the law enforcement pillar. What we have really tried
to do is to get closer cooperation and better use of
resources. But we are also trying to specialize the
police and the judiciary and to fight more complicated
crimes, as I have already touched upon.

As the representative of Ukraine mentioned,
human trafficking is one of the areas in which we have
also passed a regulation. We have already had some
results in repatriating people.

I would also like to say a few words about the
Kosovo Albanians. I have already touched upon this. I
think the representative of the United States of
America used very strong words. This is important. I
have said it already, but I will repeat it to the leaders of
Kosovo Albanians: they have to come out clearly -
and I think they have done so - and get the message
through to their people that what we should do is to
isolate terrorism.

There was a question asked by, I believe, either
Colombia or Singapore about how many local Kosovo
Albanians support the extremists. I must say that I
think that number is very few. But the number is large
enough to make it possible for them to operate ~ and
that is a problem. We must arrive at a situation where
there the supporters are so few that Kosovo Albanians
will report on their activities and make sure that they
are stopped. I hope that the things that are happening
now will actually push things more in that direction
than they already are, simply because there is a
growing recognition that what is going on in the region
as such - those extremist actions - is certainly not in
the interests of Kosovo Albanians. There is a growing
recognition of that.

Singapore and Jamaica also raised the question of
reconciliation. I think that is one of the things that has
been missing. Clear statements about the criminal
activities that were committed in the past could lead to
reconciliation. I think this is one of the areas where we
should be working. As the representative of
Bangladesh mentioned, the question of missing persons
could be a very important step here because those
communities have a very strong interest in dealing with
this issue.

Finally, there was a question about a Security
Council visit to Kosovo. I would like to say that I
would welcome such a visit at an appropriate time. Of
course, we must look at the security situation. It is also
clear that such a visit should be helpful in addressing
the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). As the
Council knows, we must look at the situation. Right
now the security situation is difficult, and therefore the
dates and the itinerary should be carefully considered. I
think we should work on the possibility when the
situation allows it.

