Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to convey the sincere gratitude of
the Senegalese delegation to the Ukrainian presidency
for having taken the initiative to organize this important
debate on a topic of proven relevance. The briefings of
this morning made by Ms. Viotti, Mr. Stock, Mr. Rao
and Mr. Trelawny have given us a clear idea of the
issues under consideration, and I would like, on behalf
of the delegation of Senegal, to warmly thank and
congratulate them.

I recall that in September 2016 we held an open
debate concerning aviation security in the face of
terrorist attacks (see S/PV.7775). We also held two
Arria Formula meetings in November, one of which
was organized by Ukraine on the topic of critical
infrastructure. The other, on the issue of cybersecurity,
was co-organized by Senegal and Spain. Our discussion
this morning affords us an opportunity to continue our
strategic analysis of the ways and means to properly
identify and better prevent the risks linked to such
threats and, at the same time, to measure the reliability,
resilience and vulnerability of critical infrastructure
in the face of terrorist attacks that could lead to
incalculable catastrophe.
Because extremist groups have increasingly
targeted civilian infrastructure in their efforts to
maximize civilian casualties, such infrastructure
should be given priority in terms of surveillance and
protection in order to preserve the continued operation
of human communities and enterprises, while also
guaranteeing national security and public safety in
countries that are targeted or attacked. On that point
my delegation welcomes the unanimous adoption this
morning of resolution 2341 (2017), which constitutes,
without a doubt, an important step forward in the
international community's efforts in the face of such
emerging threats to international peace and security.

Given the interconnected nature of civilian
infrastructure, which only serves to heighten
its vulnerability, constant vigilance and
awareness - bearing in mind the specificities of the
geopolitical environment and context of each country
and region - is crucial. The delegation of Senegal
thinks that it is very important to establish and
strengthen public-private partnerships at the national,
regional and international levels with all stakeholders,
in terms of sharing information, experience and even
intelligence, as well as operational coordination, the
securing of supply lines and border control. I would
like to recall that Senegal has established a framework
for the exchange of sensitive information with other
States with a view to coping more effectively with the
emergence of new threats and attempts at illicit actions
using aircraft ortargeting airports or port infrastructure.

In the area of aviation, in accordance with the
provisions the relevant texts adopted by the International
Civil Aviation Organization, which stipulate that each
State is responsible for the effective implementation of
all safety measures aimed at protecting civil aviation
against illegal attacks, Senegal has for several years
implemented a broad programme aimed at enhancing
civil-aviation security in the country and in its airspace.
That policy has led the national assembly to adopt a new
civil aviation code through an act of4 May 2015 and to
establish aircraft regulations aimed at ensuring the full
implementation of security procedures and measures.

In the maritime and ports sphere, I wish to point out
that Senegal is a signatory to most of the international
instruments mentioned by the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General, including the Yaounde process, the
Djibouti Code of Conduct and the African Charter on
Maritime Security, Safety and Development, adopted
in October 2016 in Lome.
At the subregional level, a cooperation agreement
was signed on 24 March 2016 by the relevant Ministers
of Senegal, Mali, Cote d'Ivoire and Burkina Faso in
order to pool the efforts of those countries; strengthen
cooperative relations among their security services and
establish unity of action through the harmonization
of national counter-terrorism legislation and border
surveillance; and ensure the authenticity of travel
documents in accordance with regional agreements
concerning the movement of persons.

Over the past few years, West Africa has seen an
increase in terrorist attacks and criminal cyberattacks.
In that regard, I would mention the report of the United
Nations assessment mission on the impact of the Libyan
crisis on the Sahel region, carried out in December
2011 (see S/2012/42), in which the circulation of a
large number of weapons and ammunition in the
region was noted, in particular rocket launchers.
Such smuggled weapons constitute a real threat to the
security and stability of the Sahelo-Saharan region. It
is therefore essential to avoid having Africa become the
weak link in preventive efforts to protect and secure
critical infrastructure. On that point, the delegation of
Senegal welcomes and strongly supports the effective
implementation of paragraph 9 of the resolution that we
have just adopted.

Moreover, the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
which is already doing outstanding work through its
Executive Directorate in cooperation with the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force, should continue
to provide technical assistance to affected States in
order to help them strengthen their capacity to protect
critical infrastructure and vulnerable public spaces.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to point
out that, for the implementation of the resolution we
have just adopted to be effective, it must be consistent
with previously adopted Council resolutions in the
framework of the fight against terrorism, in particular
resolutions 2178 (2014), 2253 (2015) and 2322 (2016).
Hence, it should be part of a more comprehensive United
Nations global anti-terrorism strategy. My delegation
is also waiting with great interest for the presentation
in the coming 12 months by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee of a progress report on the implementation
of the important resolution just adopted.

