The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Timor-Leste, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Santos
(Timor-Leste), took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
announcement of the results of the presidential
elections in Timor-Leste, and congratulates
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta on his election as
President, and looks forward to working with the
new Government to help build a better future for
Timor-Leste.

"The Security Council congratulates the
Timorese people for demonstrating their strong
commitment to peace and democracy, and
commends the presidential candidates for the
peaceful manner in which they conducted their
campaigns. The Council pledges its continued
support for the Government and people of Timor-
Leste as they embark on another step aimed at
strengthening the foundations of democracy and
assume their rightful place in the community of
nations.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
over the still fragile and volatile security,
political, social and humanitarian situation in
Timor-Leste. The Council emphasizes the
importance of all parties continuing to work
together in a spirit of cooperation and
compromise in order to consolidate progress
made by Timor-Leste in recent years and to
enable the country to move to a peaceful and
more prosperous future.

"The Security Council expresses its sincere
appreciation for the central role played by the
National Commission on Elections (CNE) and the
Technical Secretariat for Electoral Administration
(STAE) in preparing and organizing the
presidential elections. It commends the Timorese
National Police (PNTL) and the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
Police, with the support of the international
security force, for providing security during the
electoral process.

"The Security Council commends the
invaluable support provided for the preparations
and holding of the elections by UNMIT and
regional and international partners. It also
expresses its appreciation for the role played by
domestic and international electoral observers
and encourages further such support for
parliamentary elections.

"The Security Council pays tribute to the
donor community for the assistance they have
provided to Timor-Leste and encourages the
international community as a whole to continue
to assist the country as it enters another stage in
the process of peace consolidation, reconstruction
and recovery.

"The Security Council calls upon the
Government of Timor-Leste to continue to
confront the challenges facing the country. It
underlines that while the manifestations of the
current challenges in Timor-Leste are political
and institutional in nature, poverty and its
associated deprivations also contributed to these
challenges.

"The Security Council calls upon all parties
in Timor-Leste to ensure that the upcoming
parliamentary elections scheduled for 30 June
2007 take place in a free, fair and peaceful
environment.
07-35563
"The Security Council expresses its
continued support for the work of UNMIT under
the leadership of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Atul Khare, and
encourages UNMIT, in accordance with its
mandate, to continue to cooperate and coordinate
with the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, as well as all relevant partners, to
support the Government of Timor-Leste."
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2007/l4.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.15 17.171.

