Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to welcome to New York and
to the Security Council His Excellency Mr. Tieman
Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of the Republic of Mali. His
presence among us today attests to the importance that
His Excellency President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita and
his Government accord to the support of the Security
Council and the international community to achieve the
goals of stabilizing and normalizing the situation in the
country. We ask Minister Coulibaly that he accept our
sincerest congratulations on his recent appointment at
the healm of Malian diplomacy.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea thanks the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for presenting to us the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/ 1105) on the current
situation in the Republic of Mali in a detailed and clear
manner - as is his custom. Today's briefing is taking
place 12 days following the briefing (see S/PV.8156) by
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel. Both that
briefing, in which Mali was referenced as part of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), and today's
on Mali specifically, are cause for serious concern.
We therefore call on all political stakeholders in Mali
to continue to capitalize on efforts by the members of
the Security Council, including the visit to the region
in late 2017, as well as the facilitation roles of Algeria
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

The Agreement Monitoring Committee designated
the Carter Center as an independent observer
responsible for overseeing the implementation of the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. In
resolution 2391 (2017), adopted on 8 December 2017,
the Security Council renewed its urgent call on the
parties to take concrete actions in connection with the
operationalization of interim authorities in northern
Mali, the establishment of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism in Kidal and Timbuktu, and to carry
out the launching of the cantonment, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, while also ensuring
women's participation.

Meanwhile, as we observe the lack of significant
progress with great concern in implementing the
Agreement, terrorist groups continue their ferocious
attacks against MINUSMA and the French and Malian
forces in the central, southern and northern parts of
Mali. As a consequence of those attacks, almost 100
members of MINUSMA have lost their lives since
2013. Given the situation, our delegation believes that
all measures needed to strengthen MINUSMA must be
taken so that it can fulfil its mandate effectively, while
also improving safety and security for its personnel.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea calls on all
the parties concerned and those signatory to the
Agreement, which was established two and a half years
ago, to make the effort necessary for its implementation
in a spirit of trust and with a shared vision of restoring
peace and security in Mali, as a prerequisite for facing
the challenges that the country will encounter in 2018,
namely, ensuring that progress is made in a critical
presidential election cycle scheduled for July and in
legislative elections scheduled for November, for which
a common political strategy will be needed, during
which the international community will have to provide
the necessary support for the Government of Mali to
achieve that goal.

In that regard, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
commends the work of the International Organization
of La Francophonie, which identified needs concerning
the elections with a view towards providing all the
necessary support, for which it dispatched the former
Prime Minister of Djibouti, Mr. Dileita Mohamed
Dileita, to Mali in November 2017 so that he could
define those areas for which La Francophonie could
provide support. We encourage La Francophonie to
pursue its work and raise awareness of other partners
so that they will join those efforts to ensure the support
needed for the holding of planned elections throughout
this year.

Notwithstanding the efforts aimed at supporting
our Malian partners, I reiterate how important it is that
the political will of all political actors prevail in putting
Mali first and implementing the Peace Agreement, as
well as taking advantage of all the support extended
to the country, including in combating terrorist groups,
establishing security throughout the country and
holding successful elections, which will begin a new
political chapter in the political life ofMali. MINUSMA
will play a key role during that new decisive phase in
order to ensure its successful completion.

