Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate on the issue of the Council's
working methods. I would also like to thank you for the
concept note you have circulated to inform our debate
(S/2012/853, annex). We trust that our deliberations will
make it possible to renew the commitment to continue
to move forward with improving the efficiency,
transparency and interactivity of the Security Council.
I would also like especially to thank the Permanent
Representative of Portugal for his statement and for
his work as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.

We acknowledge the progress that has been made
with regard to some of the Council's practices, as well
as in connection with improving new measures set out
in presidential note 507 (S/2010/507) and subsequent
such notes. In that regard, the progress made in the
Informal Working Group this year and the measures
that have been adopted to improve internal aspects
of the Council's work, including the establishment
of a new web page in the six official languages, are
all commendable. Nevertheless, we believe that there
is still room for improvement. In that connection, I
should like to highlight some practices that we believe
should be improved or more systematically carried out.
I should mention that I will be guided by the concept
note, insofar as I shall not revisit the great number of
items that we have discussed in the past - and will
continue to discuss - under the rubric of working
methods of the Council.

First, I should like to mention the importance that
we attach to the regular consideration of the items on the
Council's agenda. In that connection, I should like thank
the Secretariat for the broad perspective encompassed
by document published on 1 November on the mandates
and publication cycles of Security Council reports.
The practices of spacing the renewal of mandates,
grouping meetings by theme and streamlining requests
for reports are not only common sense; they have also
demonstrated their utility. That is a specific measure
that we support, as it benefits Council Presidents,
experts negotiating draft resolutions and the Secretariat
itself.

We trust that this exercise will continue to be
implemented in an orderly and well-planned fashion.
We believe that to that end greater account must be
taken of the work done by other bodies, such as the Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly, in considering
budget adoptions for peacekeeping operations.
Regarding requests for reports, we heard what the
Secretariat said about wanting more specific requests,
particularly with respect to the spacing, content and
scope of reports.

Presidential note 507 provides us with a number
of measures, including the possibility of reviewing
certain paragraphs in the light of the criteria that we
are continuing to elaborate in terms of spacing out
mandate renewals, grouping meetings by theme and
streamlining requests for reports.

Secondly, we would as a priority continue to improve
the interaction between the chairs of subsidiary bodies,
that is, Committees and informal working groups, with
all Member States. In particular, we deem necessary the
development of a mechanism for interaction with those
Member States that are to hold such chairmanships,
particularly those that are joining the Council for the
first time, so that they not only have the opportunity
to voice their preferences but are also enabled better to
prepare for their roles and work.

We support an informal process in which all Council
members participate that is efficient, transparent and
inclusive and that would facilitate the exchange of
information on the work done by subsidiary organs.
We believe that recently elected members must be
consulted immediately following their election. The
Informal Working Group is considering proposals to
that end, and we trust that it will be possible to approve
as soon as possible a President's note on that issue.

Thirdly, we wish to highlight the importance of
public meetings and the usefulness of open debates,
which promote greater participation of non-members of
the Council, with measures that include ensuring that
Member States are given enough time to prepare useful
contributions; increasing interactivity, by inviting
non-Council members to alternate their statements with
those of Council members; and promoting more focused
contributions, for instance through the preparation of
concept notes and, where possible, following up on
relevant contributions made by participants after the
holding of an open debate. In that respect, I would recall
that four open debates were held under the presidency
of Guatemala, in October.

My fourth and final point concerns the need for
closer cooperation between the Council on the one
hand and regional and subregional organizations on
the other with respect to the management of crises and
armed conflicts. It is important to increase the number
of Security Council consultations held with regional
and subregional organizations playing an active role in
crisis resolution and the settlement of armed conflicts,
such as the African Union and the League of Arab
States, especially when the Council is acting under
Chapter VII of the Charter. That would ensure greater
efficiency in the short, medium and long terms with
respect to finding lasting solutions to crises.

We deem it important to continue to be innovative
and to adopt other measures, with the necessary political
will on the part of Member States, particularly the
permanent members, in order to improve the working
methods of the Security Council. Transparency,
accountability and consistency are key elements
that must obtain for the Security Council in all of its
activities, approaches and procedures.

There is no doubt that improving the working
methods of the Council would contribute to
strengthening its capacity to maintain international
peace and security and to administer efficiently and
effectively its growing workload and the multiplicity
and complexity of the items on its agenda.

