Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Ambassador Quinlan
for his briefing covering the work undertaken during
the reporting period by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), which he chairs.
Given the extension of the mandate of the Panel of
Experts tasked with providing that subsidiary body
of the Security Council with qualified conclusions on
various aspects of the Iranian sanctions mechanism, we
wish to focus on two issues that we consider important.

First, all the experts' activities, including their data
and analysis, are confidential. They cannot automatically
be included in documents of the Committee that are
meant for broad distribution. Secondly, the conclusions
reached by the independent experts reflect only their
own viewpoints and are not decisions of the Committee.
In particular, they are not guidelines for action, at least
not until the Committee has been able to come to a clear
decision on them. We hope that this understanding of
our work will be retained in the future.

We consider it necessary to address individually
several important elements of the Chair's briefing.
First, while at our last time on this item (see S/PV.7211)
we discussed the incident of the interdiction in the Red
Sea of the closed vessel, we should like once again to
emphasize that we are not convinced by the experts'
allegations with respect to the direct involvement of
Iran in that incident. The accusations aimed at Tehran
are based on secondary, and not direct evidence. Even
if we could prove that there was a violation under
paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007), the nature of the
specific violation would not be clear.

Secondly, we agreed to retain in the last paragraph
of the report (S/2014/394) the issues highlighted by
our Western colleagues. We understand what they are
trying to say, but we do not share the concern that some
member States might interpret the decisions achieved
during the negotiation process on the settlement of the
Iranian nuclear programme as a signal of the weakening
of the Security Council sanctions regime towards Iran.

There is also another important aspect to the issue.
Some United Nations Members, wrongly interpreting
the Security Council agreed sanctions, have gone outside
that framework by instituting unilateral restrictions and
limitations that lack a basis in international law. They
are harming only themselves, creating complexities
that are impossible to resolve at the United Nations.
We also consider it important to note that, at the

current critical stage of the negotiating process on the
Iranian nuclear programme, any external activity of the
Committee - that is, acting outside of its mandate or
substituting real action with political statements of any
sort - is absolutely unacceptable. To us, this is not the
time for such behaviour.
We will do everything that falls to us to bring
the Iranian nuclear programme issue to a conclusion,
including lifting sanctions against Tehran pursuant to
resolutions of the Security Council. In that regard, we
welcome the holding of the next round of the negotiating
process, to take place from 18 to 26 September in New
York, and hope that it will reach a successful conclusion.

