Over the past years, the Governments of some States members of the Security Council have dealt with the humanitarian situation in my country with blatant selectivity. That selectivity has manifested itself, and continues to be manifested, in their politicized focus on certain areas to protect the remnants of the terrorist organizations that control them. That selectivity is also aimed at preventing the Syrian Arab Army and its allies from liberating them from terrorism. At the same time, those Governments deliberately overlooked the catastrophic humanitarian conditions experienced by Syrians in other areas occupied by the American and Turkish forces and the crimes committed by their tools of proxy separatist militias and terrorist organizations. I will be focusing in my statement today on the areas that were termed in the deliberations of the Council as areas located in north-eastern Syria and which have been dubbed by the United States Administration as areas east of the Euphrates. The suffering of those areas has not been limited to the afflictions resulting from the criminal practices of the terrorist organization the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, or to the results of the crimes of the illegal international coalition that wreaked havoc and devastation in the region and paved the way for the occupation and looting of Syria's resources, including oil, gas, antiquities and agricultural crops. Rather, the suffering of the Syrian people in those areas was exacerbated in quantity and quality as a result of the crimes of the American and Turkish occupation. Today, as has been the case for more than 20 days now, more than | million Syrian civilian in Hasakah city and its surrounding areas - in north-eastern Syria - are facing water deprivation and thirst as the Turkish regime continues to commit its crimes, using water as a weapon of war to punish the people of the city, including women, children and the elderly, because they refuse occupation and hold on to their country. With the blessing of the American Administration and its tools, the Turkish occupation forces and their proxies have cut off the pumping of drinking water from the Allouk station and the wells feeding it more than 16 times and for varying periods, the last of which extended for more than 20 days, which resulted in the suffering of our people in Hasakah. That city has so far continued to suffer from thirst due to the extreme climate conditions and the health threats associated with the spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic. On behalf of the Government of my country, I have addressed many relevant official letters to the Council and to His Excellency the Secretary-General. Unfortunately, we have not seen from the Council any concrete steps to stop these prescribed atrocities and gross violations. While we express our thanks and gratitude to the Secretary-General for his prompt response and his good offices to end the suffering of our people in Hasakah and to ensure that drinking water is re-pumped to them urgently, we condemn the failure of the Turkish regime and its tools to respond as promptly as required, and we deplore the positions of Mr. Lowcock, who is supposed to represent the human face of the United Nations. Mr. Lowcock, instead of condemning the crimes of the Turkish occupation in his briefings, has previously, before this very Council, thanked the Turkish regime for its facilitation in sending a technical team to repair the Allouk station, ignoring the fact that the Turkish regime bombed the station and attacked its workers, expelling them, as it launched what was called a "peace spring operation". He also ignored the fact that this station is a civilian facility that provides necessary drinking water to more than | million Syrian civilians and that bombing it or cutting off its water supply is a barbaric act, a war crime and a crime against humanity under international humanitarian law, including the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. That crime requires urgent action from the United Nations to put an end to this occupation and end the suffering of the people of Hasakah from water deprivation and thirst. I would have expected Mr. Lowcock to head a humanitarian demonstration in front of the Turkish Permanent Mission protesting the deprivation of the people of Hasakah city of drinking water. We have the right to ask: if Mr. Lowcock is biased and incapable of taking professional, objective and credible positions, why did the so-called humanitarian co-penholders in the Council not take action to hold meetings and adopt at least one presidential statement condemning Erdogan's targeting of the Allouk civilian water station and his use of water as a weapon to punish civilians? These self-proclaimed co-penholders and those behind them are clearly loyal to NATO and its aggressive policies, which show zero respect for international law, the Charter of the United Nations and human rights. That disrespect has been demonstrated on an ongoing basis, as no voices were raised when attacks by the American occupation forces caused severe damage to the Euphrates and Baath dams, energy and water plants and to the famous suspension bridge in Deir ez-Zor, in addition to other civilian facilities. Nor were their voices raised when, on 27 March 2017, the illegitimate coalition air force targeted a vehicle carrying a team of technicians supervising the Euphrates dam and volunteers from the Syrian Red Crescent as they were trying to reach the dam to repair the damage caused by the United States bombing and prevent its collapse. That sinful attack led to the death of Firas Al-Hussein, a Syrian citizen who was a humanitarian volunteer in the Syrian Red Crescent, while the rest of the team were injured. None of my Western colleagues in the Council at the time, nor at any other time - I do not have the time to enumerate them now - uttered a single word about the American air force targeting humanitarian workers. Two days ago, the so-called international coalition acknowledged its responsibility for killing 1,377 civilians during its hostilities, considering them as collateral damage. Of course, the numbers exceed this number exponentially, but the matter will pass unnoticed so long as Germany and Belgium are the two entrusted humanitarian co-penholders in the Council. Therefore, international law has become like the gentle lamb whose care is entrusted to a herd of wolves. Today Erdogan is committing these crimes in joint complicity to implement the Western project based on targeting and destroying civil and service structures and the institutions of the Syrian State. If the Council thinks that our words do not show the reality on the ground, we challenge it to prove the opposite and take steps to hold the countries that are occupying parts of my country accountable for their crimes against Syria and the region in general. The Syrian State and Syrian humanitarian organizations have honourably assumed their responsibilities in the face of the Turkish regime's crime of cutting off drinking water to the residents of Hasakah. Drinking water has been provided to our people there to the extent possible, but the needs exceed all expectations and capabilities owing to the Turkish and American occupation of the northern and eastern areas of Syria. Syria warns of the continuation or recurrence of this disaster and demands that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the European Union countries and leaders wake up from their irresponsible slumber and show respect for the moral and legal foundations on which this international Organization is based. In continuation of the policies of some Governments hostile to my country, on 24 August terrorist organizations blew up the gas pipeline feeding the Syrian electric power stations, causing a general blackout all over Syria. That terrorist attack, perpetrated by the terrorist groups supported by the American troops in the Al-Tanf occupied area, is merely a link in the chain of economic terrorism that has become the dominant title of the current phase. This economic terrorism is practiced by some Governments of the States Members of the Organization vis-a-vis my country by imposing unilateral coercive measures, including the so-called Caesar Act, and through the crimes that those Governments commit directly or through their tools of separatist militias and terrorist organizations to plunder oil, gas, antiquities, wheat and agricultural crops and destroy civilian facilities and infrastructure. All of those crimes aim to suffocate Syrian citizens and deprive them of their basic requirements of food, medicine, gas and electricity, obstructing the reconstruction process, preventing the return of the displaced and exerting greater pressure on the Syrian Government to make political concessions, especially since that terrorist bombing coincided with the commencement of the third round of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva. I would like to draw the Council's attention to a study published a few days ago by the Center for a New American Security, funded by the United States Government. This study is authored by Nicholas Heras, a researcher at the Center who has also worked with the Pentagon. It calls on Washington to weaponize wheat to starve civilians in Syria in order to reduce food supplies and pressure the Syrian Government and Russia to make political concessions that serve United States interests in the region. This twisted logic of using wheat as a weapon to punish civilians is akin to Erdogan's use of water as a weapon to punish civilians. Some of the Governments of Council Member States have slaughtered international humanitarian law in their policies towards my country just as they slaughtered its biological father - international law - before it. Nothing remains before the Council, except the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, which a number of Member States still uphold and defend. The question here is, does the Council want the provisions of our Charter to fail this test too? Finally, in response to what the United States representative has stated about the situation in Al-Hol camp, we stress the responsibility of the American Administration, its terrorist militias and some European Governments for the current situation in the camp. That is in view of the American occupation of that area and the refusal of some European Governments to repatriate their thousands of semi-human trash who were sent illegally to my country as terrorists without borders and their families. We have demanded this over and over. Separatist militias of the Syrian Democratic Forces, which are proxies of the American occupation, are trying to take advantage of the issue of inhabitants of Al-Hol camp to feign some sort of recognition, then concluding suspicious cheap deals and using them as political media blackmail.
