The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has agreed, in
consultation with the Secretary-General, to
temporarily relocate military and civilian staff of
the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea (UNMEE) from Eritrea to Ethiopia. The
Security Council intends to maintain an UNMEE
military presence in Eritrea during the period in
which it is reviewing future plans for UNMEE.

"The Security Council has approved this
decision solely in the interests of the safety and
security of UNMEE staff. The lack of
cooperation with UNMEE by the Eritrean
authorities has produced conditions on the ground
which prevent UNMEE implementing its mandate
satisfactorily.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
Eritrea's unacceptable actions and restrictions on
UNMEE, which have drastically reduced any
meaningful operational capacity for the mission
and will have, if they are sustained, implications
for UNMEE's future. The Security Council
recalls its demand, expressed in resolution 1640
(2005), that Eritrea reverse such restrictions and
provide UNMEE with the access, assistance,
support and protection required for the
performance of its duties.

"In this regard, the Security Council
intends, with the Secretariat, to review promptly
all options for UNMEE's deployment and
functions in the context of its original purpose,
capacity to act effectively and the different
military options available.

"The Security Council's View on the
fundamental issue of implementation of the
Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission's
delimitation decision remains unchanged and the
Council emphasizes the urgent need for progress
in implementation of the EEBC's decision."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2005/62.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda. The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.
