Ms. Nakamitsu: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council once again on the implementation of resolution
2118 (2013), on the elimination of the Syrian Arab
Republic's chemical-weapons programme.

I remain in regular contact with the Director-
General of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to discuss matters related

to this issue; I spoke to him last week. In addition, I met
with the Charge d'affaires of the Permanent Mission of
the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations this
past Friday.

At the time of my previous briefing, planning
was under way with regard to the destruction of the
remaining two stationary above-ground facilities of
the 27 declared by the Syrian Arab Republic. I am
informed that the OPCW, working with the United
Nations Office for Project Services, is currently at the
stage of finalizing a contract with a private company to
carry out the destruction, which I understand could be
completed within two months.

There have been some developments on the
issues related to Syria's initial declaration and
subsequent amendments. The translation and analysis
of documents that were provided to the OPCW by the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in November
have been completed. The OPCW has indicated that
this information provided clarifications on some
issues. However, the OPCW is continuing to follow
up with the Government of Syria on the remaining
gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies. The Director-
General will submit a report in that regard to the next
session of the OPCW Executive Council, which will
take place in March.

Further to its routine inspections in Syria, samples
taken by the OPCW team during its second inspection
at the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre
are currently being analysed by two OPCW-designated
laboratories. The Executive Council will be informed
of the results of the inspection via a separate note
from the Director-General to the next session of the
Executive Council.

The OPCW Fact-finding Mission continues to look
into all allegations of the use of chemical weapons in
Syria, the majority of which involve the use of toxic
chemicals, such a chlorine, in areas not under the
control of the Government. The Fact-finding Mission
expects to submit a report on the allegations very soon.
In addition, another Fact-finding Mission team has
been looking into allegations of the use of chemical
weapons brought to the attention of the OPCW by
the Government of Syria. At the time of our previous
briefing, a Fact-finding Mission team was in Damascus,
at the invitation of the Government, to look into several
of those allegations. I am informed that a report in that
regard is also pending.

There is still work to do before resolution 2118 (2013)
can be considered to have been fully implemented,
and for the international community to have shared
confidence that the chemical-weapons programme of
the Syrian Arab Republic has been fully eliminated.
Moreover, allegations of the use of chemical weapons in
Syria have continued, including just this past weekend
in the town of Saraqeb. That makes abundantly clear
our continuing and collective responsibility to ensure
that those responsible are held to account.

New reports by the Fact-finding Mission are
pending. Should they conclude that there has been the
use, or likely use, of chemical weapons in any of those
alleged incidents, our obligation to enact a meaningful
response will be further intensified. It is my hope, and
the hope of the Secretary-General, that such a response
will favour unity, not impunity. As always, the Office
for Disarmament Affairs stands ready to provide
whatever support and assistance it can.

