Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Patricia O'Brien for
her comprehensive briefing on the modalities for the
establishment of specialized Somali anti-piracy courts.

South Africa remains concerned about the
continuing incidence of piracy off the coast of Somalia.
To that end, we encourage States to take action
individually and collectively to punish acts of piracy in
conformity with the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea.

South Africa wishes to reiterate its view that the
threat of piracy off the coast of Somalia is but a
symptom of the internal political problems of
instability and conflict in that sister African country.
The threat of piracy can therefore only be resolved
through a comprehensive approach that seeks to bring
peace, stability and economic development to Somalia,
including through the provision of adequate resources
through the African Union Mission in Somalia. South
Africa is firm in its view that piracy has to be defeated
on land by comprehensively addressing all the social-
economic, political and security challenges the people
of Somalia face.

The reports of continuing illegal and unreported
fishing in the waters off Somalia remain a major
concern for us.

In addition, South Africa fully supports efforts to
promote the rule of law and to fight the incidence of
piracy off the coast of Somalia through the use of
specialized anti-piracy courts, including extraterritorial
courts. In our View, the establishment of a judicial
mechanism such as this should satisfy two important
requirements. First, it must be fully compatible with
the constitutional and legislative framework of
Somalia. Secondly, it must take into consideration the
Views of the Somali authorities in the regions where
the courts are established.

My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2011/360) on the
modalities for the establishment of specialized Somali
anti-piracy courts. We welcome the clarity that the
report provides for assessing the recommendations
contained in the report of the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Legal Issues Related to Piracy
off the Coast of Somalia (see S/2011/30, annex),
Mr. Jack Lang, on the establishment of the specialized
Somali courts to try suspected pirates in Somalia and
the region alike.

It is evident from the report that the establishment
of such courts inside Somalia or in the region will
require considerable financial resources and the
building the necessary judicial capacity, establishing
additional imprisonment infrastructure, addressing
security concerns and creating the necessary
constitutional and legal framework for facilitating the
work of such specialized courts. What needs to be
borne in mind is that the special courts are to be
national courts. Therefore, there should be no
disparities between piracy courts, jails in other courts
or jails for other crimes in terms of the facilities to be
established.

From the report, we observe the following major
challenges outlined in establishing specialized Somali
courts in Somalia. The first is the lack of adequate
criminal and procedural legislation to provide a sound
basis for piracy prosecutions in Somalia. Secondly,
neither the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) nor
the regions favour the participation of foreign nationals
in proceedings in judicial or prosecutorial posts.
Thirdly, the views expressed by the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia indicate that the current
political climate in the country may make it difficult to
pass the requisite legislation and amendments to the
Transitional Federal Charter.

Under those circumstances, my delegation
believes that is it important to take into consideration
the views of the TFG and the regions in establishing
such specialized courts. My delegation therefore
welcomes the assistance and capacity-building
provided by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to the TFG and regional
authorities in Somalia in strengthening their national
institutions in their anti-piracy efforts and in meeting
international standards.

We further welcome the ongoing training of
judicial officers and the construction and
re-establishment of court and prison facilities in
Somaliland and Puntland. That is particularly
important given the express View of the Somalis that
they do not wish foreign nationals to participate in
judicial proceedings or prosecutorial posts. According
to the report, the Somali authorities have expressed
their support for the ongoing work of UNDP and
UNODC in strengthening existing court structures in
Somaliland and Puntland. The Security Council must
consider those views in its deliberations on any future
action.

Concerning the establishment of an
extraterritorial Somali specialized anti-piracy court in
another State in the region, we note the opposition of
the TFG and regional authorities to the establishment
of such courts. We should consider the development of
a sustainable mechanism for resourcing national
jurisdictions that have demonstrated willingness to
arrest and prosecute pirates so as to enable them to
pursue their efforts to put an end to impunity for
piracy. This practice of catch-and-release has ensured
the exponential growth of piracy, and it must stop.

We continue to encourage States to criminalize
piracy in their national jurisdictions. In that regard, we
urge flag States to prosecute piracy.

