The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.

We are grateful for the information that Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy Haysom
have provided us at today's meeting. We recognize the
work that they are doing in a situation as difficult as the
one in South Sudan today.

Since the beginning of the year, we have been
examining the situation in South Sudan on almost
a monthly basis. Unfortunately, we have seen little
progress in the political arena and hardly any advances
in security and humanitarian situation, which remains
the same or has even worsened in various parts of
the country since last year. The revitalization of the
political process and fostering the full implementation
of the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan need to be our shared goals
and understood as the only solution to the conflict.

In that regard, as we have said on previous occasions,
we welcomed the announcement of the unilateral
cessation of hostilities made by President Salva Kiir
and the rollout of the national dialogue. Nevertheless,

it is clear that we need greater commitment from all
parties so that those initiatives can be successfully
implemented. We regret that, as the Secretary-General
states in his report (S/2017/505), hostilities have not
stopped, and confrontations continue in Upper Nile,
Greater Equatoria, Greater Bahr el-Ghazal, Jonglei and
Unity states.

We once again call on the Sudan People's Liberation
Army and Sudan People's Liberation Army in Opposition
to agree to the ceasefire, which would decrease tensions
and constructively pave the way towards dialogue.
The consequences of those confrontations have
corresponded to the increase in the humanitarian needs
ofthe millions of South Sudanese people who had to flee
their homes. Since 2013, 3.8 million South Sudanese
have had to leave their homes. As the Secretary-
General's report indicates, since the beginning of this
year alone, Uganda has hosted approximately 247,500
South Sudanese refugees. Those statistics are alarming,
and we require the commitment of all parties to ensure
that humanitarian aid arrives unhindered and ensure
the safety of humanitarian workers.

Against that troubling backdrop, regional cooperation
is vital for progress to be made in that regard.
Bolivia welcomes the communique of the thirty-first
Extraordinary Summit of the Assembly of Heads of State
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), which took place on 2 June and was attended by
the Commissioner of African Union Peace and Security
Council, the Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, representatives of the United Nations and
the representatives of the troika on South Sudan. We
concur with all the conclusions reached at that important
meeting, which, in our opinion, brought together the key
stakeholders interested in finding a solution to the conflict
in South Sudan. Accordingly, I would like to underscore
the following points contained in the communique, which
calls on President Salva Kiir to

"follow up the strict implementation ofthe ceasefire
and ensure that his field commanders respect the
ceasefire and take swift measure against those who
violate his decision.

"In this connection, the IGAD Summit urges the
armed opposition groups to reciprocate the call for
a ceasefire as well as to renounce Violence [while
emphasizing] that all armed opposition groups in
South Sudan also share full responsibility on the

humanitarian consequences of the conflict and
human rights violations occurring in South Sudan".

Furthermore the communique expresses

"concern on the obstacles facing humanitarian
agencies including killings of humanitarian
personnel and takes note ofthe progress made by the
Government to address the issue of access through
the establishment of the High-level Humanitarian
Oversight Committee, and the opening of the new
humanitarian corridors."

We especially welcome the convening of the High-
level Revitalization Forum to breathe new life into the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan. We hope that this will be an
important element in efforts to advance the effective
implementation of the peace agreement.

Concerning the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force, we welcome the meeting with the
Chiefs of Staff of the troop-contributing countries and
the representatives of the Government of South Sudan
to take up pending issues and set a definitive timetable
for a full deployment to coordinate with the work of
UNMISS. We are anxiously awaiting the outcome of
that meeting.

Lastly, we would like to underscore the work of
Special Representative David Shearer, Special Envoy
Haysom and UNMISS. We wish them every success in
their endeavours, and we offer them a full support and
backing as they pursue the action going forward.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.

