Mr. Vale de Almeida: It is my honour speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its 28 member States.

The candidate countries of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and
Albania; the country taking part in the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate
Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and the
Republic of Moldova and Armenia, align themselves
with this statement.

Let me first congratulate Ukraine on its current
presidency of the Security Council and to thank
Sweden for its excellent presidency last month. I would
like to commend Ukraine for organizing today's debate
and for this opportunity to speak about the protection
of critical infrastructure, a topic of major concern for
the European Union and its member States. I would
also like to stress the importance of working together
on this issue at the international level to ensure a high
degree of protection of our critical infrastructure and
to increase their resilience to terrorist attacks and
other disruptions.

The questions raised in the concept note (S/2017/104, annex) are very important.I would like to address them
briefly, one by one.

On the first question, about our tools, in Europe
we have in place the European Programme for Critical
Infrastructure Protection. In place since 2006, it sets
the overall framework for activities aimed at improving
the protection of critical infrastructure in the European
Union across all relevant sectors of economic activity.
The programme aims to respond not only to terrorist
threats, but also include man-made, technological threats
and natural disasters. In short, it seeks to provide an
all-hazards cross-sectoral approach. The programme is
supported by regular exchanges of information between
EU member States in the framework of the meetings of
the critical infrastructure protection contact points.

A key pillar of the programme is the 2008 European
critical infrastructures directive, which establishes a
procedure for identifying and designating European
critical infrastructures and a common approach for
assessing the need to improve their protection. Those
refer to critical infrastructure located in member States
whose disruption or destruction would have a significant
impact on at least two member States. It has a sectoral
scope and applies to the energy and transport sectors.

The directive furthermore requires owners and
operators of designated European critical infrastructures
to prepare operator security plans - advanced
business continuity plans - and nominate security
liaison officers, linking the owner/operator with the
national authority responsible for critical infrastructure
protection. The application of the directive is monitored
by contact points appointed from each EU member
State. The contact points group also engages with the
European Commission in international cooperation
outside of the EU - so far with United States of
America and Canada - but, this year, will also start to
engage with neighbouring countries in Eastern Europe
and the Balkans.

Reacting to new threat developments, in 2016
the EU adopted a joint framework to counter hybrid
threats, which also covers the matter of the protection of
critical infrastructure against hybrid and asymmetrical
threats, such as in the field of energy and transport. It
is designed to strengthen member States' resilience in
that area and foresees cooperation with EU partners in
countering such threats.

With regard to the second question, on methods
to promote improved responsiveness to terrorist
attacks and the resilience of critical infrastructure, the
European Commission has funded over 120 different
projects under the Prevention, Preparedness and
Consequence Management of Terrorism and other
Security-related Risks Programme between 2007 and
2013. That programme was designed to protect citizens
and critical infrastructures from terrorist attacks
and other security incidents by fostering prevention
and preparedness, improving the protection of such
infrastructure and addressing crisis management. A
key objective was to provide expert knowledge and the
scientific basis for better understanding criticalities
and interdependencies. The increase in cyberthreats
also led the EU to adopt legislation on the security of
network and information systems in July 2016.

As for the third point, on how to strengthen the
capacity of both the public and private sectors to prevent
attacks and react to threats to critical infrastructure,
training sessions and exercises have been very useful
tools, which the European Union has encouraged
and engaged in. A good example is the VITEX 2016
exercise, which was designed and coordinated by
the Dutch presidency of the European Union. It was
the first EU-wide exercise focusing on the effects of
large-scale failure of critical infrastructure - in this
case electricity - across Europe. The VITEX 2016
exercise resulted in an exercise guide with an exercise
design, which describes step-by-step how such an
exercise can be organized. This guide is available to
everyone in order to encourage possible follow-up
exercises in the future.

Addressing the fourth point on mechanisms and
platforms for cooperation, I want to point to the vital
importance of regular exchanges of information and
best practices. The European Commission has for such
purposes developed the Critical Infrastructure Warning
Information Network, which is an Internet-based,
multi-level system for exchanging critical infrastructure
protection ideas, studies and good practices among
Member States and key stakeholders. This portal,
which has been operational since mid-January 2013,
also seeks to raise awareness and contribute to the
protection of critical infrastructure in Europe.

As for my last point - the role of the United
Nations and its agencies in this work - there is
certainly a potential for further cooperation as the
security and protection of critical infrastructure are a
concern we all face, as is the fight against terrorism.
The European Union would be interested in cooperating
internationally, with partners beyond its border, in the
area of protection of critical infrastructure against this
common threat. We are already engaged in various
forums, such as the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Council of Europe, but
would also welcome United Nations initiatives in this
field, and we stand ready to explore possibilities for
such cooperation.

