Mr. Allagany (Saudi Arabia) (interpretation from Arabic): I am pleased to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. We are confident that your wisdom and
efficiency will lead the Council to success.

Saudi Arabia is following attentively the development
of the peace process in the Middle East. We cannot fail to
express our deep concern at the events the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Al-Quds al-Sharif, and the
Lebanese Republic are going through.

In recent weeks, Israel, the occupying Power, has
continued to take very harsh measures against the
Palestinian people in the Palestinian territories. These
measures have included the confiscation of land, the
expansion of settlements, the imposition of extremely harsh
restrictions on movement, and a full siege and strangulation
of the Palestinian people.

Israel justifies all these measures by its commitment
to establish safe passages between Gaza and Jericho, and
between Gaza and the West Bank, during, respectively,
the first and second phases of the implementation of the
agreements between the two parties. The Israeli policy
currently being implemented, which is unprecedented
since the 1967 occupation, has made life unbearable and
has paralysed daily life on absolutely every level.
In talking of the elements of the peace process and
ensuring its success, we are inevitably led to reaffirm that
the international community must commit itself to finding
a permanent, just and comprehensive settlement for
Palestine.

The closure of the borders of the West Bank and
Gaza with Jordan and Egypt, including the prohibition of
the movement of people and of goods that are imported
legally by Palestinian merchants, the severing of links
between the Palestinian territories and the outside world,
and the imposition of actual isolation on Palestine all
contravene agreements that have been concluded and have
nothing to do with the concept of peacemaking.

Saudi Arabia, which has supported the peace process
since it was launched in Madrid in 1991, is in full
solidarity with its Arab brothers. This Israeli siege of the
Palestinian people through closure and blockade is
tantamount to a declaration of war on the Palestinian
people, who have opted for peace.

Peace today is not only a Palestinian demand; it has
become an international and Arab demand as well.

The question of Al-Quds al-Sharif is at the core of
the Israeli-Arab conflict. Therefore, no permanent peace
in the Middle East can be achieved without a just solution
to this question: a solution which takes into account
internationally binding resolutions, particularly Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), which stipulates the
withdrawal of Israel from the territories that were
occupied in 1967, and 252 (1968), relating to Al-Quds
al-Sharif. Israel should undertake not to impose any
demographic change that could alter the status of
Jerusalem or affect the forthcoming negotiations on its
final status. Al-Quds al-Sharif is the first of the two holy
qiblas and the third holy shrine for all the world's
Muslims; there can be no peace until all their rights with
respect to the Holy City are restored.

We expect the sponsors of the peace process - the
United States of America and the Russian Federation -

 

to ensure that the Israeli Government honours its
commitments, and to desist from putting obstacles in the
way of peace, particularly in view of the early progress in
the peace process. We cannot forget that progress in the
peace process always coincides with recognition of the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. Now we can see
the results of ignoring those rights.

Tangible progress must be made in negotiations on the
Lebanese and Syrian tracks. By increasing its representation
in bilateral negotiations, and thus proving its seriousness,
Syria has gone a very long way towards creating an
atmosphere conducive to reaching a settlement in its dispute
with Israel.

As far as the Lebanese track is concerned, what we
see today in the constant bombardment of Lebanese villages
is a flagrant breach of Lebanese sovereignty and of Security
Council resolution 425 (1978), which clearly stipulates that
Israeli forces must withdraw unconditionally and
immediately from Lebanese territory.

The question of Palestine is not confined to the early
transfer of authority from Israeli military and civil
authorities to the Palestinian Authority. The essence of the
question of Palestine includes the return of displaced
persons and refugees to their homeland; the removal from
Palestinian territory of Israeli settlements - which now
number 152, of which 124 are in the West Bank and 28 in
the Gaza Strip; the return of East Jerusalem to Arab
sovereignty; and the ability of the Palestinian people to
exercise full sovereignty over its land.

Our question today is whether the human conscience
will be awakened and whether the leaders of Israel will
learn from the wisdom of history that peace is necessary for
them and for others. They could do this by seriously and
faithfully demonstrating their intention to find a
comprehensive and just solution that would ensure the
withdrawal of Israel from all the Palestinian and Arab-
occupied lands - including Al-Quds al-Sharif - in
accordance with legal international resolutions, and by
understanding the meaning of peaceful coexistence based on
a balance of interests between rivals, so that the Middle
East can enjoy peace, prosperity and stability.

