Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): Let
me start by echoing that last remark. I think that Mali
has done a terrific job this month, Mr. President, as you
come to the end of your tenure. We would like to thank
you for that and for your very sensitive approach to
Security Council matters with a definite African
viewpoint, which has been valuable to us, and the
viewpoint of a smaller delegation. I think your whole
delegation deserves huge praise for the work that it has
done over two years to lead us on a number of issues of
great importance to the Council and give us a very
particular perspective.

I am delighted that we are listening to the views
in detail of those non-permanent members that are
leaving the Council. I think it is extraordinarily
valuable to us, and I am glad that these remarks are
going into the record. I will not try to cover everything
that has affected the United Kingdom's experience
because that would not be popular, but I do want to
make a few remarks about certain aspects of our work.

The United Kingdom is extremely pleased that
we do so much of our work on Africa because Africa is
a continent that needs more help from the United
Nations than any other and needs to benefit more from
modernized, improved and developed procedures from
within the United Nations, including from within the
Security Council, than any other continent. The
integration of our approach matters to Africa because
the integration of its problems is deep and significant.
We have to match the problems with the attempted
solutions.

I think that over the last couple of years we have
become more operational. We have become more
insistent that our resolutions should be implemented.
But I think we have to take account of quite a deep fact
about United Nations work, including the work of the
Security Council: because of the need to create
consensus and because of the need to deal with ranges
of problems that interact with each other, the results
that we create in the Security Council or in the United
Nations family as a whole are cumulative and are slow.

Sometimes, because of the modern world's
tendency to focus on tomorrow's headlines - and our
politicians are not exempt from that - we forget that
the United Nations does its great work through
accumulation of the professionalism and often the
courage on the ground of a large number of people. I
feel very strongly that the Nobel Peace Prize was
deserved certainly by the Secretary-General, but also
by that part of the United Nations system that actually
risks lives, health and careers on the ground. Those are
the people who deserve the Nobel Peace Prize. I am not
sure that the intergovernmental system would have got
there on its own. However, that means we have to be
conscious of that cumulative effect and take advantage
of achieving what we can achieve, at the time, on each
item that comes before us, and have a sense of the flow
of events building up. That is why it is very important
that we increase the transparency of our work.

But we have hit a problem here - the interplay
between transparency as it happens in open meetings
and our inability to have a proper interactive discussion
with non-member States. Only a certain number of
non-members will come to listen to us talk among
ourselves. Yet, when we have open debates to which
they are asked to contribute, they read statements of
position. We have not solved that conundrum. It does
require more work, but we are beginning to tease it out;
we know What we want without being able to get there.
I listened very carefully to what Ambassador
Valdivieso had to say on that point, and I agree with
him.

The one subject on which we have not yet begun
to take the cumulative approach is clearly the Middle
East peace process, and the Council suffers from that.
Any other subject on which we tried to reach base with
one jump would also suffer from stalemate,
inoperability and unachievability.

The discussion we had with the Secretary-General
the other day at lunch indicates a very interesting
alternative approach to the Middle East peace process
dilemma that we face: to treat it more often as an
operational subject than as a subject for political
statement, hearing those who should properly be heard
on the question, discussing it with them and having
more frequent briefings from the Secretary-General and
his team. That would make a much better inroad into
such a difficult subject than the occasional dramas that
do not get us anywhere. Let us think about that further.

I also hope that as we discuss our own
procedures, we bring the Secretariat with us. The
Secretariat does the Council a tremendous service; it
works miracles on procedures and interpretation. Our
interpreters are our lifeline to each other. Yet, in terms
of taking a procedural approach which produces the
answers we want, sometimes the Secretariat is more
conservative than any of us. So the Secretariat needs to
come along in these discussions, as well as the 15, 30
or 90 members of the Council past and present whom
we talk to, and it would be nice if, in a discussion like
this, the Under-Secretary-General and the Assistant
Secretary-General could join Joseph and be with us to
discuss the Secretariat's viewpoint.

I hope that we continue with our lunches with
previous members of the Council. It's probably not
possible to have a decent discussion with more than 30
people, so we will have a rolling membership.
However, I do think that the lunches are valuable, and I
am glad that people are enthusiastic about that.

I would like to make a couple of small points
about recent procedures before Ambassador
Mahbubani gets to the microphone. I am perfectly
content with the procedures that we have for the list of
speakers, because everybody seems to be happy with
them, and that is more important than anything else.
However, perhaps the Secretariat could do the lottery
earlier - at least two working days beforehand, not the
same day. A lottery is a lottery; it does not matter when
you do it. Then we would know how to shape our
interventions according to the placement and the order.
If there is to be a lead nation, perhaps we could at least
discuss the criteria for choosing that lead nation, so we
do not have a new "Mahbubani round" on that
particular issue.

Reform is quite important in all of this, and the
United Kingdom is a strong proponent of Security
Council enlargement. I do not quite accept Ambassador
Kuchinsky's statement that the five permanent
members are feeling the heat on this question. I think it
is in the interests of the five permanent members that
there should be reform 4 certainly reform of the
nature of our work and the way we go about it. It is in
our interests to have the political legitimacy of the
Council extended, now that it is quite clear that we are
one of the few parts of the inter-governmental system
that are actually capable of taking ongoing operational
decisions. Therefore, making the environment for our
decision-making more effective is an extremely
important part of our business. Otherwise, we are all
wasting our time. So let us continue these discussions.

Thank you, Mr. President, for making this
discussion possible, and thanks to those who have
spoken thus far for making it so interesting. Let us
continue developing so that we can meet the problems
that are brought before us.

