Mr. Celem (Turkey): At the outset, my delegation
would like to commend the Costa Rican presidency and the
Security Council for scheduling an open debate on this very
important subject at this crucial stage. We expressed our
views in depth on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the General Assembly in the debate under
agenda item 47 three days ago. Therefore, I will be brief.

It is noteworthy that considerable progress has been
made in implementing peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina since the signing of the Dayton/Paris Peace
Agreement. The fact is that, since the signing of the
Peace Agreement, considerable progress has been
achieved in the military field. Nonetheless. lack of
compliance on some crucial civilian aspects of the
Agreement indicates that the task undertaken by the
international community is far from complete. As
accurately reflected, most recently in the conclusions of
the Bonn Peace Implementation Conference of 9 and 10
December 1997, the fragility of the situation in the
country compels us to maintain a stable security
environment. The Secretary-General's reports of 8
September and 10 December 1997 and the latest report of
the High Representative for the implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina all point to
the fact that the peace process has not yet become
irreversible.

In this respect, I would like to reaffirm Turkey's full
support for the General Framework Agreement for Peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the annexes thereto. They
constitute the basis for the establishment of a durable and
just peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In order to heal the
wounds of the war and to attain lasting peace, it is
incumbent upon the international community to exert
every effort to help Bosnia and Herzegovina in its
arduous endeavour for reconciliation and reintegration.
Turkey, along with other States, is actively participating
in the implementation of both the military and civilian
aspects of the Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement and is
ready, on its part, to continue doing so.

With its resolution 52/150, the General Assembly
recently reiterated its full commitment to the stabilization
and consolidation of peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and reconciliation among its constituent peoples. We
welcome this unanimous decision reaffirming its concern
about non-compliance with the peace agreement and
demonstrating its willingness to take the necessary
measures in its power to obtain full implementation. For
this purpose, it is essential that all the conditions
envisaged by the Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement - inter
alia, cooperation with the International Tribunal, the
return of refugees and displaced persons to their homes

 

and the establishment of common institutions - materialize
without delay.

It is not possible to overstate the importance of the
work of the International Tribunal for the process of
reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Turkey supports
fully the efforts of the International Tribunal aimed at the
prosecution of persons responsible for serious violations of
international humanitarian law committed in the territory of
the former Yugoslavia since 1991 and believes that States
and parties to the Peace Agreement must meet their
obligations to cooperate with the Tribunal.

The conclusions of the Peace Implementation
Conference on Bosnia and Herzegovina held in Bonn drew
particular attention to the failure of the authorities of the
Republika Srpska entity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to
carry out their obligations. It is the duty of the international
community to exert the necessary pressure on the parties
which do not live up to their legal obligations of
cooperating with the Tribunal. At this juncture, it is
important to recall that, under the Dayton Accord, the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) is
responsible for the Serbian entity's cooperation and
compliance, as well as its own.

Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), the Sintra
Political Declaration of the Ministerial Meeting of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council and,
just recently, the Bonn Peace Implementation Conference
all confirmed that international economic aid is conditional
upon compliance with and implementation of the Peace
Agreement. In this regard, we would like to stress the need
for timely information about the level of cooperation and
compliance so that necessary assessments can be made.

Turkey welcomes the positive steps taken towards a
normalization of relations between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. However, there is ample room for progress in
this respect. Therefore, we call upon the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to fulfil
immediately the requirement of establishing full and
unconditional diplomatic relations with Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We believe that such a development will
provide the necessary tool to remove some of the existing
hurdles on the road to normalization.

Turkey also welcomes the successful conclusion of the
local elections of 13 and 14 September 1997. We expect
full and unconditional implementation of the election
results. Any attempt not to implement them will hamper
the delicate process underway.

Economic revitalization is essential for the process
of reconciliation, the improvement of living conditions
and the maintenance of durable peace, both in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in the region. However, we are
dismayed that the package of essential legislation
establishing the common institutions of economic
management has not been implemented in full; nor has
the State-level legislation specified in the Sintra
Declaration been adopted. We hope that necessary steps
will be taken immediately, so that Bosnia and
Herzegovina can have an economic policy framework
which would allow it to start taking advantage of the
multilateral economic assistance already available. As
urged by the Organization of the Islamic Conference
Contact Group on 7 December 1997, the international
community must disburse expeditiously the funds pledged
for the rehabilitation and reconstruction programme of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The Implementation Force (IFOR) has played a
crucial role in preserving peace and order and in ensuring
progress on the peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Turkey believes that the Stabilization Force (SFOR), as
the successor to IFOR, has been indispensable for the
maintenance of a stable security environment essential for
deterring or, if necessary, halting a resumption of
hostilities. We welcome the emerging consensus on the
need for a military presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina
to continue beyond June 1998. As pointed out by the
Secretary-General in his last report,

"Much has been achieved, but much also remains to
be done." [S/1997/966, para. 45]

At this volatile stage of the peace process, it is
essential that the international community continue to
exert itself persistently in order to achieve a lasting peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

