I would like to thank Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special Representative of the Secretary-General; Ambassador Dian Triansyah Djani, Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011); and Ms. Shkula Zadran for their statements. Viet Nam commends their efforts and reiterates its support for the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in this challenging time of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I also warmly welcome Ambassador Adela Raz, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, and Ambassador Majid Ravanchi, Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, to this meeting. The year 2020 marks the beginning of the historic intra-Afghan peace negotiations, which open a pathway for the pursuit of long-term peace and stability in the country. I would like to reaffirm Viet Nam's support for the Afghan- led and Afghan-owned inclusive peace process and the full implementation of resolution 2513 (2020). We are pleased that the Afghan parties agreed on 2 December to a code of conduct that will act as guidance for negotiations on specific issues. We commend the consistent efforts of the Government of Afghanistan in promoting the peace process, including its commitment to ensuring the participation of women and youth in that process. While significant progress has been made, sustainable peace and development are still far from being guaranteed. We are concerned about the recent increase in the level of violence and of civilian casualties, including among women and children. We strongly condemn the ongoing attacks on civilians and civilian objects. It is tragic to hear about the loss of the lives of young students, health-care workers and journalists in the past few weeks. Furthermore, the Government and the people of Afghanistan continue to face tremendous challenges in the socioeconomic sphere. In the light of recent developments, I wish to make the following three points. First, we call on the Afghan parties to find a common understanding in order to achieve a permanent ceasefire, thereby putting an end to the ongoing violence. The intra-Afghan peace negotiations require a stable and conducive environment in order to succeed and achieve a lasting political solution. The continued support of the United Nations, UNAMA, the countries of the region and other international partners will be crucial to maintaining the momentum of the peace talks. We also welcome and encourage further efforts to facilitate the meaningful participation of women and youth in the peace process and the reconstruction of the country. The bright younger generation of Afghanistan, such as Ms. Zadran, represents the hope and future of the nation. Secondly, we once again urge all parties to fully respect international humanitarian law, immediately stop targeting civilians and civilian objects and allow unhindered access to humanitarian services in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Strengthened efforts are also needed to combat the increasing presence of terrorist groups in the country. We also commend the efforts of UNAMA and the United Nations Mine Action Service in addressing the humanitarian challenges in Afghanistan in past months. Thirdly, long-term peace and stability also require robust development and sustainable livelihoods for the people. In that regard, the Government and international partners should continue to work together in promoting economic development and the reconstruction of Afghanistan, as well as in addressing pressing issues such as food insecurity, the COVID-19 pandemic, climate change, crime and drug trafficking. We are concerned that 11.15 million people, more than one third of the country's population, are facing high levels of food insecurity. That number could rise to 13.15 million during the winter period of December 2020 to March 2021. We welcome the successful outcome of the 2020 Afghanistan Conference held in Geneva last month, at which international partners pledged more than $12 billion in aid for the country in the next four years. We call on the international community to continue to strengthen its humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan in that regard to ensure its projected needs. Before concluding, I would like to express our appreciation to Indonesia and Germany, the co-penholders on Afghanistan, for their tireless efforts during the past two years. I also congratulate Ambassador Djani on his successful chairmanship of the 1988 Committee.
