Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We are pleased to see you here in the
Chamber again, Madam President, and we would like
to thank the Netherlands for convening today's meeting
on such an important subject. I would also like to
thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. David Beasley,
Executive Director of the World Food Programme, for
their thorough briefings on the relationship between
conflict and hunger around the world, as well as the
ongoing efforts to alleviate the suffering that those two
terrible problems inflict on their Victims.

Armed conflicts are one of the main obstacles to
the realization of the right to adequate nourishment
in many parts of the world, since they often interrupt
the various stages of the production, harvesting and
distribution of food. In Africa, where the livelihoods
of 60 per cent of the population depend on agriculture,
conflicts can have a disastrous effect on their countries'
economies and plans for sustainable development.
Equatorial Guinea is deeply concerned about the
increasing exploitation of hunger in armed conflict.
It is a deplorable fact that in the twenty-first century,
11 per cent of the world's population - 815 million
people - are suffering from hunger or starvation, and
that more than half ofthose people - 489 million - are
living in situations of armed conflict. And of all them,
243 million are African and represent 20 per cent of the
continent's total population.

Through the implementation of our Horizon
2020 national plan, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and Agenda 2063 of the African Union,
my Government is continuing to work to achieve the
total eradication of hunger in Equatorial Guinea and
Africa as a whole. Our brother countries are making
similar efforts. However, one of the challenges in our
subregion is in helping to reach a peaceful settlement
of the conflicts in two of those brother countries, the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, where some 7 million people are affected,
many of them displaced and exposed to hunger. That
situation is complicated by the porous borders between
our countries and the presence of terrorist organizations
and armed rebel groups that exploit this vulnerability
for illegal purposes.

Despite the progress that African countries have
made to achieve the Millennium Development Goals
and preserve peace, there are 215 million hungry
people in Africa, where eight of the 15 United Nations
peacekeeping missions are also located. Although
there are fewer conflicts between countries globally,
the numbers of internal conflicts are growing and
are exacerbated by the presence and intervention of
terrorist and extremist groups. Exploiting hunger and
access to food and humanitarian aid as weapons of war
in these situations is deplorable and Equatorial Guinea
vehemently condemns such practices.

While conflicts are determining factors in 10 of the
13 worst food security crises in the world, they are not
necessarily the cause of such crises, or the only one.
Conflicts themselves also result from poverty and a lack
of access to basic needs such as food, from the lack of
opportunities that enable countries to achieve equitable
economic growth and sustainable development in areas
such as the industrialization of the agricultural sector,
which supports two thirds of Africa's population, a
lack of access to markets, and abnormal climatic events
such as El Nifio. For those reasons, Equatorial Guinea
encourages the international community to consolidate
its efforts to ensure the sustainable financing of the
zero-hunger Sustainable Development Goal, the
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development

Programme and the African Union's 2014 Malabo

Declaration on Accelerated Agricultural Growth and

Transformation for Shared Prosperity and Improved

Livelihoods. In that regard, Equatorial Guinea welcomes

the recent plans to strengthen the partnership between

the African Union and the United Nations to end hunger

in Africa by 2025. We also note that Equatorial Guinea

and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the

United Nations have established the Africa Solidarity

Trust Fund, which has been fully funded to the tune of

$30 million.

Equatorial Guinea commends the courageous work
of humanitarian personnel and condemns all attacks on
them as well as violations of international humanitarian
law with regard to the protection of civilians. We
believe that in order to ensure the protection during
conflicts of the most vulnerable civilians, such as
women, children and people with disabilities, and of
humanitarian personnel, the Security Council, while
always respecting States' sovereignty, should redouble
its efforts to find ways to resolve conflicts through
dialogue and uphold international humanitarian law.

In conclusion, Equatorial Guinea endorses the
recommendations of the 9 August 2017 presidential
statement on this topic (S/PRST/2017/14). We
encourage the various United Nations agencies,
especially those dedicated to humanitarian work and
development cooperation in order to help prevent
conflict and maintain peace following conflict, to work
more closely with one another and with regional and
subregional organizations, as well as with States, to
find sustainable solutions.

We call on international public opinion and the
private, business and academic sectors to continue to
seek solutions to food waste. The 2015 United Nations
Food and Agriculture Organization report entitled The
State ofFood Insecurity in the World noted that a 25 per
cent reduction in food waste in developed nations would
cover the needs of the 870 million people worldwide
who suffer from hunger. Let us get to work.

