Mr. Kastrup (Germany): I am speaking as the
Presidency of the European Union. I would like to inform
the Security Council of the following statement, adopted
today by the European Council at its meeting in Berlin.
The heads of State and Government of the European
Union "are deeply concerned about the failure of the
mediation efforts undertaken by Ambassador Holbrooke
and the three Rambouillet process negotiators,
Ambassadors Hill, Majorski and Petritsch, with the
President of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
Slobodan Milosevic. The common objective of these
efforts was to persuade the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to accept a ceasefire in Kosovo and a political
solution to the Kosovo conflict, in order to stop a
humanitarian catastrophe in Kosovo.

"Over one quarter of a million Kosovars are
now homeless because of the repression carried out
by Belgrade's security forces. Sixty-five thousand
have been driven from their homes in the last
month, 25,000 since the peace talks broke down in
Paris last Friday. While the Kosovo Albanians
signed the Rambouillet Accords, Belgrade's forces
poured into Kosovo to start a new offensive. Since
the outbreak of hostilities in Kosovo in March 1993,

 

around 440,000 people, more than one fifth of the
population of Kosovo, have fled or been displaced.
There are new victims every day. The civilian
population is the target of the hostilities.

"The international community has done its
utmost to find a peaceful solution to the Kosovo
conflict. In Rambouillet, and most recently in Paris,
intensive efforts have been made, after months of
preparations, to negotiate an agreement for the self-
govemment of Kosovo which is fair for both parties
to the conflict and which would ensure a peaceful
future for Kosovo Serbs as well as Kosovo Albanians
and all other national communities. The draft
agreement, which was signed by the Kosovo
Albanians in Paris, meets these requirements on the
basis of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Yugoslavia. It assures Kosovo a high degree of self-
govemment, guarantees the individual human rights of
all citizens in Kosovo according to the highest
European standards, envisages extensive rights for all
national communities living in Kosovo and creates the
basis for the necessary reconstruction of the war-tom
region.

"The Yugoslav leadership under President
Milosevic has persistently refused to engage seriously
in the search for a political solution. It has presented
the Yugoslav people with a distorted picture of the
issues and course of the negotiations."

I might add that we have also witnessed that tonight in this
Chamber.

"In addition, the Serb police and Yugoslav Federal
Armed Forces have in the last few weeks massively
reinforced their presence in Kosovo, thereby further
exceeding the ceilings set out in the Holbrooke-
Milosevic agreement of 12 October 1998. Finally, the
Yugoslav security forces are conducting military
operations against the civilian population in Kosovo in
contravention of the provisions of United Nations
Security Council resolution 1199 (1998).

"On the threshold of the 21st century, Europe
cannot tolerate a humanitarian catastrophe in its midst.
It cannot be permitted that, in the middle of Europe,
the predominant population of Kosovo is collectively
deprived of its rights and subjected to grave human
rights abuses. We, the countries of the European
Union, are under a moral obligation to ensure that
indiscriminate behaviour and violence, which became
tangible in the massacre of Racak in January 1999,
are not repeated. We have a duty to ensure the
return to their homes of the hundreds of thousands
of refugees and displaced persons. Aggression must
not be rewarded. An aggressor must know that he
will have to pay a high price. This is the lesson to
be learned from the 20th century.

"Nor will the international community tolerate
crimes against humanity. Those now persisting with
the conflict in Kosovo should not forget that the
mandate of The Hague Tribunal covers Kosovo.
They and their leaders will be held personally
accountable for their actions.

"We are ultimately responsible for securing
peace and cooperation in the region which will
guarantee the respect of our basic European values,
i.e., the respect of human and minority rights,
international law, democratic institutions and the
inviolability of borders.

"Our policy is directed against neither the
Yugoslav or Serb population nor against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia or the Republic of Serbia. It
is directed against the irresponsible policy of the
Yugoslav leadership. It is directed against security
forces cynically and brutally fighting a part of their
own population. We want to put an end to these
outrages. President Milosevic must stop Serb
aggression in Kosovo and sign the Rambouillet
Accords, which include a NATO-led implementation
force to provide stability.

"We urge the Yugoslav leadership under
President Milosevic to summon up the courage at
this juncture to change radically its own policy. It is
not yet too late to stop the internal repression and to
accept the international community's mediation
efforts. The international community's only objective
is to find a political future for Kosovo, on the basis
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which does justice
to the concerns and aspirations of all the people in
Kosovo.

"The Kosovo Albanians showed their
commitment to a peaceful solution by signing the
Rambouillet Accords. It is vital that they now show
maximum restraint.

 

"We underline that it is not our aim to keep the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in its self-imposed
isolation in Europe and the world. On the contrary, we
would like to end the isolation of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia in Europe. But for this to happen,
Milosevic must choose the path of peace in Kosovo
and the path of reform and democratisation, including
freedom of the media in the whole of Yugoslavia."

