Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): The seventeenth progress report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL) paints a generally woeful picture of the
situation in that country, where the violent struggle for
power by the political factions is frustrating both the
legitimate aspirations of the Liberian people to live in peace
and the efforts of the international community to put an end
to the conflict by peaceful means within the framework
established by the Abuja Agreement. My delegation wishes
here to express its concern over the continuation of
hostilities and the deterioration of the security situation in
Liberia, which threatens the peace process, deepens the
political crisis and adversely affects respect for human
rights and humanitarian assistance.

For more than six years the United Nations and the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
have been engaged in a broad effort to put an end to the
Liberian civil war. However, the lack of political will, of
firm resolve by the parties to comply with the Abuja
Agreement and of a serious commitment to maintain the
cease-fire continue to undermine the viability of the peace
process and could mean the loss of the support given so far
by the international community.

My delegation has taken note of the Mechanism
adopted last 7 May by the Foreign Ministers of the
ECOWAS member countries, at their meeting in Accra, to
reactivate the Abuja Agreement in Liberia. They reaffirmed
that the Agreement is essential as a basis for the
achievement of peace in Liberia and set forth conditions
that must be met by the Liberian factions in order to renew
its implementation.
My delegation wishes to highlight the importance of
the fulfilment of those conditions for the peace process in
Liberia. If the hostilities continue, if the Liberian factions
do not soon restore the cease-fire, if they do not withdraw

 

their combatants from the city of Monrovia, if they do not
return the weapons taken from the ECOWAS Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG) and the equipment plundered from
UNOMIL, other United Nations agencies and non-
governmental organizations, and if they do not guarantee
civilians' safety and freedom of movement, the
consequences for the country and for the Liberian people
will be catastrophic; for the international community will
not wish to continue to take part in a peace process that
the parties fail to show clear resolve to carry to
completion, and ECOWAS and UNOMIL, which have
been dealing with the conflict for years, could consider
withdrawing from Liberia. My delegation therefore
supports the appeal in the Secretary-General's report for
the parties to implement without further delay the
measures agreed upon by ECOWAS in Accra.

The most important things at this moment are the
restoration of the basic conditions of peace and security
in Liberia and the renewal of the implementation of the
Abuja Agreement. In the conditions of insecurity and
instability prevailing in the country, it is impossible to
guarantee the participation of all sectors of civil society
in the peace process or the holding of the elections
provided for in the Agreement. Nor is it feasible in such
a situation for UNOMIL to accomplish effectively its
tasks or to be able to investigate reports of human rights
violations committed during the recent hostilities. It is
also unlikely that humanitarian assistance will be able to
reach the majority of displaced civilians and that the
repatriation of the hundreds of thousands of Liberian
refugees seeking refuge in neighbouring countries can be
carried out. We therefore wish to reiterate the need for
the parties to take concrete steps to restore public order
throughout Liberia.

My delegation wishes to highlight the significant role
played by the Economic Community of West African
States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) for the promotion
of a peaceful settlement of the crisis in Liberia. We
recognize the importance of its continuing presence in
Liberia, despite the serious limitations in terms of
personnel and resources that do not allow it to provide
adequate protection for United Nations personnel and
property. ECOMOG should therefore be provided with
sufficient funds and the necessary human resources to
carry out its functions as a peace-keeping force. We also
believe that the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia continues to play an important role in support of
the efforts of ECOWAS to promote the renewal of the
peace process and the adoption of confidence-building
measures that will make it possible to implement the
Abuja Agreement.

 

Accordingly, my delegation would be prepared to
support the recommendation made by the Secretary-General
in his report that the mandate of UNOMIL be extended,
with the number of its personnel subject to increase or
reduction depending on developments in the situation in
Liberia.

