The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Bangladesh, Brazil,
Burundi, Canada, the Central African Republic, Egypt,
Germany, Guatemala, India, Italy, Morocco, New
Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, the Republic of
Korea, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand and Uruguay, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I wish to extend a
warm welcome to His Excellency Lord Malloch-
Brown, United Kingdom Minister for Africa, Asia and
the United Nations; His Excellency Mr. Ebrahim Ismail
Ebrahim, Deputy Minister for International Relations
and Cooperation of South Africa; His Excellency Jean-
Francis Bozize, Minister Delegate at the Presidency of
the Central African Republic in charge of National
Defence, Veterans Affairs, Victims of War,
Disarmament and Restructuring of the Army; and His
Excellency Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Omaar, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Somalia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bozize'
(Central African Republic), Mr. Omaar
(Somalia), Mr. Ebrahim (South Africa) and the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
2

agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Heraldo Mufioz, Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Chile;
Mr. Jordan Ryan, Assistant Administrator and Director
of the Bureau for Crisis Prevention and Recovery at the
United Nations Development Programme; and
Mr. Alastair McKechnie, Director of the Fragile and
Conflict-Affected Countries Group at the World Bank.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/304, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uganda.

Let me begin by thanking Council members for
participating in this high-level meeting to focus on the
important issue of post-conflict peacebuilding.
Members of the Council will recall that the Security
Council, in May last year, requested the Secretary-
General, the Peacebuilding Commission, international
and regional organizations and Member States to
consider how to support countries affected by conflict
to secure sustainable peace in a faster and more
effective way. I would therefore like to thank the
Secretary-General for the report he has prepared, which
he will be presenting today.

The task before us is to consider and refine
strategies through which the United Nations and the
international community can effectively support
countries emerging from conflict to move towards
sustainable peace, reconstruction, economic recovery
and development.

Post-conflict peacebuilding is premised on the
simple fact that without peace development is not
possible, and yet without development peace is not
durable. There is need to deliver tangible peace
dividends, including the provision of basic services and
the improvement of the standard of living of the
population.
09-41769

In accordance with current practice and
framework, peacebuilding activities are not envisaged
in countries that are still in conflict situations. The
Security Council needs to address the critical issue of
the early consideration of peacebuilding activities right
from the peacemaking and peacekeeping stages.

In any peacebuilding endeavour, national
leadership and ownership are of paramount importance.
National authorities must take the primary
responsibility for re-establishing the key institutions of
governance and economic recovery, with the support of
the United Nations and international partners. This
requires identifying key priorities, developing and
agreeing on a national strategy to address them through
a widely consultative process, and mobilizing the
requisite political, financial and technical support in a
coordinated manner.

Our experience in Uganda illustrates the
importance of identifying national priorities based on
our own unique situation and conditions. We decided
that it was important to address post-conflict
peacebuilding, starting from 1986, in a sequenced
manner, beginning with the most urgent and critical
elements. These included efforts to guarantee the
security of life and property; embarking on national
reconciliation and unity by establishing a broad-based
Government; establishing a human rights commission
to investigate human rights abuses in the country; and
introducing and consolidating the concept of popular
democracy.

Other priorities included security sector reform
by, inter alia, integrating all former fighting forces into
a new national army and granting amnesty to most of
them. We launched and executed a nationally agreed
minimum recovery programme and then embarked on a
process of constitutional reform through countrywide
consultations, culminating in the promulgation of a
new national Constitution in 1995.

Peacebuilding is a shared responsibility in which
the United Nations, subregional and regional
organizations and the wider international community
have a critical role to play. It does not really matter
where conflict situations arise - be it in the Balkans,
Asia, Latin America or Africa. The role of regional
approaches to solving problems is key because regions
have more intimate knowledge of specific situations.
Experience in Africa, and in the Great Lakes region in
09-41769
particular, shows that regional efforts can be
successful.

The Regional Peace Initiative on Burundi,
chaired by Uganda and facilitated by South Africa, is a
good example in that regard. The knowledge and clear
understanding of the political and social dynamics that
the regional leaders brought to the peace process in
Burundi were critical to resolving the conflict. Burundi
is now making steady progress in post-conflict
peacebuilding with the support of the East African
Community, the African Union, the United Nations and
international partners.

The Economic Community of West African States
played a positive role in Liberia, while the African
Union, through the African Union Mission in Somalia,
is currently engaged in efforts to bring peace and
stability to Somalia. Regional organizations, such as
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the
Organization of American States, the European Union
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe have also made substantial contributions to
peacebuilding.

The regional organizations in Africa have the
necessary human resources, but what they clearly lack
are the financial resources. That is where the United
Nations and the international community can be of
great help. The challenge is how the United Nations
can address issues of international peace and security
meaningfully and remain relevant. Uganda therefore
calls upon the United Nations and international
partners to support regional and subregional efforts to
strengthen their capacities in peacebuilding.

Post-conflict peacebuilding activities require
adequate, flexible and predictable funding. There is
urgent need for the United Nations system to ensure
greater coherence in peacemaking, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development activities. We therefore
call upon the United Nations to strengthen further its
strategic partnerships with the World Bank and other
financial institutions. We are encouraged by the
initiatives for flexible funding being undertaken by the
United Nations through the Peacebuilding Fund and the
launching of the in-country multi-donor trust funds.
The United Nations should also focus more on
implementation of the concepts of a joint United
Nations vision and integrated missions in supporting
peacebuilding activities.
3
Finally, we thank all delegations for their
contribution to the draft presidential statement as an
outcome of our deliberations.

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and invite him to
take the floor.


