Mr. Ballestero (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation is pleased to see you here in New York,
Mr. President, to preside over this meeting. We also
welcome the presence of President Abbas, the
Secretary-General, Secretary of State Rice, the various
ministers and deputy ministers for foreign affairs and
the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States.

My country has been a member of the Security
Council for the past 12 months. Throughout that
period, we have tried to give meaning to our presence
here by promoting the observance of international law
in the Middle East, the fulfilment of the commitments
of the parties and the implementation of the resolutions
of the Security Council. During the entire time, we
have also called for the Council to take significant
steps to alleviate tensions and strengthen the peace
process. We have called for the Council to play a
significant role in what we feel to be one of the most
serious threats to international peace and security.

We have not been as successful in that goal as we
had hoped. In recent weeks, the members of this
Council unanimously agreed on what became
resolution 1850 (2008), the first resolution on this topic
since 2004, which broke the silence of this Council.
That resolution, as Secretary of State Rice said at the
time, aimed to describe "the contours of the
negotiations" and to define "the role of the
international community, which will prevent a return to
violence and hopelessness". I repeat: "which will
prevent a return to violence and hopelessness"
(S/PV.6045, p. 3). For Russian Minister Lavrov, the
resolution's aim was "to strengthen the continuity and
irreversibility of the political process and give that
approach the strength of international law" (ibid., p. 5).
Today, the situation on the ground demonstrates that
resolution 1850 (2008) was not enough to achieve
those lofty aims.
Subsequently, the beginning of the Israeli military
offensive generated a press statement that expressed
shared concern at the escalating violence, terrorist acts,
the fate of the civilian population and the terrifying
humanitarian situation in Gaza. In it, the members of

the Council expressed the need to reopen the way to
finding a political solution to the Middle East issue.
We hoped that those statements of the Council would
prevent the serious situation that we are experiencing
and regretting today. Unfortunately, the situation has
shown that we were wrong and that it was not enough.

Today's meeting should not be a mere declaration
of good intentions. Little more than three weeks ago,
Minister Miliband said here that "the perils of inertia
are clear; inactivity and confrontation are the recruiting
sergeants for extremism" (ibid., p. 6). The political
process and the situation on the ground are inseparable,
and it is therefore necessary for this Council to demand
an immediate end to all military action, using all the
instruments and powers stipulated in the Charter of the
United Nations.

In this Chamber, there are voices defending the
errors of all the parties. For that reason, as we already
said some months ago, this Council can be part of the
problem and not part of the solution to the crisis in
Middle East. It is important to shake off our inertia by
moving away from the eye-for-an-eye approach, which
only leads to the blindness of all, and by adopting a
courageous position that can create an environment
conducive to negotiations.

Costa Rica echoed the words of the French
delegation when, in this very Chamber on 16 December,
Ambassador Ripert stated "the absolute need for
respect for humanitarian law" which "unreservedly
prohibits terrorist acts that blindly strike civilian
populations" and "also prohibits any form of collective
punishment" (ibid., p. 9). His delegation called upon
the members of the Council not to forget that those
rules must provide guidance in addressing the situation
in Gaza. Costa Rica supports his words.

Costa Rica is ready to contribute to the adoption
of a draft resolution that urgently calls for an
immediate cessation of the hostilities, the
establishment of an effective and lasting truce and the
opening of all border crossings with controls and
guarantees accepted and respected by all, so as to allow
a return to the path of negotiations that will ultimately
lead to the establishment of a viable and democratic
Palestinian State, living side by side with Israel and
jointly promoting the well-being and development that
their peoples deserve and desire.

