Mr. Vohidov (Uzbekistan): Today, the Parliament of
Uzbekistan had a meeting at which deep concern was
expressed regarding the continuing military action in
Afghanistan; the Parliament considered that this military
action poses a major threat to international and regional
peace and security, particularly in the region of Central
Asia.

We strongly support the preservation of the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Afghanistan. Uzbekistan has strong confidence that there
is no military solution to the Afghan conflict and that it
can be settled only through peaceful negotiations among

 

all Afghan parties. Uzbekistan calls upon those parties to
refrain from further hostilities and to come to the
negotiating table. The Republic of Uzbekistan is confident
that all parties to the Afghan conflict should be involved in
a peace process aimed at the formation of a broad-based
and fully representative government of Afghanistan.

One of the main concerns of my Government is the
continuing supply of arms and ammunition to the parties to
the Afghan conflict and the unabated foreign interference in
Afghanistan. We are also confident that it is necessary to
cease such interference immediately. It is a fact that
continuing instability in Afghanistan creates conditions
favourable to the further spread of terrorism and the illegal
production and trafficking of drugs.

We are deeply concerned at the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan and hope that the
Afghan parties will do everything possible to create the
conditions necessary for the United Nations and other
international humanitarian organizations to provide
humanitarian assistance to all in Afghanistan who are in
need of it. We condemn violations of universally
recognized norms of international law and international
humanitarian law in Afghanistan in the field of the
treatment of prisoners of war and non-combatants in
Afghanistan.

Uzbekistan believes that the United Nations must
continue to play its central and impartial role in
international efforts towards a peaceful resolution of the
Afghan conflict.

Uzbekistan reiterates its position that the activities of
the Six plus Two group, one of the main mechanisms for
considering the situation in Afghanistan, are very important
towards the achievement of peaceful resolution of Afghan
conflict. In that connection, on behalf of my Government,
I would like to reaffirm the proposal of Uzbekistan that a
meeting of the Six plus Two group be held in the region.
We believe that such a meeting could make a positive
contribution to a political settlement of the Afghan conflict.
Tashkent is ready to host the meeting.

Taking into consideration all that I have said, the
Government of the Republic of Uzbekistan supports the
draft resolution on Afghanistan now before the Security
Council, and requests that Uzbekistan be considered as a
sponsor of the draft resolution.

