Mr. Moriko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dacie,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs ofthe Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Citaku,
Ambassador of the Republic of Kosovo to the United
States of America, to today's meeting on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We also commend Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
UNMIK, on his detailed briefing.

C6te d'Ivoire welcomes the successful holding
of legislative elections on 6 October, which serve
to help entrench democracy and build the country's
institutions. In order to strengthen that positive
momentum, my country calls on the political parties
that emerged victorious in the elections to make the
necessary compromises, with a view to forming a new
Government, which will have to provide lasting solutions
to the many challenges facing Kosovo, in particular the
normalization of relations between Kosovo and Serbia,
reconciliation among the various communities in
Kosovo and the country's economic development.

With regard to the normalization of relations
between Kosovo and Serbia, my delegation notes with
satisfaction that the dialogue that has been facilitated
by the European Union since 2011 has resulted in the
signing of 32 agreements between the two parties.
However, it deplores the scant progress made in
implementing some of those agreements and the delays
in the process of normalizing relations between the
two countries.

With regard to reconciliation among the various
communities in Kosovo, Cote d'Ivoire urges the
country's political authorities to work towards easing
the tense sociopolitical climate. In particular, it invites
them to take all necessary measures to eliminate the
obstacles to establishing an association or community
of Serb municipalities in Kosovo. In addition, my
delegation calls for the early resumption ofnegotiations,
under the auspices of the European Union, in order to
build new momentum in the reconciliation process, the
promotion of human rights and on the path to settling
the issue of the full international recognition of Kosovo
and its participation in all international organizations.

With regard to that last point, my country would
like to reiterate its call for the total elimination of
customs duties on goods imported from Serbia and
Bosnia, in accordance with regulations applicable to
countries that have signed the Central European Free
Trade Agreement in recent years. Indeed, that tariff
barrier hinders not only efforts to reach an agreement
between Kosovo and Serbia but also initiatives aimed
at Kosovo becoming a member of the European Union.
An agreement between the two countries should also
allow Serbia to suspend its international campaign to
persuade countries that have recognized Kosovo as an
independent State to revoke such recognition.

In conclusion, C6te d'Ivoire reiterates its support
for the efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and all the personnel of UNMIK
and the Kosovo Force, as well as the European Union.
It calls on the international community to provide
significant support to the special trust fund in support
of the Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian communities
in Kosovo.

I would like to end by congratulating, on behalf of
my delegation, the entire South African team, led by
Ambassador Jerry Matjila, on its excellent presidency
during the month of October.

