Mr. Sylvain-Goma (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset, Sir, to welcome your assumption of
the Council presidency this month, and to thank the
Ambassador of Gabon for his efforts to facilitate my
presence at this debate. We in Central Africa are proud
of the establishment of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) in Libreville, and
we welcome the invitation of the Secretary-General of
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) to this debate to discuss the development of
the Office's activities.

With regard to the issues before the Security
Council, I shall very briefly touch on a few aspects in
connection with the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA),
while speaking at greater length on the Gulf of Guinea.
I would also like to take advantage of our presence in
the Council to make some comments on the problems
that concern us and efforts we are carrying out at
ECCAS that we believe could benefit from cooperation
with UNOCA.

With regard to the LRA, ECCAS is aware of the
developments that have just been recounted here.
ECCAS has been involved in various meetings
organized by the African Union, especially at Bangui.
That has made it possible to take note of the
developments in the activities between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic
and what is now South Sudan. The observer of the
African Union has just spoken about possible
developments, namely, the possibility of establishing a
force and setting up an operations centre in order to put
in place a framework for political follow-up. Final
decisions will soon be taken by the Peace and Security
Council, as the observer of the African Union has also
just pointed out.

How those issues affect the Economic
Community of Central African States should be seen in
the context of the fact that all of us are concerned
about peace and security problems on the continent.
For ECCAS in particular, however, they are of concern
given that the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Central African Republic are members of the
Community. Given that fact, there can be no holding
back when it comes to engaging on those issues. A
mere look into the situation bears that out.

In 2008, ECCAS undertook its first activities in
the field by setting up the Mission for the
Consolidation of Peace in the Central African Republic
(MICOPAX), which began its work on 1 January 2009.
MICOPAX's efforts led the European Union
assessment missions to determine that several positive
steps had been taken, but that there were also concerns.
In an official statement, the Central African Republic
expressed its satisfaction with the cooperation that had
taken place, in particular in connection with
MICOPAX's ability to control certain aspects that
could have jeopardized the presidential election.

The work of ECCAS with the Mission for the
Consolidation of Peace in the Central African Republic
has now reached the mid-point, making it possible for
us to address two concerns. In no particular order, the
first has to do with the desire of the Government of the
Central African Republic to acknowledge that more
than 20 years of peacekeeping missions on its territory
had not been enough to focus on the training of the
Forces armees centrafricaines (FACA). Secondly,
ECCAS member States believe that the time has come
to ensure that the forces of the Central African
Republic can strengthen their capacity to take control
of the security situation throughout the country.

Taking those two concerns into consideration,
MICOPAX officials and the ECCAS Council of
Ministers took the decision to begin the gradual
drawdown of the Mission, while continuing, in the two
following years, the capacity-building previously
agreed. Three hundred and ninety-nine force members
will receive training in 2012. That will be reviewed
prior to the end of the mandate given to the mission by
ECCAS, in 2013. In that context, given that
developments in the setting up by ECCAS, through the
structures for regional brigades, require a great deal of
caution, we will endeavour to ensure that the emphasis
continues to be placed first on MICOPAX, bearing in
mind the goals to which I have just referred in the area
of training. We will also focus on the training of the
armed forces against the backdrop of the contribution
they will have to make in the context of the regional
force that is still being put together to deal with the
LRA.

It is of course true that things are continuing to
evolve and that the situation in Central Africa will
continue to be of concern to ECCAS heads of State. As
the recently conducted African Union assessment
mission suggested, if constraints necessitated that
senior political officials consider a different approach
from the one I have just outlined, then indeed other
decisions may have to be taken, for peace has no price.

Those are the comments I wished to make on this
issue. In brief, the current capacity of ECCAS imposes
constraints on it in connection with carrying out the
peacebuilding Mission in Central Africa in accordance
with the current mandate, including gradually drawing
down MICOPAX prior to its full withdrawal in 2013.
However, ECCAS stands ready to follow up any
measures that may be called for by the African Union's
senior political leaders.

