Let me begin by thanking our briefers, Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons, Ambassador Djani and Ms. Zadran, for their very edifying briefings. I would also like to take this opportunity to reiterate our condemnation of the continued attacks on civilian targets in Afghanistan, extend our condolences to the victims, their families and the Afghan people and wish a speedy recovery to the injured. The numerous calls and commitments by the warring parties to reduce violence have not been followed up on the ground. We would like to encourage all stakeholders to recommit themselves to the voice of non-violence, which is a necessary condition for the success of the ongoing intra-Afghan talks. With regard to these talks, we hope that tangible progress will be made as soon as possible, and we look forward to the second round, which represents a crucial step for the future of Afghanistan. However, ending the war in Afghanistan will require much more than just talks. Indeed, to ensure a full transition to peace, it is necessary to establish a solid basis for a comprehensive peace process. To that end, it is essential that all stakeholders, including the various sectors of civil society - women, youth, minorities and journalists - be included. The Niger is in favour of such inclusion, as the engagement of all parties - and their being given a meaningful place at the negotiating table - is key to the success of the discussions, and therefore to sustainable peace and development. We must help the Afghan Government not only to promote and strengthen women's rights and those of all components of the population but also to consolidate the progress made over the last two decades, as mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1182). Supporting Afghanistan also means helping its Government to reform and professionalize its defence and security forces, implement mechanisms for good governance and establish a national consensus on future relations among the different groups, as suggested by the experts. Finally, as we all know, building lasting peace always involves tackling the root causes of conflict. In that regard, we would like to stress the role that a healthy and inclusive economy plays, but also the importance of the international community's commitment to the Afghan people, particularly in mitigating the dramatic effects of the coronavirus disease and in continuing its indispensable support for the country.
