Ms. Lind (Estonia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's debate on a topic that not only
addresses United Nations peacekeeping operations, but
also focuses on the broader shift of the United Nations
towards the goal of preventing conflicts and sustaining
peace.

Estonia aligns itself with the statement just
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

United Nations peacekeeping operations play an
essential role in securing peace and stability globally
and the Blue Helmets who have served and are serving
across the world deserve our highest appreciation. There
is no doubt that peacekeeping missions have made real
difference on the ground. As research shows, compared
to the predeployment period, peacekeeping reduces the
number of civilians killed by more than 90 per cent.

However, as we witness more complex, volatile and
longer-lasting crises each passing year, there is a real
need to look at the ways of tackling the instabilities in
the world both before they have turned into a full blown
armed conflict and also after the weapons have been
put down. Preventive measures and striving for political
solutions are key, and we fully support the Secretary-
General's efforts in that regard. Equally important is
giving attention to the post-conflict transition so as
to enable sustainable peace. The mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations should therefore
become more concrete and robust, especially by
including tangible targets and an exit strategy, while
bearing in mind the need to protect civilians and assure
the sustainability of the rule of law, as well as the
respect for human rights and international law.

To achieve sustainable peace, it is important that all
actors work together to resolve the conflict. Sustainable
peace can be achieved only if we have a thorough and
broad understanding of the conflicts, the different actors
and the key players. That includes adding specialized
units to United Nations peacekeeping missions where
necessary. Sometimes a small specialized unit, such
as an intelligence-gathering unit, can make a huge
difference in terms of the mission's size or duration on
the ground.

Participating in United Nations peacekeeping has
always been important for Estonia. In recent years,
we have significantly increased our participation in
peacekeeping operations and are currently contributing
to three missions - the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization.

Furthermore, Estonia is currently a member of
the Peacebuilding Commission, and we fully support
a broader focus for the Commission, which must take
a regional approach, address cross-cutting issues and
serve as a bridge between the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council.

In conclusion, we see more robust and adaptive
mandates, firm and decisive actions, less duplication and
fragmentation, more innovative solutions and emphasis
on the partnerships at the regional and international
levels as essential to achieving lasting peace. Also, let
me emphasize once more the importance of prevention
when it comes to sustaining peace. Estonia is fully
committed to that cause and sees that as one of the key
issues in our endeavour to become an elected member
of the Council for the period 2020-2021.
