The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

France welcomes the fact that the Security
Council has unanimously adopted resolution 1695
(2006). That action by the Security Council is an
appropriate response to a serious situation. The
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's development
and testing of ballistic missiles capable of carrying
weapons of mass destruction seriously endanger
security in North-East Asia and beyond for several
reasons.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea
asserts that it has developed nuclear weapons, and it
has not joined the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction. Those
ballistic missiles are able to carry such weapons. The
Democratic People's Republic of Korea is attempting
to increase the range of its missiles. It sells such
weapons and is today the main ballistic proliferator in
the world, particularly in areas of tension.
The combination of those factors makes the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's recent

ballistic tests an event that endangers the security of
the entire international community. The Security
Council has a duty to condemn those tests and to
ensure that the international community mobilizes to
prevent the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
from developing its missile and weapons of mass
destruction programmes. That is the meaning of
today's resolution, which, among other things, requires
that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea return
to a responsible stance. The Democratic People's
Republic of Korea must cease its ballistic activities and
reinstate its moratorium on testing. It must return to the
six-party talks, implement the commitments it entered
into in the joint statement of 19 September 2005 and,
in particular, renounce all of its nuclear weapons and
its existing nuclear programme with a view to
achieving the verifiable denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula.

The resolution is perfectly clear. It contains
provisions to which all parties must adhere. France will
seek to implement it through the non-proliferation
mechanisms to which it is a party and the European
Union. I would recall that the European Union is
implementing a rigorous policy of non-proliferation,
including in its relations with other States. It expects
all States to do likewise.

Finally, the unanimous adoption of the resolution
constitutes a significant development in the Security
Council's efforts to combat proliferation. France
believes that the Council must act in a united and
robust manner in that area. The Council has carefully
weighed the words of the message it has formulated
today. It has taken into account the responsibilities
incumbent upon it to combat proliferation, as affirmed
in the presidential statement of the 1992 summit and as
recalled and extended by resolution 1540 (2004). The
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery is a threat to international peace and
security.

Throughout the negotiations, France has
endeavoured to ensure unity in the Security Council,
for the Council's unity considerably increases the
effectiveness of its efforts. Today's unity is an
indication of the shared will to act resolutely in the
upcoming stages of the fight against the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

