Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala voted in favour of resolution 2092 (2013)
owing to the importance we attach to the work of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), the situation in
that country and the need for the political situation
to move in the right direction, namely, a return to a
constitutionally elected Government. We also did
so because we agree with extending the mandate of
UNIOGBIS for an additional three months, so as to
provide an opportunity for a new assessment of the
situation in the country and the eventual role of the
mission.

However, as my colleagues know, we had certain
difficulties with the seventh preambular paragraph of
the draft resolution. We did not want to impede the
adoption of the resolution, which, I wish to emphasize,
we support as a whole. However, we did want to set out
the reason for those difficulties, namely, that the text of
the resolution takes note of the signing of a memorandum
of understanding concerning the implementation of
the road map for the reform of the security sector in
Guinea-Bissau. That is a document we have never seen,
and we would therefore be ill-advised to take note of
a document whose contents have not been shared with
us. We point that out in the fervent hope that all the
relevant information in the Council's resolutions will
be fully shared with all members in a timely manner.

In conclusion, I should like to point out that, since
the military coup d'e'tat in Guinea-Bissau on 12 April
2012, Guatemala has participated actively in Security
Council discussions and has supported its resolutions
and statements. Owing to our own history, we have
adopted a zero-tolerance policy towards such breaches
of the constitutional order. We therefore supported
the Security Council's decision to continue to actively
consider this issue. We call for the early resumption of
a democratic electoral process and for the restoration of
a legitimate Government in the country.

