Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I have the honour to
present the report of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006), in accordance with paragraph
18 (h) of the same resolution. The present report covers
the period from 6 September to 12 December, during
which time the Committee held two informal meetings
and conducted additional work using the no-objection
procedure envisioned in paragraph 15 of the guidelines
for the conduct of its work.

Before presenting the Committee's activity, I
would like to welcome the interim agreement reached
between the P5+1 and Iran in Geneva on 24 November.
The potential of this important agreement as a way
forward towards a comprehensive settlement of the
Iranian nuclear issue is obvious. The Security Council
measures imposed by resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747
(2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010), however, remain
in effect. States have an obligation to implement them
duly. It is only by a Security Council decision that
those measures can be modified or terminated. Until
then, Member States are obligated to enforce them
and the Committee, with the assistance of its Panel of
Experts, must carry out its mandate to monitor their
implementation.

It is, however, my hope that the agreement reached in
Geneva will encourage Iran to engage with the Council
and the Committee. You will recall, Mr. President, that
the Committee has twice reached out to Iran this year
in relation to incidents investigated by the Panel of
Experts. We wrote on 12 April in relation to the Panel's
unanimous conclusion that Iran's launches of the
Shahab-l and -3 missiles during the Great Prophet VII
exercises contravened paragraph 9 of resolution 1929
(2010). On 21 May we wrote, in relation to the Panel's
conclusion, that an intercepted arms shipment was at
the very least a probable violation by Iran of paragraph
5 of resolution 1747 (2007). Iran has not so far replied
and the Committee again calls on Iran to do so.

I would like to turn now to the Committee's activity
during the reporting period.

The Committee met on 23 October to discuss the
Panel's report on a seizure of a consignment of carbon
fibre destined for Iran. The seizure was reported to the
Committee on 6 June. The Panel of Experts investigated
this case. It concluded that Iran's attempted procurement
of this carbon fibre was a violation of its obligations
under resolution 1929 (2010) and previous resolutions.
Similarly, on 5 November a Member State reported
its seizure of goods that it suspected were sanctioned
goods, but wanted the assistance of the Panel of Experts
before making its final determination as to whether the
goods were sanctioned or not. The Panel is now working
with that Member State.

The ban on supplying nuclear-related items to Iran
is subject to some conditional exceptions, notably in
relation to items for light-water reactors, which the
Council considers to be less proliferation-sensitive than
heavy-water reactors. The Committee must be notified
of supplies to Iran of items falling under this exception.
During the reporting period, the Committee received
two such notifications by a Member State concerning
the delivery of items for reactor unit 1 of the Bushehr
nuclear power plant.

Member States remain under an obligation to freeze
assets on their territory that are owned or controlled by a
person or entity listed by the Council or the Committee,
and to prevent any assets from being made available
to such persons or entities. Like the goods ban, these
targeted financial sanctions are subject to a range of
conditional exceptions so to ensure that their effect is
limited to the object and purpose of the sanctions.

The Committee received three notifications from
a Member State pursuant to paragraph 15 of resolution
1737 (2006) and paragraph 4 of resolution 1747 (2007),
which allows for payments owed by a listed person or
entity under a contract entered into prior to the listing
to be made from that person or entity's frozen funds,
subject to notification to the Committee.

Listed persons and entities have the right to
petition the Committee to be delisted - that is, to
have the sanctions removed - through the Focal Point
established by resolution 1730 (2006). As mentioned in
my previous briefings to the Council, the Committee
has been considering such a petition from the First
East Export Bank (FEEB), an entity that is currently
on the Committee's consolidated list. On 25 November,
the Committee rejected the delisting request and
communicated to the Focal Point the reasons for the
rejection, which the Focal Point transmitted to FEEB.

The Committee also assisted States exercising
vigilance, in accordance with the resolutions, over
financial transactions with persons or entities in
Iran. One Member State consulted the Committee on
7 November on the modalities of making a payment,
to which the Committee had already advised it had
no objection in December 2012, from an entity on its
territory to the Ministry of Defence of Iran. Also on
7 November, a State informed the Committee that its
authorities were carrying out an investigation regarding
an alleged connection between an Iranian national and
a company registered in the reporting State, and sought
the Committee's assistance in obtaining additional
information about the named individual and entity.

As part ofthe Committee's efforts to assist Member
States in implementing the Security Council measures,
on 18 November I joined the Chairs of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1373 (2001), 1540
(2004), 1718 (2006) and 1988 (2001) and ofthe Al-Qaida
Committees, as well as by the President ofthe Financial
Action Task Force (FATF) in an open briefing for
States on the respective roles of the Security Council
and FATF in combating the financing of terrorism and
proliferation. The high turnout and lively question-and-
answer session that followed indicate the strong
interest of Member States on this issue. I believe that
the briefing was effective in raising awareness among
States of the measures imposed by the Council and
the related recommendations and guidance developed
by FATF, as well as the assistance that the Security
Council Committees and FATF can provide. We look
forward to organizing similar joint briefings for the
benefit of Member States.

The Committee continues to assist States and
international organizations in implementing the relevant
Security Council measures. On 27 September, the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
asked the Committee to confirm that its proposal
for technical assistance to Iran did not contravene
the applicable sanctions measures. In a letter dated
11 October, the Committee confirmed that the relevant
resolutions did not prohibit the described project.
The Panel of Experts submitted its midterm report
to the Security Council on 4 December. As mandated
by resolution 2105 (2013), in advance of the submission
to the Council the Committee considered the Panel's
report during an informal meeting held on 21 November.
Committee members welcomed the report and took
note of the Panel's key activities since the renewal of its
mandate in June.

Finally, I am happy to report that the Panel is again
at full capacity, with Mr. Kazuto Suzuki joining the
Panel at the beginning of December. Furthermore, over
the past three months the Panel participated in a number
of events that are listed in the annex to the report. I
should note that a slightly more detailed version of the
report that I have just read out, including the annexes,
will be available online.

