Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): I thank all briefers for
their briefings, and in particular I commend Ms. Ellen
Laj for her service and efforts in the very difficult and
challenging conditions to support the people of South
Sudan in reaching sustainable peace after years of
conflict. We wish her the best in her future endeavours.

Five years after the proclamation of South Sudan's
independence and 20 months of conflict, the South
Sudanese parties signed a peace agreement brokered
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
which was endorsed by the African Union and the
international community. Today, following the incidents
that took place in Juba between 8 to 11 July, the situation
has worsened. Progress on the implementation of the
provisions of the peace agreement has been halted, and
instead of increased dialogue we have borne witness
over the past month to the resurgence of hate speech
and incitements to violence.

The international community must send a clear
message to the leadership of South Sudan. First, the
leadership must recall its responsibility to protect the
civilian population. Secondly, it must be informed
that the international community will not tolerate a
genocide or war crimes and crimes against humanity
in South Sudan. Thirdly, perpetrators of all acts of
Violence, in particular ethnic and/or sexual Violence,
will be held accountable.

We as the international community also have a
responsibility to revive the peace agreement in South
Sudan, which is the legal instrument signed by the
parties and international partners. In that regard, we
think that an arms embargo is not a solution to the
conflict. The efforts of the international community
must encourage the parties towards more dialogue
and inclusivity. However, we recognize that some
important steps that have been taken by the Transitional
Government of National Unity of South Sudan regarding
the operationalization of the Regional Protection Force
authorized by the Security Council, but we also regret
all Violations of the status of forces agreement and the
blockade that has created additional challenges for the
performance of the Mission.

I would like to ask Mr. Dieng a question. In light
of the difficulty in deploying the 4,000 personnel of
the Regional Protection Force, what does he think of
increasing the number of unarmed civilian protectors
who are currently protecting civilians in 10 locations
around the country, including the protection of civilian
areas in Bentiu, Malakal and Juba?

We commend you for your hard work, Sir, in
your capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) on South Sudan, and
we welcome your initiative to visit South Sudan and
other countries ofthe region. It is important to establish
contact with the reality of South Sudan and the various
stakeholders in order to address misunderstandings
regarding the role of the Committee. On the other
hand, we regret the fact that the Panel of Experts that
supports the Committee produces biased, unbalanced
and controversial reports that are contradicted by
other issues reported by other United Nations organs.
It should be noted with regret by the Panel that the
peace agreement has already collapsed and that the
Transitional Government of National Unity has become
a regime, with all its negative and biased perceptions.

We believe that it is our responsibility, as members
of this organ, which is responsible for maintaining
peace and security, to support the people of South
Sudan in addressing their current challenges and help
them on the path towards sustainable peace. Angola is
fully committed to those objectives.

