Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for convening this timely debate.

For the past 73 years we have been striving to build
a rules-based order, in which principles such as equality
among States, the peaceful settlement of disputes
and the promotion and protection of human rights
underpinned our relations. Those are the same values
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, and
together they constitute the bedrock of multilateralism.
However, the very idea of placing our hopes in shared
institutions and rules is now unfortunately in jeopardy.
Multilateral institutions are at a difficult juncture, and
there is a widespread feeling that changes must be
urgently undertaken. But what are the causes of the
current crisis?

First of all, our institutional architecture, including
the United Nations, is not well equipped to respond to
current challenges. As the Secretary-General stated in
the plenary of the General Assembly last September,
"twenty-first century challenges outpace twentieth
century institutions and mindsets" (A/73/PV.6, p. I). We have failed to update our main institutions
to properly reflect the current geopolitical landscape
and the increasingly multipolar order. Entire regions
and countries with excellent records in contributing
to international peace and security are still excluded
from permanent representation in the Security
Council. While the majority of situations on the
agenda of the Council relate to African countries, the
continent remains without permanent representation.
It is crucial to increase the number of members
in both categories 4 not only non-permanent but
also permanent. It is regrettable that in 25 years of
continuous discussions no results whatsoever have
been achieved in the efforts to reform the Council. Even
worse, several Member States feel the pressure to not
even engage in the current international negotiations.
The result is ever-growing scepticism about the ability
of the Council to deliver on its mandate and to manage
sensitive conflicts. Brazil strongly believes that the
Security Council is still the appropriate body to deal
with threats to international peace and security. But, in
order to avoid the progressive erosion of its legitimacy,
it is high time for real and effective reform.

At the same time, the Security Council must avoid
encroaching on issues that fall under the purview of
other United Nations bodies. Even though we agree that
the Council must address the root causes of conflicts,
that should happen in very specific contexts related
to items on its agenda, and never with the purpose of
developing general policies and norms. Our crisis is
also compounded by the inability to stick to what we
agree upon. Selectivity in choosing which obligations
to follow also undermines multilateralism and
international cooperation, since it directly impairs our
capacity to build trust among ourselves.

One case in point is nuclear disarmament, an
objective we have not attained in spite of the very
clear provisions of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. That Treaty has greatly helped
us achieve progress in containing proliferation. But
the nuclear threat will be completely addressed only
through disarmament. Unfortunately, the opposition
by some countries to the recent Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons calls into question the
commitment to rid the world of all types of weapons
of mass destruction. That opens up space for unilateral
decisions and reduces the faith in multilateralism as a
means to reach decisions on hard and sensitive matters.

Some issues relating to the use of force are also
worrisome examples of the inability to stick to what
we agreed upon. There are increasingly frequent
attempts to depart from the collective security system
created in 1945. We simply cannot afford to lose
sight of the fundamental notion that the prohibition
on the use of force is the rule and that self-defence
and Chapter VII authorization are exceptions. Brazil
has been consistently voicing its disagreement with
interpretations that seek to expand the scope ofthe right
to self-defence, in particular with regard to non-State
actors. Also, we have been calling upon the Security
Council to follow up on notifications received under
Article 51, to ensure that the obligations laid out in the
Charter are being fulfilled.

Thereis alsoroomforimprovementinthemonitoring
of the implementation of Security Council resolutions
authorizing the use of force. Brazil has suggested
that inspiration be drawn from the peacekeeping and
sanctions regimes so as to ensure that those resolutions
include sunset clauses, demand adequate reporting and
establish panels of experts. Given their exceptional
nature, such authorizations must be limited in their
legal, operational and temporal aspects. Those troops
might not be wearing blue helmets, but they act under
the authority 4 and legitimacy 4 of a blue text.

We must do our best to preserve the United Nations
as the most symbolic expression of international
democracy and of our determination to live in
peace, promote and protect human rights and attain
sustainable development. We must above all heed the
lessons of the past. Multilateralism is not an option, it
is an undeniable need. The alternatives to it are grim:
fragmentation, unilateralism, more frequent use of
force and the inability to tackle challenges that no one
can solve without cooperation. It is our responsibility to
work with a sense of urgency to update our institutions
and norms in order to promote international peace
and security. Brazil will remain fully committed to
strengthening the United Nations at this difficult
juncture.

