Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like first of all, Sir, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of May. I would also like to welcome the
Secretariat's report and to assure it that it has received
our full attention.

I have come from Doha, where once again I was
naive enough to hope that the Khartoum regime had
decided to put an end to its aggression against my
country and indeed to its subversive attempts to thwart
our policy to consolidate the rule of law and
democracy. For a moment, I actually hoped that it
would be the end of those attempts to overthrow the
legitimate institutions of the country and to install in
N'Djamena an authority loyal to Khartoum -
Khartoum, which thus hopes to benefit from the
complicity of such an authority to continue with
impunity its crimes against humanity in Darfur.

However, at the time of the press conference that
followed the signing of the agreement, a slight doubt
about Khartoum's good faith crossed my mind. Indeed,
in answer to a question about the presence of
subversive forces on Sudanese territory, the Sudanese
Minister wanted it believed that the fighters of the
Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) were based in
Chad, giving as an example the presence in N'Djamena
of Mr. Khalil, the head of that movement. However,
with the agreement of the Sudan, we facilitated a
meeting between the envoy of a great country and
Mr. Khalil of JEM. That envoy used his good offices
for the resumption of the Doha inter-Sudanese talks,
with a View to a ceasefire and a political settlement of
the Darfur crisis. He managed to convince IBM. to
dispatch a delegation to Doha. Did we commit a crime
by playing our role of facilitator?

Khartoum's attitude does not surprise us if we
look at the past. Peace agreements have been signed at
the level of heads of State - first in Tripoli, Libya, on
8 February 2006; in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, on 3 May
2007; and in Dhaka, Senegal, on 13 March 2008 - not
to mention the many communiques issued in the
context of peace initiatives of the countries of the
subregion or of the African Union under the auspices
of our brother, Guide Muammar Al-Qadhafi. Once the
meeting was over and the agreement signed, the ink
hardly dry, whether immediately afterwards or a few
days or weeks later, we were attacked by forces coming
from the Sudan.

In short, if, despite all those agreements, the
situation continues to worsen, it is because somewhere
there is ill will and bad faith. One tends to say that it is
the fault of both countries, which seems to us
inaccurate. How can you put on an equal footing the
one that started the war - the aggressor - and the one
that is defending itself: the victim.

We are the victims of a Machiavellian
machination of the Khartoum regime, whereas we have
not stopped working for peace in Darfur. But Khartoum
has unjustly accused us of being behind the rebellion in
Darfur and has mounted a vast war machine to
destabilize our country. The proof exists. We have
proof that since the beginning of 2005, the Sudan has
recruited, equipped and trained a subversive tribal
force against Chad. These are Sudanese, Chadian and
bi-national combatants whose only goal is to overthrow
the legitimate institutions of the country. It made
available to that force Toyota military vehicles, heavy
weapons, equipment stockpiles, food, fuel and so on.
And it has not stopped trying to unite all those tribal
components into a common front and has made
available to them several military training camps in
Darfur.
09-33090
Moreover, the Khartoum regime applauded the
desertion of some elements of the Chadian National
Armed Forces in October 2005 and the defection of
some Chadian officers in December 2005. Those
soldiers and officers were retrieved by Khartoum,
which placed them at the head of its war machine to
conceal its aggression as an intra-Chadian issue.

That subversive force became active on
26 September 2005 , when it attacked the Chadian town
Moudeina. Two major attacks were carried out on Adre
on 18 December 2005. That double attack on Adre was
followed by a huge offensive against several Chadian
military garrisons in eastern Chad and a Sudanese
refugee camp on Chadian territory. But the most
spectacular attacks were those of 13 April 2006 and
2 February 2008 on N'Djamena, clearly revealing
Khartoum's intention to overthrow State institutions.

With regard to what is occurring in the eastern
part of my country, members will agree with me that I
was right to tell them in my previous communications
that the rule of law and democracy, which we intend to
consolidate in Chad, necessarily depend on stability
and peace in the country, and not the obscure strategies
of the groups of armed mercenaries in the pay of the
Sudan. They will agree that the establishment of a
lasting peace in Chad depends also, and in particular,
on the consolidation of the democratic rule of law in
the country through effective implementation of the
provisions of the 13 August 2007 political agreement
sponsored by the international community. They will
agree too that those who, as I said, are still today being
unfairly called the armed opposition must renounce the
use of force and return to the country, in accordance
with the 25 October 2007 Sirte Agreement, instead of
rejecting that Agreement on the pretext that it is
obsolete, thus helping to consolidate the democratic
rule of law, to which we want them to truly commit
themselves by endorsing the 13 August 2007 political
agreement. However, I also quite rightly emphasize
that we should not dream too much, as we know that
they are not free to choose that path, which is contrary
to their masters' Machiavellian designs.

Despite the Doha agreement, their masters
ordered them to enter Chad, and its army supports them
in attacking Chad. Members will recall that I
emphasized their presence in the Sudan and that, under
the 25 October 2007 Sirte Agreement, they were
supposed to be disarmed and regrouped where they
were stationed. That is why, before the Council, we

welcomed the Secretary-General's most recent report
on this topic (S/2009/199), in which he stated in
paragraph 13 that those indebted to Khartoum - our
phrase - "continued to consolidate their forces in
West Darfur near El Geneina". On the same occasion, I
reaffirmed our commitment to comply with the
provisions of all the peace agreements linking us to the
Sudan: the Tripoli, Dakar and Riyadh Agreements. And
I concluded by expressing to the Council our hope that
the Chadian-Sudanese peace talks to be held in Doha,
Qatar, would pave the way for a true normalization of
our relations.

On 5 May, the Government of the Republic of
Chad recalled that it had welcomed the signing of the
Doha agreement on normalizing relations with the
Sudan - the umpteenth agreement, as knowledgeable
observers ironically stressed. Trusting in the
commitment of the mediator countries and the
expressed will to implement the provisions of all
previous agreements, the Government of the Republic
of Chad emphasized that it hoped that this time, there
would truly be a return to peace and trust between the
two countries.

Regrettably, the Chadian Government bitterly
noted that the intentions and the strategy of the
Khartoum regime had not changed and that, by signing
the Doha Agreement, the Khartoum regime had acted
with the same duplicity as with previous agreements.
With the ink on the Doha Agreement not even dry, the
Government of Chad denounced the aggressive posture
of the Khartoum regime, which had launched several
armed columns, equipped with 350 vehicles, against
our country. They were defeated, but we do not exclude
the possibility that Khartoum will repeat its aggression.
The Chadian Government believes that, by unleashing
that planned aggression against Chad, the Sudanese
regime renounced the Doha agreement.

Through its statement, the Government of the
Republic of Chad wishes to draw the international
community's attention to the bad faith of the Khartoum
regime and to ask that it take all necessary useful
measures to help Chad protect its stability, its integrity
and the safety of its beleaguered population. Therefore,
I wish to state that, on my Government's instructions, I
requested that the Security Council hold an urgent
meeting to consider the new aggression committed by
the Sudan against my country. I thank the Council for
heeding our appeal and organizing this meeting.

It is no longer a secret to any Council member
present here that the puppet force created, armed,
equipped and led by Sudanese soldiers and reinforced
by the notorious Janjaweed militia has constantly
attacked my country. As I said, the Secretary-General's
most recent report indicated the presence of that force
near El Geneina, in the Sudan. The Chad-Sudan
mediation cannot deny that, because it requested that
the Doha meeting be delayed and held on 28 April
instead of 7 April, as previously planned, to give the
Sudanese Government time to fulfil its commitments
under the 25 October Sirte Agreement by moving its
puppets away from the border and disarming them. The
Doha agreement also refers to the Sirte Agreement in
its provision calling for the parties to comprehensively
implement the agreements of which they have been
witnesses and guarantors.

This new situation, which dangerously threatens
peace and security in the subregion in general and in
Chad in particular, deserves the urgent attention of the
Council so that it can take all appropriate measures to
put an end to the Sudan's repeated aggressions against
my country, which needs the international community's
support to protect its integrity, its stability and the
security of its population. The Security Council must
no longer tolerate the fact that thousands of men
equipped with hundreds of vehicles are being
mobilized by the Sudan in plain view of the entire
world to attack my country. The Council must clearly
condemn the Al-Bashir regime for its repeated acts of
aggression over the years against my country, which
has suffered too much from war and aspires to live in
peace under the rule of law and democracy, even
though that is not what Khartoum would prefer.

