Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We have listened very carefully to the
briefings just delivered by Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen; Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs; and Mr. David Beasley, Executive Director
of the World Food Programme. We thank them for
the detailed and valuable briefings they provided. We
reiterate our full support for the work being done by
Mr. Martin Griffiths, and encourage him to continue
with his noble mission for the well-being of the
Yemeni people.

As we meet once again today to analyse the conflict
in Yemen, which is now in its fifth year, Equatorial
Guinea would like to begin by expressing its praise and
full support for the good management of the United
Nations system and other international actors, the sole
objective of which is to put an end as soon as possible to
this situation, which has ensnared women and children
and the entire Yemeni civilian population.

In late 2018, we were pleased to note the
good management of the mediation process led by
Mr. Griffiths, which led to the meeting in Sweden.
Taking past failures into account, we considered the
Yemeni parties' agreement to meet, negotiate and reach
a consensus on the various aspects of the Stockholm
Agreement to be a success. We have always recognized
that important step, but the most important thing
now is for the leaders of the parties to ensure strict
compliance with those commitments and to cooperate
with the Special Envoy in good faith and cooperation.
Commitment to the political process and partnership
with the United Nations, through the Special Envoy,
are indeed essential to achieving the goals of peace,
stability and the improvement of the living conditions
of the population affected by the conflict.

Despite the delays observed in the implementation
of the agreement, we welcomed some statements
made by the Special Envoy at the meeting in June (see S/PV.8551), such as the ongoing reduction in violence
throughout Al-Hudaydah governorate in the six months
since the entry into force of the agreement and the
reduction by 68 per cent in the number of civilian
victims in the five months after the ceasefire. In the
same vein, we were pleased to note the constructive
collaboration in recent months of the warring parties
with the Redeployment Coordination Committee
in the plans for the first and second phases of the
redeployments. It is important for that collaboration to
lead them to the tripartite monitoring mechanism.

Furthermore, our delegation calls on the parties
to immediately begin work on the other aspects of the
agreement, such as the implementation of the exchanges
of prisoners and detainees and the memorandum
of understanding on Taiz, which are equally
important in making progress towards achieving the
established objectives.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is extremely
concerned about the humanitarian crisis affecting
Yemen as a result of the conflict. The increase in food
insecurity, epidemics and the collapse of the health
system, as well as inflation and economic decline, have
contributed greatly to worsening this crisis.

Faced with this situation, we note with concern the
decision taken by the World Food Programme to partially
suspend the delivery of humanitarian assistance in the
country's capital. We therefore encourage the authorities
of the warring parties to find a solution to the incidents

that led to the suspension so that aid can be restored
and can continue to be distributed to the thousands of
people who need it. Although an agreement has not
been realized, we consider the ongoing negotiations
worthwhile and we praise the efforts of the World Food
Programme to reach that goal.

Similarly, we reiterate our concern about the
increase in fatalities in the rapidly spreading cholera
epidemic that has claimed thousands of human lives
since the outbreak began in the country. In that regard,
we urge all parties to facilitate humanitarian access to
the population in need of medicines and other services.
We further implore the parties to allow the displaced
persons throughout the country access to food, medical
care and shelter.

Finally, I would like to underscore the importance
of making progress on all the issues in question, which
deserve a sustainable solution in order to ensure the
possibility of a resumption of talks between the parties
on a comprehensive political solution. Moreover, we
reaffirm and reiterate our full support for the diplomatic
efforts of Special Envoy Griffiths, as well as the work
of the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, Mr. Lowcock, and the Executive Director of
the World Food Programme, Mr. Beasley, to alleviate
the suffering of the population and resolve the conflict
in Yemen.

