Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to
start by thanking the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina for his briefing. Jordan has taken note of
the conclusions contained in the High Representative's
forty-seventh report on implementation of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina peace agreement (see S/2015/300, annex). The report includes a number of positive steps
forward, which we welcome. At the same time, we are
concerned by actions that continue to undermine the
foundations of the Dayton Peace Agreement.

The agreement between the Bosnian parties to
form the current Government has placed Bosnia and
Herzegovina back on the path to normalization. Jordan
therefore welcomes the formation of the Government
and calls on it to pursue its efforts to meet the political,
social and economic aspirations of its citizens. Jordan
commends the efforts undertaken in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the area of reform in general, but
reaffirms the importance of redoubling efforts in the
areas of the rule of law, the fight against corruption
and other pivotal issues. If Bosnia and Herzegovina is
to meet these challenges, the current authorities, the
leaders of the various parties and the political elite
need to work together vigorously to confront these
challenges, regardless of their differences.

In the light of the difficult economic conditions
afflicting Bosnia and Herzegovina, all stakeholders
must stand together to revive the country's weakened
economy. This responsibility lies primarily with
Bosnians themselves, who must work to create
the conditions necessary to reviving the country's
economic system. At the same time, we urge the
international community to continue to assist Bosnia
and Herzegovina in that vital sector, and we urge all the
countries of the region to develop and strengthen their
relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In that context, and in the interest of strengthening
the country's cooperation and regional integration,
Jordan welcomes the adoption by the Bosnian
Parliamentary Assembly in February of the Presidency's
written commitment to maintaining the country's
efforts to accede to the European Union, in accordance
with the aspirations of Bosnians Within their broader,
more comprehensive vision of the future. This will
require greater effort on the part of Bosnian leaders by
taking important decisions to overcome the challenges
involved in meeting the necessary criteria for accession.

The political difficulties experienced by Bosnia
and Herzegovina during the period that preceded the
agreement on the formation of the current Government
show that the only path open to the Bosnians is to work
together to overcome the problems and difficulties
currently afflicting the country. Thus, the respect of all
Bosnians for the unity and sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina within its recognized international borders
is essential to the country's progress and prosperity. We
urge all those who promote the idea of secession from
Bosnia and Herzegovina to refrain from making such
calls, which contravene the provisions of the Bosnian
Constitution and the Dayton Peace Agreement. We
also urge them to harness their energies to strengthen
national unity and to engage in positive cooperation
with all entities in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In conclusion, we pay tribute to the multinational
stabilization force in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
commend its efforts to assist with the implementation
ofthe peace agreements and promote capacity building.

