Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, allow me to join others in expressing our
deepest condolences to the Government and people of
Turkey in the aftermath of the earthquake in the city of
Van yesterday, as well as to the Government and
people of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on the death of
Crown Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud.

Allow me also to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing. We
further thank the Permanent Representative of Israel,
His Excellency Mr. Ron Prosor, and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine, His Excellency Mr. Riyad
Mansour, for their contributions to today's debate.

Bosnia and Herzegovina understands the request
for membership in the United Nations that was
submitted to the Secretary-General on 23 September as
an aspiration of the Palestinian people for their own
statehood. It is also our understanding that the entire
international community would like to see the
realization of a two-State solution, with a secure State
of Israel and an independent State of Palestine living
side by side in peace and security. The only way to
bring about a just and lasting solution to the conflict is
through direct negotiations between the Israelis and the
Palestinians on the basis of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Road
Map, the agreements previously reached by the parties
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches particular
importance to the determination of the Quartet to
actively seek a comprehensive resolution of the Middle
East conflict. In that context, we take note of the
Quartet's statement issued on 23 September and the
proposed timetable for the resumption of credible
negotiations. We are all aware of the complex situation
in which the negotiations must resume, but as we have
previously stated, it is in the best interest of not only
the Israelis and the Palestinians, but also the peoples of
the region and beyond.

The continuation of settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, continues to pose a serious obstacle on the
road to comprehensive peace. Those activities are
illegal under international law and are contrary to
Israel's obligations under the Road Map. We therefore
call upon Israel to respond positively to the appeals of
the international community and to end all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem. We also reiterate our view
that the status of Jerusalem is a final status issue that
must be resolved through negotiations between the
parties.

The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip
continues to be of great concern. We reiterate our
appeal for the immediate, sustained and unconditional
opening of crossings for the flow of humanitarian aid,
commercial goods and persons to and from Gaza, in
accordance with resolution 1860 (2009). Israel's
security concerns, including a complete stop to
violence, must also be addressed.

My delegation is aware of the tremendous efforts
required from both sides in order to return to the table
and get the negotiation process moving. A number of
obstacles must be overcome, but we believe that good
political will and a strong sense of political
responsibility can help to overcome those hurdles.
Even small steps in the right direction can contribute to
confidence-building and the creation of the general
environment necessary for successful negotiations. In
that context, we welcome the recent announcement and
conduct of the prisoner exchange. We appreciate the
efforts of all those who have contributed to the
agreement, including the Egyptian and German
negotiators. In that connection, we express our sincere
belief that a just, comprehensive and lasting settlement
in the Middle East is possible. We therefore urge both
parties to make an extra effort and to seize the
opportunity to overcome obstacles.

Allow me to conclude by turning briefly to the
situations in Yemen and Syria. In Yemen, regrettably,
the deadlock has been costly, the death toll has been
rising, the economy is ruined, violence is flaring and
some provinces have fallen out of Government control.
Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly condemns all human
rights violations and emphasizes that all who commit
them must be held responsible. We express our hope
that the transfer of power will begin as soon as
possible, and we reiterate our support for an inclusive
Yemeni-led process of transition.

The situation in Syria remains a source of deep
concern and carries with it a real risk of greater
violence and civil war. Once again, we strongly
condemn the continued violence and use of force and
urge the Syrian authorities to immediately stop such
actions. We also reiterate our firm position that all
those responsible for committing crimes must be
brought to justice and held accountable. Bosnia and
Herzegovina restates its support for Syria's sovereignty
and territorial integrity. We still believe that an
inclusive, Syrian-led dialogue and the implementation
of the announced reforms are the keys to resolving the
cr1s1s.

