The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Algeria, Australia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cape Verde, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Ethiopia, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Mongolia, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Senegal, South Africa,
Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe, in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Baali (Algeria),
Ms. Wensley (Australia), Mr. Fonseca (Brazil),
Mr. Sotirov (Bulgaria), Mr. Leao Monteiro (Cape Verde), Mr. Simonovic (Croatia), Mr. Rodriguez
Parrilla (Cuba), Mr. Zackheos (Cyprus), Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo), Mr. Olhaye
(Djibouti), Mr. Mohammed (Ethiopia), Mr. Wibisono
(Indonesia), Mr. Vento (Italy), Mr. Satoh (Japan),
Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Enkhsaikhan (Mongolia), Mr. Powles (New Zealand), Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria), Mr. Honningstad
(Norway), Mr. Brito (Portugal), Mr. Lee See-young
(Republic of Korea), Mr. Ka (Senegal), Mr. Kumalo
(South Africa), Dr. Kiyonga (Uganda), Mr. Kasanda
(Zambia) and Dr. Stamps (Zimbabwe) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council's prior consultations, and in the
absence of objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. James Wolfensohn,
President of the World Bank; Mr. Mark Malloch Brown,
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme; and Dr. Peter Piot, Executive Director of the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I welcome Mr. Wolfensohn, Mr. Malloch Brown and
Dr. Piot, and invite them to take a seat at the Council
table.

Let me thank the members of the Council for the
honour of presiding over it, and for their willingness to
greet the dawn of this new millennium by exploring a
brand-new definition of world security. Today marks the
first time, after more than 4,000 meetings stretching back
over more than half a century, that the Security Council
will discuss a health issue as a security threat. We tend to
think of a threat to security in terms of war and peace.
Yet no one can doubt that the havoc wreaked and the toll
exacted by HIV/AIDS do threaten our security. The heart
of the security agenda is protecting lives, and we now
know that the number of people who will die of AIDS in
the first decade of the twenty-first century will rival the
number that died in all of the wars in all of the decades
of the twentieth century.

When 10 people in sub-Saharan Africa are infected
every minute; when 11 million children have already
become AIDS orphans, and many must be raised by other
children; when a single disease threatens everything from
economic strength to peacekeeping, we clearly face a
security threat of the greatest magnitude. This historic
meeting not only recognizes the real and present danger
to world security posed by the AIDS pandemic - which
I will discuss in further detail during my remarks as head
of the United States delegation - but also begins a
month-long focus by this Council on the special
challenges confronting the continent of Africa.

The powerful fact that we begin here today by
concentrating on AIDS has a still larger significance: it
sets a precedent for Security Council concern and action
on a broader security agenda. By the power of example,
this meeting demands of us that we see security through
a new and wider prism and, forever after, think about it
according to a new and more expansive definition.

For the past half century, the Security Council has
dealt with the classic security agenda built upon common
efforts to resist aggression and to stop armed conflict. We
have witnessed wars among nations, and violence on the
scale of war within nations, for many reasons: because of

 

claims of religious or racial superiority; because of lust for
power, disguised as ideology or rationalized as geo-strategic
doctrine; because of a sense that a small place or a larger
region, or even the whole world itself, was too small to
allow for the survival and prosperity of all, unless the
powerful could dominate the weak; because of the tendency
of too many to see themselves solely as separate groups,
celebrating and defending their exclusivity by demonizing
and dehumanizing others; and because of poverty, which
causes the collapse of hopes and expectations and the
coming apart of society, and makes people first desperate,
and then freshly open to evil leadership.

But while the old threats still face our global
community, there are new things under the sun - new
forces arising that now, or soon will, challenge international
order, raising issues of peace and war. As our world enters
the year 2000, it is not the change in our calendar that
matters. What matters is that in this symbolic transition
from old to new, we find one of those precious few
moments in all of human history when we have a chance to
become the change we wish to see in the world, by seeking
a common agreement to openly recognize a powerful new
truth that has been growing just beneath the surface of
every human heart. It is time to change the nature of the
way we live together on this planet.

From this new vantage point, we must forge and
follow a new agenda for world security, an agenda that
includes the global environmental challenge, which could
render all our other progress meaningless unless we deal
with it successfully; the global challenge of defeating drugs
and corruption, which now spill across our borders; the
global challenge of terror, magnified by the availability of
new weapons of mass destruction so small they can be
concealed in a coat pocket; the new pandemics laying waste
to whole societies; and the emergence of new strains of old
diseases that are horrifyingly resistant to the antibiotics that
protected the past three generations.

Our new security agenda should be pursued with
determination, adequate resources and creative use of the
new tools at the world's disposal that can be used to bring
us together in successful common efforts - tools such as
the Internet and the emerging global information
infrastructure which, if used imaginatively, will enable new
depths of insight and cooperation by nations, non-
governmental organizations and citizens at all levels. Our
task is not merely to recognize and confront these
challenges, but to rise to our higher ideals and work
together to make our brightest dreams real in the lives of
our children.

In order to succeed, I believe - along with growing
billions around this planet - that we must create a world
where people's faith in their own capacity for self-
governance unlocks their human potential and justifies
their growing belief that all can share in an ever-widening
circle of human dignity and self-sufficiency; a world of
freedom and free markets; a world where the free flow of
ideas and information, and freer access to education,
sustain fundamental freedoms; a world in which parents
are free to choose the size of their families with the
confidence that the children they bring into this world
will survive to become healthy adults, with economic
opportunity in prosperous and peaceful communities; a
world where we educate girls as well as boys and secure
the rights of women everywhere as full members of the
human family.

All this and more constitutes the great global
challenge of our time: to create and strengthen a sense of
solidarity as we seek a newer world of security for all -
security not only from loss of life and the ravages of war,
but security from constant fear and degradation, and from
a loss of the quality of life and liberty of spirit that
should belong to all.

If we are to succeed in addressing this new security
agenda, we must recognize that because of our rapid
growth in population and the historically unprecedented
power of the new technologies at our widespread disposal,
mistakes which once were tolerable can now have
consequences that are multiplied manyfold. For example,
for almost all of recorded history, people could do
whatever they wished to their environment, and do little
to harm it permanently. People could wage war in the
world, and do nothing to destroy it. But now, threats that
were once local can have consequences that are regional
or global; damage once temporary can now become
chronic and catastrophic.

As a world community, we must prove to our
citizens that we are wise enough to control what we have
been smart enough to create. We must understand that the
old conception of global security - with its focus almost
exclusively on armies, ideologies and geopolitics - has
to be enlarged. We need to show that we not only can
contain aggression, prevent war and mediate conflicts, but
that we can also work together to anticipate and respond
to a new century, with its new global imperatives.

The human mind - our ingenuity, our dreaming,
our restless quest to do better - created this moment.
Now the human heart, coupled with the human will -

 

not of one individual, not of one nation or group of nations,
but the collective will of truly united nations - must
master this moment. We must bend it in the direction of
life, not death; justice, not oppression; opportunity, not
deprivation - a new security for the new world we now
inhabit. The future is not something that we merely try to
predict. The future is something that we make for
ourselves, together. It is up to us to move forward - with
faith in our principles, our foresight and our common
humanity.

The Spanish poet Antonio Machado once said,

"Pathwalker, there is no path; we create the path
as we walk".

There is great hope in this pathmaking meeting. It is an
honour to open it. And my hope is that the first days and
years of the millennium, and all those that follow, will be
guided by the vision that marks this first meeting. We live
in a new tine. We face new and larger responsibilities.
Meet them we can, and meet them we must - for the new
threats to humanity are as grave as war itself, and the new
hopes we have are as precious as peace.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

It is my personal honour to call on the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, who has given so much to
the cause of peace and security, Mr. Kofi Annan.


