Mr. Cuello Camilo (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): Although I have received a five-page
statement from my capital, in the interests of time I
shall read out a condensed version.

I would like to thank you, Madam President, and
your entire delegation for having organized this
important meeting. On behalf of the Government and
people of my country, I should also like to thank
President Bill Clinton, Special Envoy of the Secretary-

General for Haiti, as well as Mr. He'di Annabi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti, for
their informative briefings today and for their
continuing work on behalf of the Republic of Haiti.
The Dominican Republic commends the efforts of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to address and resolve
the numerous needs of the Haitian people. We also
acknowledge the presence of Mrs. Michele Duvivier
Pierre-Louis, Prime Minister of Haiti, from whose wise
comments this afternoon all of us have benefited.

We welcome the holding of an important donors
conference last April in Washington, during which
commitments in the amount of an additional
$350 million in assistance were pledged to Haiti. More
recently, international financial institutions cancelled
$1.2 billion of Haiti's multilateral debt. Similarly, the
countries of the Paris Club cancelled $214.7 million of
the country's bilateral debt. The Dominican Republic,
through both President Leonel Fernandez Reyna and
Foreign Minister Carlos Morales Troncoso, has
strongly called for both of those steps to be taken. It is
now urgent that the pledges of financial assistance be
given effect and that they have a direct impact upon the
resumption of growth, the creation of jobs, the
establishment of infrastructure, the provision of social
services and, given Haiti's precarious natural
environment, its capacity to feed itself and develop
peacefully.

The Dominican Republic is also a poor country.
As Haiti's neighbour on the Island of Hispaniola, we
too must confront the devastating natural events that
periodically beset us, in addition to the challenges
posed to social cohesion by an international economic
and financial crisis that has triggered a decrease in our
exports and a slowdown in tourism. The Dominican
Republic is therefore prepared to join our colleagues in
the Haitian Government in the framework of the Haiti-
Dominican Republic Joint Commission. The
Dominican Republic's teams were formed long ago.
Their agendas include numerous initiatives that must
now be finalized with our Haitian brothers.

In that connection, I should like to add that we
are more than willing to jointly implement and make
the best use of the economic association agreement that
we negotiated with the European Union, which Haiti
has yet to sign. In that connection, we would like to
thank the Secretary-General for emphasizing the
importance of the Joint Commission in his report
(S/2009/439), as well as for his objectivity in
addressing the regrettable events that occurred
recently.

Haiti alone is the master of its future.
Nevertheless, no member of the international
community can be indifferent to its enormous urgent
needs. The Dominican Republic believes that the
international community's generosity towards Haiti is,
and will always be, absolutely essential. In recent
statements, Haitian Senator Rudolph Henry Boulos
expressed important views as to my country's role,
which I would very briefly like to refer to here.

In Senator Henry Boulos's opinion, about
350,000 Haitian labourers work in the construction
industry in the Dominican Republic, with another
300,000 working in agriculture and 3,000 others in
specialized tourism activities. Moreover, according to
his own estimates, a large part of Haiti's middle class
resides in the Dominican Republic, providing a flow of
remittances to a significant part of the Haitian
population. If we combine that with the thousands of
Haitians who are currently studying in Dominican
universities and who receive official tuition and
transportation assistance and if we also take into
consideration the huge numbers of Haitians in our
schools and hospitals, we would then have a more
accurate picture of the Dominican Republic's
contribution to Haiti.

We share the Secretary-General's vision for Haiti.
In that connection, the Dominican Republic supports
the idea that the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti should, in addition to the functions established
in Security Council resolutions, continue to patrol on
the Haitian side of the border area, so as to strengthen
security and effectively combat the trafficking in
weapons and drugs, as well as other associated crimes.
Haiti continues to face significant and
unavoidable challenges. Although our geographic
reality requires mutual cooperation and solidarity, none
of our joint efforts will be enough unless we have the
generous and effective support of the international
community.

