Ms. Lajous (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, my delegation wishes to thank the Secretary-
General for his report on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) over the past three months. The report
clearly describes progress made during that period and
the challenges that must be addressed in the immediate
future.

Mexico also extends its deep thanks for the work
done by Mr. Haekkerup at the helm of UNMIK and to
all the staff of the Mission for their excellent work,
undertaken with the support of several non-
governmental and regional organizations.

The international community still remembers the
suffering of the Kosovars during their painful flight not
long ago, when they had to leave their homes and fight
for their survival. In 1999, I was Mexico's Ambassador
to Austria and visited the Kosovar refugee camps there
in order to report back to my Government. I remember
very clearly that, despite the enormous efforts of the
Austrian Government, the European Union and the
international community as a whole to support the
thousands of displaced persons, their anguish touched
the entire world. I recall the uncertainty on the faces of
men and women who did not know when or how they
would ever be able to return home.

Today, thanks to the work of the United Nations,
it is possible for an ever increasing number of such
people - which we hope to see increase further - to
return to their homes. Thanks to UNMIK, it has been
possible to normalize life in all their communities. The
States Members of this Organization can be proud of
all that has been achieved, although much remains to
be done. The most important task is to complete the
training and preparation of local administrators to
assume control of the institutions of self-government.
UNMIK deserves ample recognition for its work, but
its responsibilities must in no way be considered
permanent or long-term.

My Government welcomes the outcome of the 17
November election and the launching of the work of
the Assembly. We trust that it will soon be possible to
establish provisional self-government in accordance
with Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). We also
strongly hope that those in charge of self-government
will work in a spirit of inter-community tolerance. To
that end, we must encourage respect and mutual
tolerance that will permeate the executive functions of
the officials of local self-government. In this
connection, Mexico would stress the progress made in
strengthening the structures of the domestic judiciary,
as referred to in paragraph 25 of the Secretary-
General's report. The rule of law is the best way to
combat organized crime, which flourishes wherever
there is a vacuum in the judiciary and, by extension, in
the power structure.

One pending task is the return of all refugees and
displaced persons to their places of origin and homes.
That will offer the greatest proof that the various
political forces representing all ethnic groups have
achieved harmony within the province. Mexico
supports and believes in the ability of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
carry that process forward. Another way in which it
could help to achieve this would be to implement the
agreement with the International Commission on
Missing Persons so as to advance in the identification
of the missing.

Mexico is proud to be a multi-ethnic country, one
in which various ethnic groups live together and in
which there are 56 living indigenous languages. An
educational system that encourages tolerance and
respect for the mosaic of our various ethnic identities is
one of the factors that has contributed to coexistence
and national integration. We firmly believe that one of
the things UNMIK can do to help normalize life in the
province is to oversee the establishment of an
educational system in Kosovo that encourages a culture
of coexistence between the various ethnic groups and
respect for their various expressions.

