Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate and for
building on our recent practice by holding this meeting
as an open debate to enable Member States not on the
Council to participate. The number of those inscribed
on the speakers' list reflects the high level of interest
on this issue and its importance to all Members. An
efficient and transparent Security Council is in the
interests of all Member States as we confront new and
different challenges to international peace and security.

There have been many positive developments in
recent years, including more open meetings, Arria
Formula meetings, the use of video conferencing,
meetings with troop-contributing countries and
horizon-scanning and wrap-up meetings. In many ways,
the Security Council has proved the most adaptable of
all United Nations bodies. But today I want to focus
on just two aspects of this issue. The first concerns
the procedural aspects of the Council's work, and the
second examines how our working methods allow us
to exercise our responsibilities in the area of conflict
prevention. The Councl is regularly engaged on matters
that are current threats to international peace and
security. But if we engage and exert influence at the
right moment, we could prevent those situations from
becoming threats. Then we will be fully exercising our
responsibilities.

On the first issue, the imperative for an efficient
Council is indisputable. The Council agenda is already
full and it is growing. The time for meaningful
discussion and exchange within the Council is being
squeezed as a result. A larger Council, which we fully
support, would redouble that pressure. Those points
alone make a clear case for ensuring that the work of
the Council is made as efficient as possible.
There are a number of ways in which we can achieve
a more efficient Council, as we demonstrated during
the presidency of the United Kingdom in June. Simply
by starting meetings promptly and fully observing the
guidelines set out in presidential note S/2010/507 with
regard to the length of interventions, we concluded a
substantial amount of business in June.

But we should go further. I, for one, would support
implementing in the Security Council the African
Union Peace and Security Council practice of turning
off the microphones of speakers who have exceeded
their allotted time. That would expedite business and
allow more speakers to be heard. It is entirely possible
to keep to short interventions without limiting the
ability of Member States to fully express their views. I
am sure that this would also be the case if we adopted
the African Union practice.

I congratulate Ambassador Perceval, as Chair of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, for restating and building
on established measures for conducting business
efficiently and transparently. Presidential note 507 has
been an important reference point in that regard, as have
the two notes issued earlier this year (S/2013/515 and S/2013/630). We should make sure that we implement
their contents fully.

My second point, with regard to maintaining
international peace and security, is as much about
conflict prevention as it is about conflict management
or resolution. The Council should take full advantage of
mechanisms at its disposal, such as horizon scanning,
to exercise a preventative function. Horizon-scanning
meetings are an opportunity for the Secretariat to brief
on issues of concern. Discussions on any other business
or requests for urgent Council meetings can also be
held on rapidly evolving and emerging situations.
Many Council members have used those mechanisms
in recent months.

In the past week, Council members used those
tools to discuss the situations in the eastern part of
the Democratic People's Republic of the Congo (see S/PV.7046) and the Sudan (see S/PV.7048). It is very
welcome that Council members are approaching our

conflict-prevention responsibilities in that proactive
way.

Prior to that, such discussions have covered Egypt
and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force.
We also welcome the Secretariat's readiness to bring
troubling situations to the attention of the Council,
as was recently done with the Maldives and Guinea,
making Article 99 of the Charter an active tool for
conflict prevention.

Horizon-scanning briefings have covered Syria and
its neighbouring countries, the Sahel and the situation
between Iraq and Kuwait, among many other issues.

The Council issued a press statement following
the discussion of Guinea (SC/11159) in the past week,
and we hope that the parties in Guinea will act on it,
because elsewhere we have seen that positive responses
to Council products following those forward-looking
discussions are possible.

The parties in the Sudan and South Sudan have
been made fully aware of the Council's views on the
various issues in urgent need of resolution, including
Abyei.

The presidential statement on Yemen
(S/PRST/20l3/3), issued in February, sent a clear
message to would-be spoilers seeking to undermine the
National Dialogue and transition in Yemen.

Adopting a conflict-prevention mind-set and using
such mechanisms of working practices gives the Council
a powerful tool kit to examine and respond to emerging
crises. We should not be afraid to use it. Early effective
responses from the Council can go a long way towards
preventing further deterioration. We have only to look
at the situation in Syria to see how a lack of action over
many months allowed the conflict to escalate, with the
horrific consequences that we see today.

A modern, transparent, efficient Council is plainly
in the interests of all Member States. The risks of not
achieving that goal are equally plain, particularly in the
area of conflict prevention.

As I said in June at the end of the presidency of
the United Kingdom (see S/PV.6992), improving the
working methods is not merely desirable, it is essential.

