Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): My delegation
joins others in welcoming the Chairman-in-Office of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), Mr. Audronius Azubalis, to the
Security Council. We wish to thank him for his briefing
on the work of the OSCE.

Last week, we received a briefing (see S/PV.6477) from the High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy of the European Union
(EU) on the EU's cooperation with the United Nations,
at which time we reiterated our strong view that
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in the area of peace and
security was a major priority for us. We welcome all
efforts in that regard.

Our support for such initiatives stems from our
belief that multilateralism is strengthened through
enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations. Article 54 of
Chapter VIII of the Charter, under which the OSCE is
briefing the Council here today, envisaged strong
cooperation between the Security Council and regional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

We realize, however, that each regional
organization is unique in terms of the challenges they
face in maintaining international peace and security
and the manner in which they address those threats.
Moreover, we do not believe that efforts by regional
organizations absolve the Council of its Charter-
mandated responsibilities as the guardian of
international peace and security. In fact, such efforts
complement each other. The briefing we just received
from the Chairman-in-Office confirms as much.

We have noted with appreciation the challenges
that the OSCE helps to address, from Kosovo to
Moldova, to Nagorny Karabakh and in Central Asia.
We welcome the sharing of experiences between the
OSCE and other regional organizations, in particular
the African Union, and hope that such cooperation can
be strengthened.

In conclusion, we would like to assure the OSCE
of our support for all of those efforts.
