Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Sir, for having convened this open debate. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his latest report on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2010/579).

Switzerland welcomes the adoption of the
presidential statement today, which reaffirms the
importance of the achievement made so far in the
protection of civilians. I would also like to warmly
congratulate Ms. Valerie Amos on her appointment to
the post of Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator.

Over the past ten years, the activities of the
Security Council have been increasingly influenced by
the issue of the protection of civilians. Encouraging
progress has been made, especially in terms of
establishing general standards, as well as in taking into
account the specific protection needs of women and
children. Other bodies of the United Nations system
have followed the Council's lead, showing that the
protection of civilians is by no means the prerogative
of a single body. For example, the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations has worked over the past
three years on a common definition of the strategic
framework within which a mission must perform its
tasks relating to the protection of civilians as defined
by the Security Council.

However, the impact of those developments will
have little value if they are not transformed into a
tangible improvement in civilian protection on the
ground. We therefore encourage the Security Council,
and in particular its informal group of experts on the
protection of civilians, to take that into account in their
work.

I would like to focus my remarks on four central
aspects of the report of the Secretary-General before
the Council today, which are: engagement with non-
State armed groups, humanitarian access, the standards
governing the activities of private security companies,
and, lastly, the issue of the humanitarian impact of
explosive weapons.

First, Switzerland agrees with the Secretary-
General's evaluation of the need for greater respect for
the law by non-State armed groups and stresses the
importance of preventing obstacles to the efforts of
humanitarian organizations in that regard. We are
concerned by the impact that the adoption of lists of
terrorist groups may have on efforts to strengthen the
protection of civilians. In our view, it is important
rather to gain a better understanding of the motivations
of non-State groups and to identify strategies to ensure
that they fully respect the law. In that connection,
Switzerland welcomes the work of the Geneva
Academy of International Humanitarian Law and
Human Rights referred to in the report.

Secondly, humanitarian access remains a crucial
element for all protection and aid activities relating to
people affected by armed conflict and violence.
Switzerland expresses its concern with regard to the
growing restrictions on access granted to humanitarian
actors in conflict zones. We also wish to reiterate that it
is the primary responsibility of States to provide their
people with protection and aid. To do so, States must
ensure swift and unrestricted humanitarian access. In
that regard, the Security Council needs to continue in
its efforts to monitor constraints on humanitarian
access and, where necessary, take the necessary
measures to eliminate any such obstacles.

Thirdly, with regard to the normative framework
in conflict situations, private security companies are
playing an increasingly important role. It is essential
that those companies undertake to abide by and respect
international norms. We therefore welcome the recent
signature of an international code of conduct by some
60 private security companies, under which they have
committed to respect human rights and humanitarian
law in their activities. This initiative, the first of its
kind, was jointly launched by Switzerland and industry
associations. The code should be considered as just
part of a series of initiatives. Indeed, in 2008,
Switzerland and the International Committee of the
Red Cross presented the Montreux Document, which
reminds States of pertinent international obligations
and good practices related to operations of private
military and security companies during armed conflict.

In conclusion, we think it appropriate to continue
to follow the issue of explosive weapons, especially
with a view to better implementing international
humanitarian law. The use of certain explosive
weapons in densely populated areas is clearly a major
source of suffering for civilians in situations of armed
conflict. A more in-depth study could, for example,
reveal the extent to which greater protection could
limit these impacts.

