Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Feltman, Mr. Cardi and Mr. Vale de Almeida for
their briefings, and Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi of
Spain for the work he led last year. The information
they have given us shows that the issue has positive
aspects, challenges and also some areas of concern.

Uruguay is firmly committed to non-proliferation
and to strengthening the nuclear disarmament regime.
We do not possess nuclear weapons and we are a
member of the world's first nuclear-weapon-free zone
under the Treaty of Tlatelolco and its counterpart
organization in Latin America, the Agency for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
and the Caribbean, as well as a party to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We were
pleased and optimistic about the signing in Vienna in
2015 of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on the
Iranian nuclear programme.

Exactly one year later, after the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) had verified that Iran had
complied with the initial provisions of the agreement,
during Uruguay's presidency of the Council, we reached
the starting date for implementation, marking another
important milestone in the process, a key achievement
for non-proliferation and a significant contribution
to international peace, security and stability that
eliminates one of the main sources of tension in the
troubled region of the Middle East.

The steps taken by Iran and the other parties to the
agreement showed that positive results can be achieved
with political will and diplomacy, even in cases where
they seem distant prospects. We appreciate the IAEA's
confirmation that so far Iran has been fulfilling the
provisions of the agreement. At the same time, we are
concerned about the criticisms in the report regarding
Iran's possible violation of the provisions of annex B
to resolution 2231 (2015). In that regard, while we are
grateful for Iran's detailed report on its compliance
with that annex, in the future we would also like to
know the degree of its compliance with other aspects
of the resolution, including annex A. Uruguay urges all
the parties to the agreement to take all the necessary
measures stipulated in resolution 2231 (2015) and to
comply with its provisions in order not to jeopardize
a historic agreement that was the result of more than
two years of intense negotiations. In that regard, we
encourage the parties to act with restraint and caution
and to refrain from taking any action that runs counter
to the agreement. The Security Council, as a guarantor
of international peace and security, should oversee its
full compliance.

(spoke in English)

I would like to express my good wishes to the lady
sitting on my right, whom I will miss. It has been a
pleasure working with Ms. Power - whether we have
been in agreement or disagreement, it has always been
a pleasure and an enriching experience to listen to her
arguments, but mostly to be touched by the fire and
passion that she always puts into her statements. I wish

her all the very best. In Spanish we often say adios, but
we also often say hasta pronto - see you soon.

