It is a great honour and privilege for me to address the Security Council as Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kosova. On behalf of the Government of the Republic of Kosova, its citizens and myself, I take this opportunity to extend our sincere condolences to the families that have lost their loved ones to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic anywhere in the world, and especially in the respected countries comprising the membership of the Security Council. Before the first cases of COVID-19 appeared in Kosovo, on 11 March, our Government took immediate preventive measures, including closing schools and banning flights. As a result of a rapid, professional and efficient operation, the number of people in Kosova infected with COVID-19 has been relatively small, and the number of deaths in the country from the virus is smaller than in other countries of the region. On 6 October 2019, parliamentary elections were held in the Republic of Kosova. The elections demonstrated a high degree of democratic awareness among the citizens of Kosova and received positive evaluations from international monitors. The opposition won the elections, with the political movement I represent, Levizja Vetevendosje! - which means "the Self-Determination Movement!" - obtaining the relative majority in the Parliament of the Republic of Kosova. Prime Minister Albin Kurti was granted the mandate of the citizens to govern the country. Election turnout in municipalities with Serb ethnic majorities was higher than in the municipalities with Albanian ethnic majorities. Representatives of the Serb ethnic minority in Kosova won just six seats by vote, but, as guaranteed by our Constitution, also obtained four additional seats. The same has also occurred with respect to other ethnic minorities in the country. Although the counting and recounting process took some time, the transfer of power took place in a proper manner. Accordingly, the 6 October 2019 election represents a major step forward for democracy in Kosova. Resolution 1244 (1999) was adopted in another context. Its purpose was to resolve the humanitarian catastrophe, end the fighting, return the refugees to their homes and stop the ethnic cleansing in Kosova after the implementation of a terrible hegemonic project by Serbia. Now the situation has changed radically. As reflected in the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/255), in the last six months there have been no inter-ethnic conflicts in Kosova. Therefore, the time has come for the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to complete its mission. In my first month as Foreign Minister, I participated in a number of regional meetings with the countries of the Western Balkans; representatives of Serbia were also present at all the meetings. The impression that I garnered during the meetings is that Serbia is still unable to accept the simple fact that, on 22 July 2010, the International Court of Justice in The Hague sealed the legacy and legitimacy of the independence of the Republic of Kosova, which is irreversible. Let us all take a moment to remember the Court's explicit statement that "(t]he court is of the opinion that the declaration of independence of Kosovo adopted on 17 February 2008 did not violate international law." The sooner Serbia understands this, the more benefits there will be for Serbia, for us and for our region. 29/31 30/31 I know that some of the States represented today in Security Council have not recognized Kosova as an independent sovereign State. The absolute majority of United Nations Members, however, have recognized the Republic of Kosova. I invite the members to recognize the Republic of Kosova. Through that act, they would not only respect the legitimate will of the absolute majority of the citizens of Kosova but also respect the decision of the International Court of Justice and support peace and cooperation in our region. The report of Secretary-General cites the International Committee of the Red Cross, stating that 1,646 individuals have been missing since the war in Kosova in 1999. The most well-known person is University of Pristina professor Ukshin Hoti. Professor Hoti was last seen on 16 May 1999, in Dubrava Prison. He was arrested by the Serbian regime for political reasons. He had to be released that day after spending five years as a political prisoner. The guards took him out the cell door, and he was never seen again. Where is Ukshin Hoti? He was in the hands of Serbian State institutions. There are 1,645 other people like Professor Hoti. The State and society of Kosovo has a right to know where Ukshin Hoti is. Where are the 1,646 people of Kosova? Another tragedy that has pervaded the lives of many Albanian women and men since the 1999 war is rape. It is a very sensitive issue, and it comes as no surprise that many of those women and men do not want to be registered or identified owing to a fear of reliving the horror again. Despite that, there are brave women who have decided to face their fears and come forward. For instance, in 2013, Ms. Marte Tunaj was the first woman to openly testify about her rape; she died in May 2016 with a pension of €96. In addition, Ms. Vasfije Krasniqi-Goodman has continued the sacred mission of Ms. Tunaj by constantly speaking out on this issue that pains an entire nation. Recently, Ms. Shyhrete Tahiri-Sylejmani also showed unparalleled strength when she decided to talk about her experience. Today I thank those women for their courage and for inspiring and encouraging other women and men to seek justice. Most of the perpetrators were Serbian soldiers or police. Rape is a war crime. We ask Serbia to identify its soldiers and police officers who raped Albanian women and men. Justice must be served. One of the latest unjust actions by the Government in Belgrade is the arrest of our citizen Mr. Nezir Mehmetaj. He was arrested by the Serbian authorities on the border between Serbia and the Republic of Kosova on 3 January. Mr. Mehmetaj's family has stated that he and his close family have lived in Switzerland for about 30 years. As Mr. Mehmetaj suffers from diabetes, his health has deteriorated significantly during his detention. I appeal to the Permanent Representatives of United Nations States Members to use their authority to intervene and call for Mr. Mehmetaj's release from Serbian prison. Our country's relations with Serbia have remained difficult. The Government of the Republic of Kosova is convinced that our relations with Serbia can be improved only through equal, sincere and constructive dialogue. To create such an environment, on | April, our Government decided to lift the 100 per cent tax on goods from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina imposed by the previous Government. At the same time, we have taken some gradual measures of reciprocity to offset many non-tariff barriers that Serbia has imposed on our goods. It is our utmost belief that, in order to have normal relations and to contribute to stability in the region, Serbia should lower its non-tariff trade barriers, end its de-recognition campaign against Kosova and stop funding its parallel structures in our country. Prime Minister Kurti recently sent a letter to the President of the United States, Mr. Donald Trump, about the dialogue with Serbia. He had a telephone conversation with German Chancellor Angela Merkel on 23 March, and another with French President Emmanuel Macron on 9 April. In all those communications, Prime Minister Kurti made the position of Kosova clear, namely, that it is aiming for an equal dialogue that does not undermine the territorial integrity and unitary character of our State, is designed to improve relations between Kosova and Serbia and ideally results in mutual recognition. For reasons of culture, geography and history, Kosova's future lies within the European family of democracies. Therefore, we are committed to pursuing the goal of full membership in the European Union as soon as possible and implementing the reforms required to that end. Similarly, we are fully committed to joining the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and will take all the steps necessary to reach that goal. In the area of security, Kosova has declared its commitment to peace and stability in the region of South-East Europe. The independence of Kosova is a factor of peace and stability in the region, and we are a part of the international coalition against terrorism and fundamentalism. The Republic of Kosova looks forward to working with all the Members of the United Nations to promote our shared goal of world peace and security.
