Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine commends
the dedicated efforts of the delegations of Spain, New
Zealand and Egypt. Ukraine voted in favour of the
draft resolution (S/2016/1026), since we wholeheartedly
hoped that it would have served the purpose of breaking
the dangerous pattern of escalation in Syria and
contribute to easing the continued intense suffering
inflicted on the Syrian people. The draft resolution
presented a rare ifpale glimmer ofhope in the otherwise
gloomy environment around the Syrian issue in the
Security Council.

It is exactly for that reason that we are extremely
dismayed, but not surprised, by the fact that all these
efforts were, in the end, derailed once again by the
Russian Federation. It is a terrible shame to talk about
procedures as if they are more important than the
principles of the Organization and the Security Council,
let alone the wasted lives of increasing numbers of
innocent people in Aleppo.

If the draft resolution had seen the light of day and

were adopted, it would have been a small yet meaningful
step towards exercising the collective responsibility
of the Council. It would have helped to prevent what
has already become one of the gravest humanitarian
tragedies of modern times. It is utterly frustrating that
the counter-terrorism narrative will continue to be used
by Russia as an alibi for bombardments of opposition
forces and civilians in Aleppo and elsewhere. History
will hold accountable those who did not let the Council
discharge its duties.

We once again stress the urgent need for the
United Nations to look into the alarming reports of
the extensive use of incendiary weapons as well as of
other indiscriminate weapons, including bunker-buster
bombs. We firmly insist that those responsible for
committing crimes against humanity, war crimes and
other grave violations of international humanitarian law
should be brought to account. I am sure that they will.

Let us also convey once again a clear message
to those planning a retake of eastern Aleppo. The
idea that a regime victory would lead to an enforced
stability in Syria is a dangerous fantasy. What we are
witnessing is turning Aleppo into another Grozny, and
a Grozny scenario in Syria is possible but will never be
sustainable; there is no military solution to this conflict.

