Mr. Kodama (Japan): I will abridge my statement
almost by half in the hope that members of the Council
will read my full statement very carefully, if not now
then at a later time.

I would first like to express my appreciation to
the Chairs of the Council's three counter-terrorism
Committees for their respective briefings.

I believe that we can make efforts to counter
terrorism in various ways and in various situations.
Each State has its own counter-terrorism measures in
place so that it can take action, for example, to enhance
its ability to cope with terrorism or to hold discussions
with neighbouring countries. In that regard, Japan has
conducted bilateral and multilateral dialogues and
consultations, inter alia, with China, the Republic of
Korea, the United States, Australia and the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), and has made
efforts in regional forums, such as the ASEAN Regional
Forum and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation.
Those efforts have brought much progress in advancing
the capacity for counter-terrorism in many States,
including Japan.

I believe that we should also emphasize addressing
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism. In that
regard, since 2006 Japan has supported the Mindanao
peace process. In October, a framework agreement in
that process was signed between the Government of
the Republic of the Philippines and the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front.

In order to gain broader support from the
international community for United Nations counter-
terrorism measures, it is necessary to ensure the
legitimacy and credibility of those measures. In that
regard, the sanctions list of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)mustbe regularly
updated to reflect the current status of individuals and
entities listed. Each State must cooperate in order for
the Committee's Monitoring Team to be effective in
its actions. Japan also highly values the activities of
the Ombudsperson in maintaining and enhancing the
legitimacy and credibility of the sanctions regime.

Japan attaches great important to the activities
of the three Committees, and believes that it is
essential for those activities to be conducted in
close collaboration with the relevant regional and
international organizations and initiatives, especially
with regard to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). Accordingly, Japan has been
committed to the Group of Eight Global Partnership
and the Proliferation Security Initiative. We believe
it essential to consider and implement activities
designed to counter the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction in accordance with regional needs
and characteristics, with a view to making greater
contributions to developing States in order to close
their capacity gaps.

We strongly hope the 1540 Committee group of
experts will soon move into high gear. As outreach
activities of the group and the Committee itself are
important, it is necessary for the Committee to make
great strides if the importance of non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and other recently
identified challenges is to be conveyed to Member States.
To that end, Japan has hosted three series of seminars
here in New York on sanctions, non-proliferation and
disarmament. We are planning a fourth seminar in the
near future in order to support the activities of the 1540
Committee.

