Mr. Marsico (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to thank you, Mr. President and Foreign Minister of
Canada, for having once again honored us with your
presence here. I should also like to thank the Foreign
Minister of Angola, Mr. Miranda, for having once again
joined us here today.

A little more than a month ago we met to consider
the report of the Panel of Experts on violations of
sanctions against UNITA, introduced by Ambassador
Fowler in his capacity as Chairman of the Angola
sanctions Committee.

The submission of that report had significant impact
and we believe it will continue to have positive
repercussions. Not only has it mobilized the States
mentioned in the report, those in the diamond industry
and arms producers, along with neighboring countries and
countries in the sub-region, but it has also, as no other
single event in the past, raised the awareness of the
international community as a whole. For all these reasons,
this is an invaluable report.

More or less in parallel fashion, alongside this
discussion, a series of exchanges of opinion has taken
place on general issues bearing on sanctions which also
benefitted from the specific results emerging from the
Panel's work. We believe that both initiatives, whereby
formal discussion on sanctions was begun, will enable the
Council to incorporate specific measures in its work to
improve across the board the use of the tool of sanctions.

Today we are here to take a second step, as
important as the first, by adopting a resolution which we
believe will strengthen the sanctions regime against
UNITA. We hope that thereby a political solution to the
conflict in Angola will be promoted.
This draft resolution, which we support in its
entirety, contains a series of innovative elements. It
recognizes the need to monitor sanctions, establishing for
this purpose monitoring machinery with an initial duration
of six months which will pursue the work started by the
Panel. It stipulates that the Council, after review of the
implementation of the measures set out in the resolutions
on sanctions against UNITA - that is to say, resolutions
864 (1993), 1127 (1997) and 1173 (1998) - and on the
basis of the outcome thereof, will be prepared to take
steps against those States that will have violated these
sanctions. Likewise, the draft resolution that we are on
the verge of adopting contains a series of measures and
recommendations aimed at all States relating to diamonds,
petroleum, arms, financial measures and travel and
representational restrictions on UNITA abroad.

 

We note with satisfaction that the resolution
incorporates a number of different Panel recommendations
on the natural resources of Angola, whose very existence
and abundance have played a significant role in prolonging
the conflict: driving the war and facilitating the buying of
arms and fuel and even of political sympathy. Under
section B, referring to the trade in arms, we consider of
particular importance the appeal to all States to be as
diligent as they possibly can in confirming the end users.
Under section D, referring to the diamond trade, we urge
the imposition of significant penal measures against the
illegal possession of diamonds in contravention of
resolution 1173 (1998). At the same time we welcome the
establishment of a new Certificate of Origin for diamonds
by the Government of Angola, which will facilitate better
monitoring.

For more than twenty years now, the international
community has been striving to achieve a peaceful
resolution of the conflict in Angola. Argentina can identify
itself with these efforts, as in 1989 we despatched units
when the operations of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola got underway. Notwithstanding the
successive efforts of the international community, the
results were inadequate to put an end to the conflict and to
promote compliance with the 1991 "Accordos de Paz" or
with the Lusaka Protocol of 1994.

We acknowledge that the continuation of the conflict
in Angola is not due to any single factor. Notwithstanding
that, we hope that the measures we are adopting today will
make it possible to make greater use of the natural
resources of Angola for the progress of its people and not
for fuelling the conflict, will reaffirm the repudiation by the
international community of the violations of the sanctions
regimes established by the Security Council, and, finally,
will help to move the peace process in Angola forward,
renewing political efforts underway to put an end to the
conflict.

