Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your kind words. Allow me to say a
few words of thanks to you and to all the colleagues
with whom I have worked in the Security Council for
your unreserved cooperation, the good offices you have
always performed and your unwavering and sincere
efforts to achieve consensus. I also have the pleasure of
thanking the members of the Secretariat for the
outstanding work they continue to do.

I have learned a great many things despite the
relatively short time that I spent in the Security
Council as the Permanent Representative of my
country. I have learned much in working alongside my
colleagues, whom I consider to be very dear friends.
The lofty ideals with which they carry out their work
and engage in dialogue have made an unforgettable
impression on me. I will always be most proud of the
2

days I spent with my colleagues in the Security
Council. Although I may not be fully satisfied with my
work in the Security Council as an institution, I am
indeed exceedingly pleased with my personal
experience working with all my colleagues here.

Our world today faces enormous and real
challenges and threats that all of us have to confront.
Whether we are weak or strong, poor or rich or large or
small countries, all of us must face those dangers, and
we can overcome them only by working together. That
is the spirit that has inspired me.

Moreover, we must be aware that in today's
world our destiny is a shared one. We are all aboard the
same ship; we have no choice but to work together to
right errors, to act in the framework of international
legitimacy and to strive for a world of peace and
prosperity. I think that the United Nations and, in
particular, the Security Council bear a special
responsibility and have a decisive role to play in
addressing those challenges and those dangers.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question

