Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for arranging
today's meeting on the situation in the Middle East. I
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing and to welcome
the presence of the Foreign Minister of the Palestinian
National Authority at this meeting.

If we are to overcome differences and achieve a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace among all
parties in the Middle East, there is no formula other
than the pursuit of genuine dialogue. Even in areas
where the parties face seemingly insurmountable
difficulties, they must attempt to overcome them
through dialogue and negotiation. Without genuine
dialogue and negotiation, there can be no progress in
the Middle East peace process.

The international community should promote
momentum for peace. We therefore welcome the recent
trilateral meeting among President Obama, Prime
Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas, which was a
significant step towards the relaunching of direct peace
negotiations. Japan reaffirms its strong support for the
initiative taken by the United States for the resumption
of peace talks aimed at the two-State solution.
Japan shares serious concerns about Israeli
settlement activities and the recent clash between
Israeli forces and Palestinians at Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
Their negative impacts should not hinder a resumption
of the peace talks. It is imperative that all parties fulfil
their obligations under the Road Map with a View to
the achievement of the two-State solution and Middle
East peace.

Japan would like to call on the Israeli
Government to freeze all settlement activities,
including natural growth, and to refrain from
provocative actions on its territory. At the same time,
we call on the Palestinian Authority to continue to
make every effort to improve the security situation by
abiding by its commitment to cease violence and
terrorism. Unification of the Palestinian side is also
important to promote the peace process. We express
our strong support for Egypt's efforts to achieve
reconciliation between Fatah and Hamas.

The Security Council has been closely following
the humanitarian situation in Gaza and adopted
resolution 1860 (2009), in which we expressed serious
concern over the damage caused to civilian and United
Nations facilities in Gaza. Nine months after the
adoption of the resolution, the situation is very
precarious. We are deeply concerned about this
situation. The international community must maintain
its assistance to and support for the people in Gaza. We
urge Israel to cooperate with the Secretary-General's
efforts and to ensure smooth access to goods for Gaza,
as well as the free movement of people.

As we have pledged to do, Japan will continue to
extend its assistance to improve the humanitarian
situation in Gaza. We are convinced that improving the
humanitarian conditions in Gaza is one of the most
important and urgent priorities in building the
Palestinian State and promoting the peace process. One
might even state that there will be no progress in the
Middle East peace process without significant
improvement in the humanitarian situation in Gaza.

In that connection, I should like to refer to the
report of the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on
the Gaza Conflict, headed by Justice Richard
Goldstone (A/HRC/12/48). The Mission was mandated
by a decision of the Human Rights Council. We
appreciate the work of the Fact-Finding Mission, in
particular its effort to try to ensure a degree of balance
in its report. We believe that the findings and
recommendations of the Goldstone report should be
carefully reviewed, first and foremost by the Human
Rights Council within its mandate. It is important for
the Security Council to follow closely the discussion in
the Human Rights Council. In the light of the outcome,
the Security Council could consider an appropriate way
in which to deal with the report in a unified manner.

