Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): May I
at the outset express my thanks to the Togolese
presidency of the Security Council for having chosen
this issue of great importance to international peace
and security, in particular in Africa. We are pleased to
see His Excellency Mr. Faure Gnassingbe, President of
the Republic of Togo, presiding over this debate on the
impact of transnational organized crime on peace,
security and stability on West Africa and the Sahel
region. I should also like to thank His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, Secretary-General of the United
Nations, and other speakers for their valuable
statements.

The States of West Africa and the Sahel are
facing very serious problems that are threatening
security and stability throughout the African continent
and hampering the efforts being made towards
development and democracy. In particular, I am
referring to piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, illicit
weapons and drug smuggling and the threat posed by
terrorist groups.

The crises besetting many countries of the region
have worsened an already precarious security situation,
particularly in the Sahel region, due to the vast
numbers of weapons, repatriated refugees, the
appearance of new terrorist groups, the illicit transfer
of arms and rising crime, as mentioned in the report of
the assessment mission on the impact of the Libyan
crisis on the Sahel region (S/2012/42). The same report
adds that the deterioration of the security situation has
made it more difficult to ensure that humanitarian
assistance reaches the people suffering chronic food
and nutritional crises. It also indicates that in some
isolated areas criminal organizations have taken over
the provision of humanitarian assistance. That enables
them to set up local networks of arms dealers and
logistics, which once again shows how urgent it is to
adopt a global and holistic approach in the fight against
transnational organized crime at the national, regional
and international levels, taking into account the very
close link between a lack of security,
underdevelopment and poverty.

Border areas remain particularly conducive to
drug and arms trafficking and a rise in crime. More
vigilance and active cooperation among all States of
the region is more necessary than ever to effectively
counter persistent threats to the security and stability of
States and civilians.

Although the African Union and subregional
organizations have developed regional measures on
those issues, their resources and capacities continue to
be limited given the scope of the current challenge. In
its 2010 report, the International Maritime
Organization stated that the West African coast was one
of the six major hotbeds of piracy in the world,
seriously disrupting international navigation. Similarly,
as stated in the Secretary-General's report, certain
countries in the West Africa region are stopovers for
the large-scale cocaine smuggling going from Latin
America to markets in Europe and the United States.

In order to prevent those problems from
becoming even greater, it is urgent that we strengthen
international cooperation to effectively combat this
scourge, in particular by identifying appropriate means
to deal with the mobility of the protagonists of

organized crime and terrorists and their use of new
information technologies. A multilateral action at the
multilateral level must be adopted to put in place
mechanisms for facilitating judicial assistance,
extradition, cooperation among forces responsible for
public order, the consolidation of resources made
available to police forces and the criminal justice
system, and the consolidation of peace, with the
cooperation of civil society in order to increase
people's awareness and to encourage them to cooperate
with the authorities to effectively combat this problem.
We also share the View of the United Nations
assessment mission on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
with regard to how important it is that we develop a
global strategy to combat piracy in the region. In that
respect, we welcome the decision of the Togolese
presidency to hold a meeting on 27 February to discuss
this matter further.

In the same context, the international community,
with the United Nations in the lead, is also called upon
to redouble its efforts to establish an integrated global
strategy to deal with the deep-rooted causes of
instability in the region, in particular by ensuring better
coordination to implement the initiatives undertaken by
affected countries, the African Union, subregional
organizations and their various bilateral and
multilateral stakeholders; strengthening national
capacities in order to ensure better border control and
address the challenges of a lack of security and
underdevelopment; mobilizing more international aid
for West African and Sahel countries; and, lastly,
enhancing the interoperability among the various
United Nations bodies already in the area and their
presence in the field, given the fact that no United
Nations body currently has a global mandate to cover
the vast Sahel region.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate how
important it is to strengthen cooperation and the
interaction among affected States, regional
organizations and the various United Nations bodies to
address the urgent needs for humanitarian aid and the
many security-related, social and economic challenges
linked to organized transnational crime, as well as the
rapidly increasing youth unemployment.

