Argentina aligns itself with the statements made on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 27) and the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect. At the outset, I would like to thank the delegation of the Russian Federation for organizing this open debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres; the Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo- Ngcuka; the Goodwill Ambassador of UN-Women, Ms. Danai Gurira; the Adviser on Sexual and Gender-based Violence to the United Nations Interim Security Force in Abyei, Ms. Nataliia Emelianova; and the Head of the Women and Children Legal Research Foundation, Ms. Zarga Yaftali for their statements. In the framework of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and the commemoration of 25 years of the Beijing Declaration and the Platform for Action, Argentina reaffirms its commitment to the development and implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has made it clear that it will not be possible to prevent conflict, achieve peaceful solutions or build sustainable peace without effectively ensuring gender equality and the full empowerment of women and girls in all their diversity. To that end, it is necessary to increase the presence of women at all levels of decision-making. The increased participation of women will strengthen the contribution of peacekeeping operations and special political missions in the field. Argentina categorically condemns abuse and sexual and gender-based violence against and exploitation of women and girls, and supports the United Nations zero- tolerance policy in this area. We also condemn sexual and gender-based violence in conflict and post-conflict situations. We are deeply concerned about the increase in violence against women and girls during the pandemic caused by COVID-19. In this regard, we reiterate our support for efforts to eliminate sexual and gender-based violence against women and girls, and call for the means to ensure accountability and the punishment of those responsible. As of 2020 and coinciding with the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) by the Security Council, Argentina has embarked on a very active policy aimed at giving new impetus and priority to the women and peace and security agenda. In this sense, our country has worked hard in recent months on the following substantive aspects of this agenda. First, Argentina's National Action Plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted in 2015 with the aim of identifying the structural barriers that hinder women's participation in the field of peace and security and of increasing their participation in leadership positions in all areas at the national, regional and international levels. During the first halfof2020, the evaluation process and conclusion of the first plan was initiated, on 22 July, and the first interministerial dialogue for the evaluation of the National Action Plan for the Implementation of Resolution 1325 (2000) was held. In this context, different ministries have collaborated closely in preparing the second National Action Plan for the Implementation of Resolution 1325 (2000). Work has also been done with countries of our region and other regions that also have national action plans, with the aim of exchanging good practices and lessons learned in the development and implementation of these plans. Secondly, in 2018 the Federal Network of Women Mediators with a Gender Perspective, comprising 49 women mediators, was established. In September 2020, this network held a meeting at which the 49 women mediators shared the actions undertaken during the second half of 2019 and in 2020. In addition, a road map was presented with activities to be carried out in 2020 and 2021, such as participation in the annual meeting of the Global Alliance of Regional Women Mediator Networks and the exchange of good practices and experiences with other networks of women mediators. Thirdly, the Ministry of Defence continued to increase the presence of women in peace and humanitarian assistance missions, as well as their participation in its decision-making bodies, by including female military personnel from the command corps. It also carried out various activities related to dissemination, promotion and training to increase women's political participation in peace and security, peace negotiation processes, conflict management and decision-making spaces in each of these areas. It also conducted annual surveys related to post-deployment issues to monitor the existence of gender-based rights violations and the implementation of the information provided prior to deployment, among other topics, in order to mainstream the gender perspective in all peacebuilding activities and humanitarian assistance missions, including disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities. In addition, it undertook actions, such as the creation of a comprehensive plan to promote policies for the prevention, detection and treatment of domestic violence with the aim of protecting the human rights of women and girls in conflict and post-conflict countries (including refugee camps and those in displacement situations), especially in the face of gender-based violence and sexual violence, promoting an environment of security and well-being. Fourthly, the Ministry of Security continued to step up efforts to implement and achieve increasingly better results in the women and peace and security agenda. With regard to the peace operations in which participation included a police component, throughout 2020 the number of women in United Nations peace missions was maintained. Indeed, until March, when some mobility restrictions caused the planned replacements to be affected, in the missions in which Argentina participates with a police component, the proportion of female officers within the total number of deployed Argentine troops increased or remained the same. Moreover, in 2020, the Ministry succeeded in increasing the rate of women who are receiving their predeployment training at the Peace Operations Training Centre of the Argentine National Gendarmerie to 30 per cent of the total. Similarly, infrastructure was adapted and modernized to continue providing housing and improving conditions at the Centre, and 50 per cent of the permanent instructors in matters related to peace operations at the Centre were women. Also, at the institutional level, in 2020 the Ministry of Security created the National Directorate of Gender Policy and maintained its training and continuing education efforts on gender issues, both for members of the police and security forces and for officials of the Ministry and the Integrated Gender Centres of the four Federal Police and Security Forces. Furthermore, at the international level, Argentina is promoting and working with other countries on the establishment of a Network of Women Mediators of the Southern Cone with a gender perspective, in order to strengthen the role of women in building peace in the region. Argentina is also a member of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security within the United Nations; the national focal points network, which was launched in September 2016; and the Elsie Initiative, which is aimed at increasing women's participation in peacekeeping operations. In conclusion, Argentina reiterates its strong commitment to gender equality and the economic empowerment of women and girls in all their diversity, as well as to strengthening women's participation at all levels of decision-making in international peace and security.
