Mr. Brammertz: It is a privilege once again to
address the Council on the progress we are making in
the Office of the Prosecutor to complete the Tribunal's
mandate. The report before the Council (8/2010/270) is
our thirteenth, and for my Office it marks a significant
step forward in achieving the completion strategy
objectives, especially in finishing trials, securing the
cooperation of States and accelerating the downsizing
process.

For the first time since the implementation of the
completion strategy, I can report that we have no more
trials at the pre-trial stage. The cases of all the accused
we have in custody are now in the active trial phase.
Nine cases, involving 18 accused, are on trial.

On 10 June, the Trial Chamber delivered what we
consider to be a milestone judgement in the Popovie et
al. case for crimes committed against Bosnian Muslims
during and after the fall of the Srebrenica and Zepa
enclaves in July 1995. The Trial Chamber convicted
seven former high-ranking Bosnian Serb military and
police officials of genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. Among those convicted, Popovie and
Beara were found guilty of genocide, extermination
and persecution as crimes against humanity and of
murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war.
Both were sentenced to life imprisonment. Drago
Nikolic' was convicted of aiding and abetting these
crimes and was sentenced to 35 years imprisonment.

It is an important judgement first of all for the
victims of those crimes, but also for other cases of the
Tribunal and, I hope, for the prosecution of lower- and
mid-level accused in the former Yugoslavia. Moreover,
the Chamber's findings are further confirmation that
those found guilty in the Popovie case worked under
the orders of other indictees, such as Ratko Mladic',
who remains at large. The Popovie judgement
confirming that genocide occurred in Bosnia and
Herzegovina reminds us once again of the urgent need
to bring Ratko Mladie to justice.

Despite the various achievements made in
moving the trial forwards, it is regrettable to see
slippage in the trial programme. Trials of this nature
are complex and beset by a broad range of legal and
practical difficulties, many of which are beyond our
control. We nevertheless remain committed to the
expeditious and efficient completion of our work,
while respecting the fairness of proceedings.

To fulfil our mandate and meet completion
strategy goals, my Office continues to rely on the
cooperation of States and international organizations.
Over the past six months, Serbia has continued to
respond adequately to our requests for assistance by
providing access to documents, archives and witnesses.
At this moment, there are no outstanding requests. The
Serbian authorities have provided notebooks
containing the handwritten wartime notes of Ratko
Mladie and associated tapes. These were seized during
a search operation conducted by the action team in
charge of tracking fugitives in February 2010. The
valuable, voluminous material recovered is currently
being analysed, and we have sought and will continue
to seek its introduction as evidence in several trials.
10-41106

The arrest of the fugitives Mladic' and Hadzie
remains the highest priority for my office. Since my
last report, operational services in Serbia continue their
efforts to search for the fugitives. However, these
efforts have thus far produced few tangible results. We
therefore strongly believe that Serbia's current
operational strategies need to be reviewed. We have
recently asked Serbian authorities to step up search
efforts by broadening their investigation, intensifying
search operations and increasing their operational
capacity. Decisive and intensified action by the
operational services and political authorities is critical
to attaining the arrest of the two fugitives. I expressed
these concerns at the European Union's Foreign Affairs
Council on 14 June. I reiterated to the ministers that
the support of the European Union in securing the
cooperation of States has not only been extremely
effective in the past but will remain essential in the
future.

During this reporting period, Croatia has
generally been responsive to our requests for
assistance. However, the issue of missing important
documents related to Operation Storm in 1995 remains
outstanding. In October 2009, Croatia established an
inter-agency task force to take over its administrative
investigation. While there has been a general
improvement in the quality of the interviews
conducted, no full account of the whereabouts of the
important missing documents has been provided. In
addition, key investigative avenues remain unexplored.

During the past weeks, I have been assured by the
authorities that the administrative investigation will
pursue additional leads and expand its work, as
suggested by my office one year ago. I hope that these
activities will result in effective action and concrete
results. While the matter remains before the Trial
Chamber, I await the results of these efforts by Croatia
to see whether Croatia intensifies its administrative
investigation and fully accounts for the missing
documents before the end of the trial.

The authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
continue to respond adequately to our requests for
assistance. I continue to encourage the authorities to
take all necessary measures against the networks
supporting fugitives. We welcome the assistance
provided by the Office of the High Representative and
other international organizations in this regard.
9

With regard to judicial proceedings, my office
supports national prosecutions and the important work
of the Special Department of War Crimes in the Office
of the State Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
strongly encourage the authorities and the international
community to carry on providing the necessary support
for the prosecution of war crimes cases.

My Office continues to provide assistance to
national prosecutors in order to ensure the transition to
domestic prosecution of war crimes cases. Building the
capacity of local courts to try war crimes is not only
critical to the success of the Tribunal's completion
strategy and legacy, but also essential for lasting
justice. As forecast in my last report, we have now
completed the transfer of cases and investigation files
to courts and prosecution offices in the region. There is
still a regular exchange of information and knowledge
in relation to this material.

We also continue to support ongoing cooperation
and capacity-building projects. In this regard, I would
specifically like to record my gratitude to the European
Union for extending the funding of the successful
project of liaison prosecutors and young professionals
from the region who work in my Office. I also
encourage all authorities in the region to strengthen
regional cooperation in order to address war crimes
cases. I note recent improvement in certain areas and
the conclusion of important judicial cooperation
agreements. However, further efforts are necessary if
there is to be a coordinated approach to war crimes
prosecutions across the region.

As the High Representative, Mr. Inzko, said in
this Chamber a few weeks ago (see S/PV.6319), recent
conciliatory gestures from political leaders in the
region have led to the creation of a space for new and
constructive dialogue. It is only in such an
environment, devoid of provocation, that the
prosecutors and courts can do their work and further
build upon the work of the Tribunal.

As announced last year, the Office of the
Prosecutor has begun downsizing. In line with the step-
by-step progress in trials and appeals, we have
abolished 22 posts so far. Despite the slippage in the
trial schedule and the fact that additional expenditure
may be required, we are nevertheless continuing to
follow a strict policy of decreasing staff levels as trials
end.

In the longer term, our eyes are also now on the
eventual closure of the Tribunal and what lies beyond.
As our final trial work progresses in The Hague,
discussions with the Working Group on the creation of
a future regional mechanism are well under way. I
welcome efforts already undertaken and important
progress made in this regard by the Austrian
chairmanship, the members of the Working Group and
the Secretariat.

In July, in will be 15 years since the genocide that
took place in Srebrenica, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Since then, an important number of high-level accused
have been tried in The Hague and progress has been
made in domestic war-crimes prosecutions. However,
the human tragedy of the war is still a vivid memory.
As Victims, the peoples of the former Yugoslavia and
the international community continue to seek justice.
That painful chapter of recent history can be properly
closed only when all those responsible for serious
violations of international humanitarian law have been
brought to trial. Therefore, there can be no alternative
to the immediate arrest of the two remaining fugitives,
Mladie and Hadzie.

I thank the Council very much for its continued
support.

