Mr. Munoz: I thank you, Sir, for inviting me to
take part in this discussion of the Secretary-General's
report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict (S/2009/304). The Peacebuilding Commission
met on 13 July to discuss the report. I would like to
share with the Council today my summary of those
discussions.

The Peacebuilding Commission welcomed the
report and endorsed the Secretary-General's approach
and recommendations. The preparation of the report

usefully brought together the many parts of the United
Nations that deal with peacebuilding and highlighted a
common understanding of the importance of
peacebuilding in the United Nations system. We were
pleased that the broad consultation process allowed the
Commission to play a significant role in formulating
the report.

Members of the Commission focused on some
key points. National ownership is the cornerstone of
peacebuilding. However, the commitment to national
ownership as a key principle of peacebuilding will
remain merely an abstract concept unless it is
accompanied from the very beginning by capacity-
building, starting with a clear understanding of existing
capacities on the ground. National capacity-building
must start immediately after the end of conflict, taking
advantage of that narrow window of opportunity to lay
the foundations for sustainable peace and show some
peace dividends. It must be part of the entry, not the
exit strategy.

Another crucial piece of the early peacebuilding
puzzle is an agreed common strategy that is nationally
owned and internationally supported, including -
depending on the country's concrete reality - basic
safety and security, political processes, basic services,
core Government functions and early economic
revitalization. In that effort, the United Nations staff
in-country must work closely with the Peacebuilding
Commission so as to ensure proper coordination and
avoid duplication.

The Secretary-General's agenda for action
proposes stronger, more effective and better supported
United Nations leadership on the ground and the
creation, as he has reported to us today, of a senior-
level mechanism at Headquarters that will ensure that
the right leadership and support teams are in place as
early as possible. We welcome this suggestion.

Predictable international support is needed for
successful peacebuilding. One essential element is
greater clarity of lead roles and responsibilities within
the United Nations, and enhanced coordination with
other key players, such as the World Bank. The
Commission welcomes the progress so far and looks
forward to further advances.

Civilian experts are an important peacebuilding
resource. Country rosters of pre-vetted civilian
experts- not least from the global South - could
help support the quick delivery of services.

International experts must complement and not replace
national expertise. We welcome the Secretary-
General's proposal for a review that would broaden and
deepen the global pool of expertise and enhance
interoperability across rosters. We also support his call
regarding the United Nations Volunteers Programme.
The diaspora may also be a significant resource in
these areas.

We share the Secretary-General's hope that
donors will be bold and innovative in establishing
flexible, rapid and predictable funding for
peacebuilding. We are satisfied with Peacebuilding
Fund pledges and funding, and we encourage the
Secretary-General to appeal to non-traditional donors,
including middle-income countries and the private
sector.

Pooled funding mechanisms, such as the country-
level multi-donor trust funds, should be established,
paying particular attention to the needs of women and
historical gender imbalances. Regional organizations
have increasingly been at the forefront of peace
processes; the challenge ahead includes strengthening
partnerships with regional actors, as well as with
bilateral donors, civil society and international
financial institutions, particularly the World Bank.

Many of the recommendations of the Secretary-
General's report are addressed to the United Nations.
We therefore welcome the Secretary-General's early
initiation of an implementation plan involving all the
relevant parts of the Organization. We recognize that
the Peacebuilding Support Office will play an
important role in this regard.

The Secretary-General's report poses several
challenges for the Peacebuilding Commission. Member
States recognize that peacekeepers are early
peacebuilders. Peacebuilding should therefore come
into play early on in the Security Council's
consideration of post-conflict situations. The
mainstreaming of peacebuilding into peacekeeping
operations and the enhancement of the civilian
components of peacebuilding operations are a must.
The Security Council should consider more proactively
the advice of the Commission, not because the
Commission is better qualified than the Council for
such a task, but only because the Commission will
emphasize the linkage between security and
development, as well as the longer-term view
contributing to sustainable peace.

The Peacebuilding Commission's 2010 review
will allow for further reflection on the role of the
Commission and how it might better exercise its
advisory role. Improving the working methods of the
Commission is a goal on our agenda. In particular, we
are exploring innovative, lighter and more flexible
ways to engage with countries that may seek the
Commission's advice.

I have one final reflection. The report stresses the
need for early and continued emphasis on coordination
and coherence, but a realistic approach will show that
this is a most difficult task among multilateral actors,
bilateral donors and civil society, and even within the
United Nations system. Institutional positioning and
turf disputes do not help peacebuilding or national
Governments, and efforts to minimize them should
continue.

Since many of the Secretary-General's
recommendations are addressed to the United Nations
system, we believe that he should be invited to report
back to the Security Council, in consultation with the
Peacebuilding Commission, on their implementation.

In conclusion, I want to reiterate the
Commission's strong support for the Secretary-
General's recommendations. Attention must now turn
to their rapid implementation. The people in post-
conflict countries will benefit if we move forward to
action.

