Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to thank you, Sir, for
organizing and presiding over today's meeting. The
presence of ministers and the Secretary-General, whom
we respectfully welcome, attests to its importance.

It has been said that the situation in the Middle
East, in particular the Israeli-Palestinian question, is
certainly one of the most complex and one of the most
paradoxical items on the agenda. It is a paradox
because, despite the unanimous View that a lasting
solution must be found, the parties and the
international community are finding it difficult to
identify a political solution that is acceptable to
everyone.

As has been recalled in the Council, several
initiatives have been taken to that end, including the
2002 Arab Peace Initiative which is still awaiting full
implementation. Much hope was therefore placed in
the Annapolis conference, and the agreements reached
there laid a solid foundation for a timely and

satisfactory solution to the conflict. In assessing the
outcome, it must be acknowledged once again that we
are far from having reached the goals set at Annapolis,
although there has been no lack of follow-up action in
support of the process. The December 2007 Paris donor
conference and the initiatives of Egypt and Yemen can
be cited in that regard.

Regrettably, real obstacles still block the road to
peace, including the ongoing Israeli settlement policies
in occupied Palestinian territories, an embargo on Gaza
that has led to a disturbing humanitarian tragedy and
the firing of rockets by Hamas into Israel, among
others. For all those reasons, my delegation supports
the Security Council's initiative to send a message of
encouragement and support to the parties that calls on
them to keep alive and well the spirit of the Annapolis
peace process by working to establish a State of
Palestine side by side and at peace with Israel.

To that end, we urge the parties to continue their
frank dialogue and to make bold concessions in order
to settle pending issues. They must also strengthen
confidence-building measures and continue to respect
the truce between Hamas and Israel. All initiatives,
including those of the Quartet, to help the parties to
overcome their differences, should be encouraged, in
particular those aimed at strengthening Palestinian
unity and providing assistance to Palestinian refugees.
The Security Council itself has an important part to
play, and it must play it fully. First of all, it must take
all the steps that it can under the Charter in order to
ensure that its resolutions on the matter are
implemented.

The vision of a State of Palestine living side by
side with Israel in complete peace and security is not
utopian, nor is it a negation of Israeli security. Rather,
it would ensure a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East. Burkina Faso believes in this idea quite sincerely
and would urge the parties and all the actors concerned
to work to achieve this legitimate goal.

In Annapolis, great hope was born on the road to
settling the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, because we and
the parties are aware that the Annapolis process is one
of the best opportunities to date to resolve the dispute.
Given the purpose of the present debate, which is to
press negotiations begun in Annapolis in order to make
them irreversible, we support the draft resolution that
has been put to us to that end.

