Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): We are grateful to you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting on
post-conflict peacebuilding. Indonesia associates itself
with the statement to be made shortly by the
representative of Jamaica on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

The Peacebuilding Commission is truly a unique
platform, in that it serves to bridge the current critical
gap in the international post-conflict peacebuilding
system. Although the Commission is still in its early
stages, we recognize that the expectations are high. It
is therefore the view of my delegation that this public
debate should be intended as a forum for the exchange
of views among the stakeholders in order to explore
practical ways of strengthening the Commission and
enabling it to perform its work in an effective and
efficient manner.

Enhanced interaction and complementarity
among various United Nations organs aimed at
supporting the work of the Peacebuilding Commission
would be beneficial. In that context, we look forward
to the expected debate on the Commission in the
General Assembly, which will provide important input
on how to better assist the Commission in its tasks.

While the Peacebuilding Commission is expected
to contribute to the advancement of global peace and
stability, we are of the view that it can have a particular
impact in its role as a coordinating body that leverages
international and national expertise. An inclusive and
well-coordinated approach would systematically
synergize peacebuilding efforts at both the national and
international levels.

It is our opinion that the work of the Commission
would be more results-oriented if integrated
peacebuilding strategies fully reflect the priorities of
the countries concerned. Each integrated strategy needs
to be broken down into manageable phases laying out a
credible set of tasks and identifying the actors
concerned. It should have a degree of flexibility in
order to adapt to changes on the ground.
The priorities have to come from national
Governments, and ownership of the post-conflict
recovery process is paramount. We feel that a better
coordinated, more coherent and well organized
international support system, provided through the
Peacebuilding Commission, would facilitate better
access and response for the countries in need. Here, we
would like to underline that the work of the
Commission should not create a separate layer of
complexity for existing processes and that the
Commission should not try to micromanage the
activities being carried out in the countries concerned.

We must be careful, however, not to end up
creating a donor-recipient culture in the Peacebuilding
Commission. Due care must be exercised so that the
donors to the Commission are not perceived as
controlling it, because that would only draw
unnecessary criticism towards the United Nations.

My delegation takes note that the resolutions
establishing the Peacebuilding Commission do not
clearly provide modalities for the involvement of
regional and subregional actors. We therefore feel that
there is also a need to provide practical tools and
guidance for engaging regional and subregional actors
in country-specific configurations.

The positive role of the relevant stakeholders is
crucial to a successful transition from the post-conflict
phase to the normal process of sustainable peace and
development. Hence, we are pleased to see the
participation of various important entities in this
discussion. Their contribution is useful, not only
because they provide the Council with additional ideas
on how to support the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission, but also because the work that they do on
the ground for people ravaged by conflict is indeed
very valuable and much appreciated.

My delegation is also of the view that civil
society and non-governmental organizations, including
women's organizations, as well as the private sector,
should play constructive roles in post-conflict
rehabilitation and reconstruction. In the light of that,
we would like to underline the need to formulate a
modality enabling them to participate actively in
peacebuilding activities.

We are particularly encouraged by the most
recent country meetings on Burundi and Sierra Leone,
which were more action-oriented. We look forward to
the presentation in the near future of the work plans on
both countries by the respective Chairs of those
country meetings. The progress made on key elements
contained in the Chairs' summaries needs to be
evaluated through more frequent meetings of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Finally, my delegation would like to state that we
need to strike a balance between the work of the

Organizational Committee and the country-specific
configurations, as success in one aids the other. A
properly empowered and robust Committee would
serve to strengthen the work of the Commission.

