Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
reiterate our solidarity with the United States and the
families of the thousands of victims claimed by the evil
hands of terrorism on 9/11 - a phenomenon against
which we stand united.

We appreciate the convening of this meeting
and the statement delivered by the representative of
the Russian Federation on the meeting held by the
guarantors of the Astana process in the city of Tehran.
We take careful note of the information provided, as
well as of the joint statement issued by the Presidents of
Iran, Russia and Turkey. In that regard, we welcome the
ongoing cooperation among the Astana guarantors and
underline the need for them to prevent a new escalation
of violence and suffering in Idlib.

We must nevertheless express our alarm and
regret at the intensification of the attacks in recent
days, which have resulted in numerous fatalities, new
internally displaced persons and the destruction of
civilian infrastructure. All of that must cease.

Peru condemns terrorism and believes that terrorist
groups must be held accountable for the crimes they
have committed. We also recognize the right of the
Syrian Government to safeguard its sovereignty and
territorial integrity, but we stress that in no case does
thatjustify new massacres of civilians.

We believe that the Astana guarantors, because
of their influence on the ground, have a special
responsibility in the current delicate scenario, all the
more so when Idlib is one of the de-escalation zones
agreed upon by those guarantors.

We commend the tireless work oer. De Mistura in
bringing the parties together and finding a way to avoid
a new humanitarian tragedy. We support in particular
his proposal to promote an effective separation between
civilians and terrorists. We recognize that is a highly
complex task, but we believe we must commit to it.

We hope that the meeting held yesterday among the
Special Envoy and the Astana guarantors and the one to
be held this week with the other countries involved in
the Syrian crisis will lead to firm commitments to the
political process based on resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

We would like to commend the valuable efforts
being made by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and its staff to provide a
humanitarian response in such difficult circumstances.

We conclude by stressing the need for the
Council to send a strong message to the international
community that it will not tolerate impunity with
regard to the continuing violations of international
law and international humanitarian law. The Council
cannot once again be a mere bystander in the face of
scenes of horror. It is our chief responsibility to prevent
those tragedies and to protect the civilian population.

