Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I thank the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for her briefing, and I once again express to her our full confidence. I also thank Mr. De Roux and Ms. Sooka for their briefings. I will focus on five points. First, the Colombian and South African experiences perfectly illustrate that no society can recover in a lasting manner from a crisis if a deadlock involving massive violations of human rights and international humanitarian law exists. In every case, achieving lasting peace is predicated upon establishing the truth with regard to the abuses committed, affording victims their status as victims and establishing individual and collective responsibility. It is imperative that the United Nations help States in transition to meet those challenges. Beginning with the peace negotiations stage, the United Nations must devote the necessary resources to meet them within the framework of the resources allocated to peacebuilding and development. We commend the work of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, which enjoys the expertise to assist in developing transitional justice policies. That requires the implementation of judicial as well as non-judicial solutions adapted to the specific situation of every national context, without resorting to a one-size-fits-all approach. In the Central African Republic, we encourage the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to support the establishment of the Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation Commission provided for in the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, signed one year ago. That body complements the establishment of an impartial and independent judicial system capable of responding to the call for justice demanded by the people of the Central African Republic. In that regard, we are encouraged by the investigations launched by the Special Criminal Court, which France supports in helping train its judges. Secondly, every segment of society must be involved. Women, who are the first victims of conflicts, must be able to participate in the very development of the transitional justice policy in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000) and the women and peace and security agenda. Young people, historians, community and religious leaders and victims groups must also be able to fully play their role. Strengthening democratic governance and education are also critical prerequisites. It is the responsibility of States to allow for remembrance and fight against historical revisionism. In the Balkans, as we commemorate the twenty- fifth anniversary of the Srebrenica massacre, it is unacceptable that political leaders glorify war criminals and deny the crimes that were determined to have taken place by the criminal courts established by the Council. Thirdly, international mechanisms must support the reform of national justice systems. Thanks to the mechanisms established for the crimes committed by Da'esh in Iraq and the atrocities committed in Syria and Burma, evidence will not disappear and those crimes will not go unpunished. France reiterates its unwavering support for the International Criminal Court, which must play a central role at the international level in the fight against impunity, in full accordance with the principle of complementarity. We call for the universal ratification of the Rome Statute and welcome States that have decided to join the International Criminal Court or cooperate with it within the framework of transitional justice, by following the example of Tunisia in June 2011 and the Sudan today. Fourthly, the attention afforded to victims plays a fundamental role. The establishment of reparationand compensation mechanisms for victims should be widespread. That is particularly the case for victims of sexual violence, who must receive the medical, psychological, legal and social assistance that is essential for their reintegration into society. That is why we also call for supporting the Global Survivors Fund, launched by Ms. Nadia Murad and Dr. Denis Mukwege. To conclude, I wish to pay special tribute to the families of victims of forced disappearance. We all have in mind the weekly demonstrations by the Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo in Buenos Aires to find their children who were abducted by the military dictatorship. That fight continues today. Sadly, those crimes are far from being a thing of the past or limited to a specific region of the world. The Syrian regime has been using those crimes systematically to eliminate all forms of opposition since 2011. The victims are peaceful activists, intellectuals, artists and ordinary Syrians, who are victims of merciless methods. The resolution of that issue is inseparable from the quest for a political solution, and the Security Council must give the resolution of the Syrian crisis its full attention.
