Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I wish to begin by
joining previous speakers in thanking Mr. Robert Serry,
the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, for his important briefing. We
welcome the convening of this open debate, which
provides the opportunity for the general membership of
the United Nations to express its views on an issue of
great importance.

Despite many critical developments on the
ground that have taken place in the region, the Security
Council has, in the past few years, been fraught with
silence in response to the Middle East conflict. It is our
fervent hope that the adoption of resolution 1850
(2008) two days ago will signal the new beginning of a
Council being able to assume its Charter-mandated
responsibilities with respect to the situation in the
Middle East.

Once again, as the parties proceed in their
negotiations, we wish to underscore the need for the
critical challenges on the ground to be urgently
addressed.

The situation in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank
remains a matter of profound concern. The
humanitarian consequences of the Israeli siege of the
Gaza Strip and the closures of the Gaza crossings have
been grave and intolerable. The briefing by the Special
Coordinator just now chronicled the sufferings endured
by the civilian population in the Gaza Strip. The siege
must be lifted immediately in order to allow the
civilian population in Gaza to have access to water,
employment, commerce, medical treatment and
education - essentially, access to their basic needs. It
is also imperative that the Egyptian-brokered
maintenance of calm in the Gaza Strip and southern
Israel be maintained.

Steps that could undermine confidence or
prejudice the outcome of negotiations must be stopped
and reversed. It is critical that any actions, activities or
statements that could undermine or hamper the peace
efforts be avoided. In that connection, Israeli
settlement activities in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, that contravene international law and the
principles of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by force must end. The construction of walls
on Palestinian land, which is in contrary to the
Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice,
must cease and the walls be removed.

We draw some encouragement from the recent
release of 227 Palestinians by the Israeli authorities.
However, my delegation remains concerned over the
fate of thousands of other Palestinians still imprisoned
by Israel and calls for their similar release.

Ending the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territory and the creation of an independent, viable and
democratic Palestine are central to the creation of
peace in the region. In anticipating the creation of a
Palestinian State, we underline the importance of
international assistance to the institution-building
activities in Palestine, including facilitating economic
development through an improvement of conditions on
the ground.

My delegation also cannot overemphasize how
incredibly important unity among Palestinians is. We
support all efforts to achieve that end. We are aware
that the inter-Palestinian dialogue planned for
November was postponed and has been rescheduled for
December 2008. We are hopeful that the dialogue can
be fully implemented as planned.

We recognize the vital role that Quartet has been
playing in the promotion of solutions to the conflict in
the Middle East that are acceptable to all parties. We
welcome the regular consultations among the Quartet
principals, including the recent meeting in New York.
My delegation also commends the League of Arab
States and individual countries in the region for their
important contributions to the Middle East peace
efforts. We attach particular importance to the Arab
Peace Initiative.

With regard to Lebanon, my delegation welcomes
the overall political stability in the country as the new
unity Government continues to function. We attach
primary importance to the continued efforts to promote
dialogue and reconciliation involving all Lebanese
factions across political, religious and ideological
lines.
We look forward to the implementation of the
15 October 2008 agreement between Lebanon and
Syria on formalizing the diplomatic relationship
between the two countries. My delegation also
underlines the importance of the indirect talks between
Israel and Syria. Israel is called upon to fully comply
with all the relevant Security Council resolutions
relating to the Lebanese and Syrian tracks.

The Middle East conflict has endured for far too
long, and ending it warrants our serious efforts. My
delegation consistently believes that finding a peaceful,
just, lasting and comprehensive settlement to the
Middle East conflict is of primary importance.
Indonesia will remain committed to its role and
contribution, within and beyond the Security Council,
to the efforts to attain comprehensive and sustainable
peace in the region, based on the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), the Madrid
terms of reference and the principle of land for peace.

