Mr. Malmierca Diaz (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council and to wish you
success in your difficult task.

Once again, the Council is meeting to examine
the serious situation in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine. We were all horrified at the
massacre yesterday in the Gaza Strip that resulted in
the deaths of 19 innocent Palestinian civilians,
including women and children. My delegation offers its
most sincere condolences to the families of the victims.

Yesterday's events in Beit Hanoun are just one
more example of what has been suffered for much too
long by the Palestinian people as a result of the illegal
occupation of its territory by Israel, the occupying
Power. The Non-Aligned Movement responded
immediately to the events taking place in the occupied
Palestinian territory by requesting the convening of
this emergency meeting of the Security Council.

In my capacity as Chair of the Coordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement and on behalf of
all member States of the Movement, I have the honour
to read to the Council the following statement on the
deterioration of the current situation in the Middle
East, especially the occupied Palestinian territory. This
statement was agreed this morning by the Coordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement.
(spoke in English)

"The Coordinating Bureau of the Non-
Aligned Movement expresses once again its
grave concern at the continued deterioration of
the situation on the ground in the occupied
Palestinian territory, during the recent period,
particularly as a result of the excessive,
indiscriminate and disproportionate use of force
by Israel, the occupying Power, which has caused
extensive loss of civilian Palestinian life and
injuries, including among children and women.

"The Movement condemns in particular the
military assaults being carried out by Israel, the
occupying Power in the Gaza Strip, which has
caused loss of life and extensive destruction of
Palestinian property and vital infrastructure. The
Movement reaffirms the continued validity of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 446 (1979), 1322 (2000), 1397 (2002),
1402 (2002), 1403 (2002), 1435 (2002), 1515
(2003) and 1553 (2004).

"The Movement emphasizes the need to
preserve the institutions of the Palestinian
National Authority and Palestinian infrastructure
and properties.

"The Movement expresses grave concern at
the dire humanitarian situation of the Palestinian
people and calls for the provision of emergency
assistance to them.

"In light of the present situation, the
Movement urges the Security Council to shoulder
its responsibility according to the United Nations
Charter in the preservation of international peace
and security by taking the following measures:

"1. Demanding that Israel, the occupying
Power, immediately cease its aggression against
the Palestinian civilian population in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
and immediately withdraw its forces from within
the Gaza Strip to positions prior to June 2006;
"2. Calling for an immediately ceasefire
between the Israeli and Palestinian sides;

"3. Calling also for the establishment and
dispatch of a United Nations observer force to
supervise the ceasefire;

"4. Calling upon Israel, the occupying

Power, to scrupulously abide by its obligations

and responsibilities under the Geneva Convention

relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949.

"In that regard, the Movement calls upon
the international community, including the
Quartet, to take immediate steps, including
confidence-building measures between the
parties, with the objective of resuming peace
negotiations and restarting the peace process.

"The Movement will remain seized of this
important issue."

(spoke in Spanish)

Thus concludes the statement of the Coordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement, which will
shortly be distributed as an official document of the
General Assembly and of the Security Council.

I should like to conclude by calling on all
members of the Security Council to support the draft
resolution submitted by the delegation of Qatar on
behalf of the members of the Group of Arab States. We
hope that the Council will be able to act without delay,
in keeping with its important responsibilities.

