Mr. Okuda (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening
today's meeting on the situation in the Middle East. I
would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco for his comprehensive briefing.

We very much regret that we have yet to see the
resumption of negotiations between Israel and the Arab
parties, including the Palestinians, despite international
efforts, especially those of the United States, to resume
negotiations. There seems to be only little progress on
many issues that we take up with regards to the peace
process. We are concerned that the longer the
negotiation is not resumed, the more precarious the
situation will become.

Japan would like to emphasize that we must not
be discouraged from making efforts to revive the peace
process and to encourage the parties to achieve a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace through
negotiations. We believe that the people in the region
have already suffered enough. We must endeavour to
resume the negotiations, as there is no way to achieve
peace other than through sincere negotiations between
the parties.

We reiterate our call on both parties to carry out
their obligations and commitments under the Road
Map. In that regard, we consider the decision of the
Government of Israel to suspend new settlement
construction for 10 months as a step in the right
direction. However, Japan reiterates its call on the
Israeli Government to freeze all settlement activities,
including natural growth, in the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem. The status of Jerusalem is one of the
core issues of final status negotiations, and we call on
Israel to refrain from taking any actions that will
prejudge the outcome of such a negotiation.

We encourage the Palestinian Authority to
continue in its efforts to improve the security situation,
which will contribute to carrying out its commitment to
ending violence and terrorism. We also strongly
support the Palestinian Authority's two-year plan to
build institutions that will support a future Palestinian
State. That effort is essential if a future Palestinian
State is to be viable.

On Gaza, we call for the full implementation of
resolution 1860 (2009) in all its aspects. One year after
the end of Operation Cast Lead, it is unacceptable that
the blockade, which has created a serious humanitarian
situation in Gaza, remains. We call on Israel to
improve the movement of goods and people, and to
cooperate with the relevant United Nations agencies.
We take note of the Secretary-General's letter to the
President of the Security Council on the follow-up to
the Board of Inquiry into incidents in Gaza
(S/2009/250). We expect that the continued dialogue
will improve cooperation on the ground between the
United Nations and the Government of Israel. We are
also concerned about the rockets that continue to be
fired into southern Israel and call on all who are
responsible to immediately stop such actions, which
could precipitate a far graver situation.

Palestinian unity under President Abbas is
important to enable the Palestinian people to seek a
negotiated solution with one voice, and we reiterate our
support for the Egyptian effort to achieve Palestinian
reconciliation.

Japan strongly supports the international efforts,
especially those of the United States, to revive the
peace process. Japan will welcome any action by Arab
States that will help to create an environment
conducive to reviving the peace process. Japan, for its
part, will continue to work with both parties and to
encourage them to take politically difficult but
necessary steps for the resumption of the peace
process. Japan will also continue to provide assistance
to the Palestinian people to improve the humanitarian
situation and to assist the Palestinian Authority in its
effort to build the institutions and viable economy
necessary for a future independent State.

