Mr. Lowcock: Let me begin today by thanking
Council members for their decision just now to adopt
resolution 2449 (2018). Cross-border aid provides a
critical lifeline to millions of Syrians who cannot be
supported through any other means. The Council has
done its part; we will now do ours to sustain aid in a
way that is as effective and accountable as possible.
The situation in the north-west of Syria, where some
3 million people remain dependent on humanitarian
cross-border operations, is very challenging. While a
pause in air strikes has had a meaningful impact on the
lives ofpeople there, shelling and fighting in the areas in
and around the demilitarized zone continue to result in
civilian death and injury and the destruction of civilian
infrastructure. In late November, a mortar struck a
primary school in Jarjanaz town just as students were
leaving, killing four boys and two girls and injuring
ten other children. Insecurity continues and incidents
affecting civilians continue to be reported every day.
The recent hostilities have reportedly forced nearly
15,000 people to flee their homes for neighbouring
villages, with many people living in the open, without
adequate shelter, during the cold winter months. They
join the many thousands already living in tents or under
plastic sheeting.

The United Nations and non-governmental
organizations continue to respond to ensure that those
in need get help, but fighting and displacement make
the situation more difficult and the population more
vulnerable. Idlib remains on the edge of a humanitarian
disaster. Should there be a further escalation of violence,
the needs would quickly overwhelm the ability of
humanitarian agencies to respond. The parties to the
conflict must take care to spare the civilian population,
while at the same time taking all possible measures
to see that the violence in Idlib ends and that the
humanitarian catastrophe the Secretary-General has
warned of does not come to pass.

Humanitarian organizations estimate that up to
6,000 people remain trapped in areas under the control
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, east of
the Euphrates, in Deir ez-Zor governorate. Civilians
continue to suffer, as a result of both ground fighting and
air strikes. On 29 November, air strikes reportedly hit a
field hospital in the area, killing and injuring scores of
civilians, including women, children and medical staff.
Freedom of movement is heavily restricted. Some 9,000
people have been able to flee since September, but they
continue to find themselves in harm's way, living in
difficult conditions and with extremely limited access
to basic assistance and services.

The most recent aid to reach displaced people in
the area was in October. The most recent humanitarian
mission to the area had to turn back when its vehicles
came under attack and one aid worker was shot. After
receiving treatment, he is now in stable condition, but the
civilians in the area continue to suffer without the basic
support that they need. I also remain very concerned
about the more than 40,000 people in Rukban, where
we continue to receive reports of civilian suffering
and death.

The deployment of our convoy in early November
has shown that where there is a political will,
humanitarian organizations can mobilize quickly and
provide help to those in need. I once again thank all
who were involved in that. We need to build on that
first delivery with a second convoy later this month to
provide food, water, hygiene and sanitation support,
and medical and nutrition items, as well as blankets,
mattresses and other essential non-food items to help
protect people during the winter. A second convoy
will also allow us to carry out further vaccinations and
speak to people about their plans as we look towards
more sustainable solutions.

I want to assure the Council that the first delivery
was effective. We monitored the delivery of aid inside
the camp for three days. We will make additional efforts
to strengthen the monitoring of the distribution in the
next convoy. We will send a bigger team, and we plan to
accompany the assistance from the offloading point to
the distribution points inside the makeshift settlement
to oversee the actual distributions and to conduct post-
distribution monitoring. My message to all concerned
parties is therefore simple. I ask them to provide the
authorizations, facilitation letters and all the necessary
security guarantees for the convoy to proceed without
delay or impediment.

Sustaining and scaling up the response is also
critical in other parts of the country, including in
areas under the control of the Government, where we
now estimate that 8.7 million people are in need of
humanitarian assistance. From January to September,
humanitarian organizations operating from inside Syria
have been reaching an average of 3.2 million people
every month. A key priority has been addressing the
needs of the most vulnerable in locations that have seen
shifts in control. Some 1.6 million people live in areas
that have changed control since the beginning of the
year. Some areas have suffered for years under siege,
have been impacted by intense military activity prior
to changing control or have seen no resumption of basic
services since changing control. Up to one-third ofthose
people are living in areas categorized by the United
Nations as hard-to-reach, where the United Nations and
its partners do not have a sustained presence and, as a
result, humanitarian needs are particularly severe. Aid
has reached 40 per cent of those locations, including
through a blanket agreement for access to northern
rural Horns and southern Hama. However, sustained
access to too many areas remains limited and some
areas are still not accessible at all.

Improving our response is not only about reaching
more people, although that is part of it. We are also
increasingly focused on further improving the quality
of our access and programming. What do we mean by
quality in humanitarian assistance? First, assistance
must be based on an assessment of needs. Secondly, it
means being able to monitor and evaluate our impact,
including by directly engaging with the people we are
trying to help. Thirdly, it involves ensuring protection
for the most vulnerable and sustaining our reach month
after month, based on the needs identified. We are
making progress in many of those areas. The United
Nations is reaching many places, with more than 550
missions over the past three months to assess, deliver or
monitor the delivery of assistance. We are also working
on expanding our field presence in governorates
outside Damascus to enhance our ability to engage
with communities, assess needs, deliver assistance and
monitor impact. We continue to engage with all parties
to the conflict, including the Government of Syria,
at multiple levels to negotiate access and ensure that
humanitarian assistance reaches those most in need. I
will report to the Council on our progress in improving
access in the months ahead.

Let me conclude by recalling the five requests I
made to the Council two months ago (see S/PV.8384).
The full implementation of those requests will remain
an important focus of our work as we move into 2019,
recognizing that other issues may also arise as the
situation evolves.

First, with the adoption of resolution 2449 (2018),
important progress has been made, but we must see
access continue without impediment. Secondly, while
we have seen the continued implementation of the
agreement between Russia and Turkey in the north-
west, it is critical that it be sustained with respect for
civilians and civilian infrastructure, and that there be an
end to the current hostilities. A full military onslaught
on Idlib and the surrounding areas must be avoided at
all costs. Thirdly, there must be support to ensure that
approval for the next humanitarian convoy to Rukban is
immediately granted and that secure access is provided
to the makeshift settlement. Fourthly, we must be
able to enjoy the Council's ongoing support so we can
further build on our efforts to ensure quality access,
through which we can carry out additional needs
assessments, deliver to all areas where needs are most
severe, and monitor the impact of our interventions.
Fifthly, we must provide financing for our current
humanitarian response plan. Donors have provided
more than $2.1 billion this year, but the plan remains
only two-thirds funded.

