Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Once again
in the space of 48 hours, the Council is meeting to
consider the very serious and deteriorating situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories. At the outset, I
would like to express our support for and agreement
with the statement made by Tunisia on behalf of the
Arab Group.

The war crimes that Israel, the occupying Power,
is currently perpetrating in the occupied Palestinian
cities, before the eyes of the entire world, are indeed
among the worst crimes of genocide. What is
happening now in the Jenin refugee camp - a scene of
horrible carnage claiming the lives of hundreds of
innocent civilians, including young people, women and
children - and the killing of dozens of people in the
old city of Nablus and in the vicinity of the Church of
the Nativity in Bethlehem exemplify the continuing
practices of oppression by the Israeli occupying forces
against innocent civilians. These acts are blatant
defiance of Security Council resolutions 1402 (2002)
and 1403 (2002) and of all the Council's calls for the
immediate cessation of acts of aggression and violence
and for withdrawal from the Palestinian cities.

Israel's continuing defiance of Security Council
resolutions and, more so, its having responded by
increasing its aggression and oppression and by
perpetrating more massacres against civilians require
the Council to act immediately and to condemn Israel
for non-compliance with the Council's resolutions.
Those acts also require the Council to call upon Israel
to respect the Fourth Geneva Convention, of 1949, in
the occupied Palestinian territories and to pressure
Israel to stop impeding the transfer of the wounded and
the provision of humanitarian and medical assistance to
those who need it as a result of Israel's barbaric daily
bombings.

The extremely serious situation in the Palestinian
territories requires immediate Council action to protect
unarmed, innocent civilians in Palestine by deploying
an international protection force as soon as possible.
Any delay or prevarication in protecting Palestinian
civilians would be a failure on the Council's part to
assume its responsibilities under the Charter.
We welcome the visit of Secretary of State Colin
Powell to the region and the statements made by
United States officials, particularly those of President
George Bush and Secretary Powell, calling on Israel to
withdraw. However, we wish to recall the final
communique of Arab Foreign Ministers meeting at
Cairo on 6 April, which stated that the biased treatment
accorded to Israel on the part of some States,
particularly the United States, has led Israel to act as if
it were above international law and United Nations
resolutions. Such privileged treatment has encouraged
Israel to pursue its aggressive policies and to threaten
peace, security and stability in the region.

By pretending to withdraw from certain areas
while simultaneously reoccupying other areas, Israel is
playing a trick that fools no one. We are certain that the
Council cannot be deceived by such a trick. The
carnage of the last 12 days perpetrated daily by the
Israeli occupying forces, the savage daily attacks and
bombings of the refugee camp of Jenin and Nablus and
the attack on the Church of the Nativity are criminal
acts and pose a clear threat to international peace and
security. They require the Council's immediate action
under Chapter VII of the Charter in order to force
Israel to implement Security Council resolutions
immediately and fully, to end its aggression against the
Palestinian people and against their rights, land and
property, and to provide the Palestinian people with
international protection.

