Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to begin by expressing my condolences to the brotherly people of Kuwait following the death of His Highness Amir Al-Sabah, who contributed greatly to humanitarian efforts and to peace and security in the region and worldwide. I thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for his briefing, which contained updated information reflecting the deteriorating situation in the occupied Palestinian territories, as well as human rights violations, the policy of fait accompli, the continuing occupation and the lack of desire to build peace. During the high-level debate, world leaders reiterated their countries' commitment to the internationally agreed upon parameters and United Nations resolutions as a basis for achieving a lasting solution to the conflict in order to put an end to the occupation and allow the Palestinian people to regain their legitimate rights, particularly their right to self- determination and their right to an independent State based on 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. That position has been continuously reiterated by the international community, which has always supported the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people and promoted a solution to the conflict. In that context, Tunisia reiterates its support for the just Palestinian cause and for the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. We also call on the international community and the Security Council, in particular, to force Israel to freeze its settlement activities, which run counter to international law, and to implement the relevant Council resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016). Tunisia rejects Israel's annexationist efforts and calls on Israel to abandon them once and for all. My country remains attached to peace as a strategic goal and is ready to support any initiative aimed at shoring up peace based on the agreed parameters, including the Arab Peace Initiative, in order to re-establish peace, justice and peaceful coexistence among the peoples of the region. We believe that the participation of the Palestinian side is a prerequisite to any initiative to resolve the conflict and to find a fair and lasting solution to the conflict. We believe that it is the responsibility of the Security Council to maintain international peace and security and to resolve conflicts. With that in mind, we recall the role of the Council in advancing the peace process and putting an end to the impunity of Israel, which continues to violate international law. We call on the Quartet to play its rightful role and to revive negotiations, in conformity with the agreed terms of reference, in order to put an end to the occupation, achieve an independent Palestinian State based on 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and resolve all final-status issues. We support the call of President Abbas for the convening of an international conference in order to relaunch a credible peace process with a clear timetable. We also welcome the genuine reconciliation measures undertaken by Palestinian factions, as well as the fact that presidential and legislative elections will be organized in the upcoming months. Israel pursues its aggressive policies and _ its violations of legitimate Palestinian rights. We condemn all incitement, destruction and actions that target civilians. We must protect Palestinian civilians, who suffer daily violations of their rights, and put an end to the blockade imposed on Gaza, which is a form of collective punishment and only serves to aggravate the suffering of men and women and to complicate the situation in the context of the pandemic by creating an additional challenge. We welcome the efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which provides support for 5.5 million Palestinian refugees, and we call on donors to continue supporting the Agency in order to meet the humanitarian needs of Palestinian refugees. We urge regional and international actors to step up their efforts to support the Palestinians and the Palestinian authority. In conclusion, we believe that in order to ease tensions and re-establish peace and security in the Middle East, it is essential to put an end to the occupation and to ensure justice for the victims.
