Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): I, too, should like to welcome Ambassador
Nestor Osorio and thank him for his report and for the
high quality of his work in the months since his
appointment as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). My delegation
welcomes the work he has undertaken with the
assistance of the Panel of Experts to ensure the
implementation of resolution 1737 (2006) and other
relevant resolutions of the Council.

We urge the Panel to continue its consultations in
a manner consistent with those it has held recently with
international and non-governmental organizations and
several capitals in an effort to better explain its
programme of work and request the information it
needs to fulfil its mandate. My delegation supports the
recommendations detailed in the report of the Panel of
Experts and encourages the organization of regional
and multilateral meetings to further clarify the specific
details of the implementation of sanctions.

We are deeply concerned over violations of the
sanctions imposed on Iran. We commend the Nigerian
authorities for having seized a ship transporting
prohibited weapons originating in Iran, in violation of
paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007), which
highlights that country's contempt for Security Council
sanctions.

Furthermore, the recent report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) describes Iran's
ongoing pursuit of its uranium enrichment activities.
We call on the Iranian authorities to comply with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, fulfil its
obligations to the IAEA and return to the E3+3
negotiating table. That is the price of restoring
confidence between Iran and the rest of the
international community in this matter.

Gabon remains committed to the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime, of which the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is the
cornerstone. In that regard, we will continue to support
the work of the 1737 Committee and its Panel of
Experts.

