Mr. Nesho (Albania): The Albanian Government
is following with great concern the latest developments
in Kosovo. We deeply regret the recent escalation in
the situation there and the loss of human lives. In
response to the recent deplorable events, I should like
to reiterate the firm position of the Albanian
Government against violence and violent acts,
regardless of the motives behind them. We strongly
condemn the violence as unacceptable and damaging.

Such events run against the general trend in
Kosovo of progress towards a democratic and multi-
ethnic society. They run against the general will of the
people of Kosovo to build, and live in, a free and open
society where the rule of law is not replaced by the
violence of the past and by ethnic hatred.

The Albanian Government stresses that this
situation of violence threatens the process of
democratization and reconciliation in Kosovo and that
it must end immediately. We call upon all the citizens
of Kosovo to demonstrate maturity, maintain calm and
cooperate in full confidence with the legitimate local
and international authorities - the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and KFOR - in order to restore law and order; we
express our confidence that they will do so.

UNMIK and KFOR have accomplished an
admirable task in Kosovo, building democratic
institutions, increasing stability and, ultimately, laying
the foundations of a multi-ethnic society. The
implementation of the standards set by the Security
Council has shown the determination of the
international community to create the future society of
Kosovo. UNMIK and its activities should not be
judged through the prism of the interests of those who
feel frustrated and who cannot function under its
guidance. Nor should it be judged through the prism of
the interests of those who cultivate parallel structures
that seek to challenge its authority. We are fully
confident that UNMIK will continue to play a central
and crucial role in Kosovo and that it will successfully
fulfil its mandate there.

The recent sad events in Kosovo should not be
considered as reflecting a failure of the process or of
the positive engagement there; they do not. Only those
who are not interested in the progress of the standards
and who are not confident with respect to the
international community in Kosovo can say that.

The Government of Albania takes this
opportunity once again to reaffirm its support for the
policy of the Security Council towards Kosovo and for
its resolution 1244 (1999). We also reaffirm our full
support for the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Harri Holkeri, UNMIK and KFOR, and
we extend that support to them. We continue to
strongly believe that the standards policy is the
fundamental basis of a peaceful, prosperous and
democratic Kosovo that will spread yet more stability
and security in the western Balkans and that will be a
part of the regional and European integration
processes.

What happened yesterday in Kosovo was not the
result of coexistence. To the contrary, it was the result
of a lack of engagement or action towards
coexistence - or even the result of efforts to
undermine such coexistence. It was the product of a
constant policy of keeping alive parallel administrative
structures that continue to feed ethnic isolation and to
drive new waves of ethnic separation, with the purpose
of dividing Kosovo. These tragic events strongly evoke
the imperative need to respect law and institutions.
They give rise to serious concerns about the obstacles
raised by parallel structures in Kosovo. The need to
dismantle those structures grows increasingly urgent if
we are to strengthen legitimate institutions, the rule of
law and order, the continuity of democratic processes
and the development of multi-ethnicity there. At the
same time, we ask that more responsibility be devolved
upon the Provisional Institutions.

In conclusion, I would stress that the
implementation of the policy of the international
community, in particular the Security Council's
recommendations for Kosovo, will succeed if the
regional political actors support the spirit of
cooperation, European integration and coexistence
there. It should be clear to all that the path that Kosovo
should follow cannot be the product of any imposed
unilateral initiative. It should lie within the framework
established by the international community, at the core
of which are dialogue and understanding, not
intolerance and violence.

