Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Danilo Tiirk for his very useful briefing.

Bulgaria welcomes the Action Plan for the
Completion of Weapons Collection, which was adopted
on 17 February, as well as the progress achieved in the
implementation of the weapons disposal plan, on which
the holding of an election for an autonomous
Bougainville government and the adoption of the new
Bougainville Constitution depend.

We appreciate and support the efforts of the
United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOB), deployed jointly with the Peace Monitoring
Group and the two parties to the conflict, aimed at
defining clear criteria for the completion of stage II of
the weapons disposal plan. Bulgaria welcomes Papua
New Guinea's obvious preparedness to settle the
dispute through peaceful and democratic means and
scrupulously to implement the Bougainville Peace
Agreement of 30 August 2001.

We were gratified by the signing on 18 February
of a memorandum of understanding by the Government
of Papua New Guinea and the Bougainville parties,
which establishes a mechanism for consultation
between them on all aspects of the implementation of
the autonomy arrangements. We also welcome the
National Government's willingness to withdraw its
Defence Force from the island on 26 March 2003.

We are very grateful to Australia, New Zealand,
Vanuatu, Fiji and the United Kingdom for their efforts
to provide material assistance to bring about a prompt
settlement of the problem. We support UNPOB's
appeal to involve the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and other United Nations agencies
in the settlement of Bougainville's problems, in
particular the reconstruction of infrastructures and the
reintegration of former combatants through such
programmes as the UNDP cocoa project.

Finally, I should like to note my Government's
very positive assessment of the dedicated and intense
work of the Secretary-General's Representative,
Mr. Noel Sinclair, and his team in support of the
consolidation of peace and stability in Bougainville.

