Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): An open debate on
the working methods of the Security Council under
your presidency, Madam President, is doubly apt.
This is an area of interest for both Council members
and the general membership, and you as Chair of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions in 2013 and 2014, Madam
President, have given a new impetus to improving the
working methods of the Council.

As we talk about the working methods today, let
us keep the core objectives of the Council in mind.
The primary purpose of the Council is maintain
international peace and security and to take decisions
in that regard in an efficient and effective manner. In
addition, it is our collective aim to promote openness,
transparency and inclusion. The Council's decisions are
high-stakes matters for States Members of the United
Nations that are not members of the Council.

Having served in the Council recently, we can
testify that it is an efficient body, perhaps the most
efficient in the United Nations system. But it needs to
work more on effectiveness. In that context, Madam
President, we welcome the decisions taken under
your stewardship of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Matters
in 2013 and 2014 on interaction and dialogue with
non-members of the Council, consultations with troop-
and police-contributing countries, appointment of more
penholders from among the elected members, and early
appointment of chairpersons of the subsidiary bodies
by a deadline. That is substantial progress and gives an
indication of more openness and responsiveness on the
part of the permanent five.

We also thank you, Madam President, for having
Pakistan's proposal on intra-Council communication
adopted, albeit in a watered-down form. Our motive
in presenting the proposal was to ensure the flow of
more authentic and timely information among Council
members by strengthening the presidency, especially
when held by an elected member, and facilitating
communication from the permanent five to the elected
ten. That would engender cohesiveness in the Council's
work. The test of the value of those decisions will lie in
their faithful and consistent implementation. We look
forward to the Council's assessment of the follow-up
and implementation of those decisions.

Wrap-up sessions, revived during Pakistan's
presidency of the Council in January 2013, have proved
to be useful for both members and non-members of the
Council. Those sessions are not a substitute for horizon
scanning, but they do help us review and preview the
agenda of the Council. Combined with the periodic
briefings by the Department of Political Affairs, those
sessions should enhance the Council's awareness for
preventive diplomacy purposes.

We should continue to find ways to forge more
robust partnership between the Council, the troop-
and police-contributing countries, the Secretariat and
the general membership. Pakistan, as Chair of the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations, tried
to enhance a shared space for discussing difficult
issues like robust peacekeeping, new technologies,
safety and security, drawdowns and transitions and
regionalization. But that was in an informal setting. We
believe that the Council should close consult the troop-
and police-contributing countries before writing down
and approving a peacekeeping mandate and it should
involve them throughout the formation of the mission.
That would help in addressing the issues relating to
force generation, command, control, communication
and coordination as well as inter-mission movements.
The aim should be to organize iterative discussions
with troop contributors so that a mandate is adapted to
the realities on the ground.

In that regard, Council members may revisit
the Brahimi recommendation on the adoption of
resolutions for a specific mandate in two phases. First,
a framework resolution should be adopted. Then, after
the troop contributors have been identified, a second
resolution should be adopted. We support two proposals
made by the United States in an intergovernmental
negotiations setting on working methods. First, there
should be an open meeting of the Security Council
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions with the participation of the
general membership, and secondly, an open informal
workshop on working methods. That should enhance the
space for dialogue between Council members and the
general membership. We call for making the process for
the selection and appointment of panels and groups of
experts more transparent, balanced and representative.

The Office of the Ombudsperson has worked
fairly effectively to advance due process with regard
to the delisting requests under the Al-Qaida sanctions
committee. It has worked consistently to ensure that
fair and clear procedures are in place to list and delist
individuals and entities in the targeted categories
of finance, travel, arms and commodities. Further
improvements are necessary to remove the existing
lacunae in the Office, such as non-inclusion of
petitioners other than those on the sanctions list and
lack of full independence.

Due process is crucial in targeted sanctions regimes.
There should be in principle no objection to their
extension or to the extension of the Ombudsperson's
jurisdiction to other sanctions committees, but this
would best be done after reforming the current office
and especially after giving it the requisite jurisdictional
autonomy.

Finally, with regard to the follow-up to the referrals
by the Council to the International Criminal Court,
we encourage Council members to hold internal
discussions on the need to designate a focal point or
create a subsidiary body or working group and work
out modalities in that regard. It is important that such a
linkage not infringe on the Council's authority or on the
Court's independence.

