Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I wish to
thank both of our briefers for their updates.

The African Union is an essential partner to the
United States and the United Nations in Africa. This is
true in part because some 80 per cent of United Nations
peacekeeping troops and budgets are committed to
Africa, but also because ofthe good work that the African
Union does in some of the world's most challenging
security environments. 1 had the pleasure of seeing this
work first-hand during my time with peacekeepers from
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan just last
week. The African Union has made Vital contributions
to peace on the continent, including brokering Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic and helping to create a road map for
peace in the Sudan, but it can do even more to increase
these contributions going forward.

In Burundi's upcoming presidential elections,
the African Union's election support will be critical
to a peaceful, transparent and inclusive process. The
African Union should also encourage the Government
of Burundi and the East African Community to advance
inter-Burundi dialogue. In Cameroon, Violence in the
Anglophone regions merits the African Union's urgent
attention. The African Union and the United Nations
should schedule a joint visit to assess the situation and
urge the parties to peacefully resolve their differences.

We also recognize that instability in Libya directly
impacts African Union member States, so we appreciate
the African Union's commitment to supporting
Special Representative Salame's efforts to reach a
political solution. It is Vital that the United Nations
succeed in that task, and we welcome the African
Union's participation in the Berlin format. That brings
us one step closer to a political solution. We remain
deeply concerned by the violation of the Council's arms
embargo on Libya. Member States that supply illicit
weapons to the country undermine Libya's stability and
we hope that the African Union will join the Council in
stopping the flow of those weapons and look forward to
supporting the African Union's Silencing the Guns by
2020 initiative.

Of course, achieving peace sometimes requires
asking our friends to make hard choices. As the
Secretary-General's report on United Nations-African
Union cooperation (S/2019/759) notes, many of the
joint efforts made by the United Nations, the African
union and regional economic communities focus on the
primacy of politics. So, we are encouraged by this past
week's consultations, during which the United Nations
and the African Union Peace and Security Council
largely agreed on several ways to address challenges
in South Sudan, the Sahel and the Central African
Republic. Verbal commitments, however, are not
enough. Both parties could follow through by calling
on South Sudan's leaders to reaffirm commitments
to the cessation of hostilities and to compromise on
outstanding issues to form a transitional Government
by 12 November.

Finally, the United States supports the efforts of
the United Nations and the African Union to secure
predictable, sustainable and reliable financing for future
operations. Work remains to achieve the conditions
that this Council set out in resolutions 2320 (2016) and
2378 (2017). As I stated last month, the mechanism
using United Nations-assessed contributions requires
a deliberate approach with appropriate safeguards, and
any resolution on that topic must address long-standing
United States policy positions, including with respect
to financial transparency and trade measures. We have
additional concerns regarding adequate burden-sharing
and adherence to United Nations standards for conduct
and peacekeeping operations. From the effectiveness of
operations to their fiscal help, stricter African Union
adherence to these principles will directly translate to
greater peace and security on the continent.

When the African Union does good work, lives
change for the better. That is why the United States has
spent more than $1.5 billion on training-support for 23
partners in Africa since 2005, including for military
and police personnel deployed to African peacekeeping
missions in six different countries. I urge all Member
States to join us in developing the capacities of African
troop and police-contributing countries.

As we have noted in several previous meetings, the
African continent is brimming with potential. Africa
has a dynamic population with hundreds of millions of
people, each with unique callings. A strong partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
is one of the keys to realizing those callings, so I
look forward to working with the members of the
Council to strengthen the United Nations-African
Union relationship.
