Mr. Badji (Senegal) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I should like first to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January and to express to you
my delegation's gratitude for your laudable and timely
initiative in organizing a public debate on the question
of peace, security and development in the Great Lakes
region.

Your initiative is particularly welcome given that
this region has for some months now, following a
lengthy period of upheaval, been experiencing a
positive trend towards peace and accord. This was
highlighted by the holding in November 2004 in Dar
es-Salaam of the first Summit of Heads of State and
Government of the International Conference on Peace,
Security, Democracy and Development in the Great
Lakes Region - an area whose stability is vital to the
entire African continent.

For that reason, my country, Senegal, which has
been following developments related to that
Conference with great interest, was extremely pleased
at the Declaration that emanated from it, which
reminded the leaders of the Great Lakes region that
their people share a common fate and that they have a
responsibility jointly to overcome the demons of
division and, in a spirit of solidarity, to build together,
in a climate of confidence, calm and good-
neighbourliness, the future of their peoples, which are
linked by strong ethnic, cultural and linguistic ties.

The impressive momentum that led to that
outcome must not be allowed to fade, because
declarations of good intentions are not enough; action
must be taken quickly to ensure that the commitments
outlined in the Declaration in the priority areas of
peace, solidarity, security, democracy and governance,
economic development and regional integration, and
humanitarian and social issues are translated into
concrete achievements. That is not the task of the
Governments and the peoples of the Great Lakes
region alone; it must be the result of a joint, agreed
initiative whose success will require a major
contribution on the part of the development partners.
Hence my delegation hopes that the Great Lakes region
will enjoy the support of donor countries, particularly
those of the Group of Eight, whose most recent
Summit, held at Gleneagles in July 2005, gives reason
to hope to those African countries that are faced with a
myriad of difficulties.

The continued support of the international
community for the normalization process in the region
is critical. It should not lose sight of the strategic
importance of the second Summit of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes region, which, we hope,
will take place this year.

During the next stage, where protocols and
programmes of action will be adopted, it will be
important to apply the concept of specific zones for
reconstruction, as set out by my compatriot, Minister
Ibrahima Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes region, to whom I convey
my fraternal regards. That concept respects the
geopolitical realities of the Great Lakes region insofar
as it integrates two forms of cooperation: local
territorial cooperation in all sectors, with the
possibility of the joint management of human
resources; and a partnership-based cooperation, with a
strong interlinkage between all segments of the
population, including youth movements, women's
groups, civil society and so on.

That project will remain utopian, however, if it
does not receive significant financial support to finance
the specific reconstruction fund, which is aimed at
supporting activities in the specific zones for
reconstruction in the region.

My delegation believes also that it is important to
consolidate, at the State level, what has been achieved
in terms of good governance, democracy, justice,
human rights and the rule of law, as set out in
resolution 1625 (2005). That is a political imperative,
because each internal conflict that results from a
failure to respect those principles risks becoming a
transnational conflict with often disastrous
consequences.

Finally, it is more urgent than ever before to
develop regional early-warning capacities in order to
identify, in a timely manner, threats to peace and
stability in the region and to take the appropriate
measures. Of course, such a mechanism should also be
accompanied by active preventive diplomacy measures,
whose role would be to advocate peace and to resolve
disagreements between political actors or groups
within or among States.

In conclusion, Mr. President, I cannot but
reiterate my pride at your initiative in having convened
this public debate and at the leadership and dedication
of Tanzania, a fraternal and friendly country, in the
process of promoting peace and shared prosperity in
the Great Lakes region, an area of the African
continent that is so dear to all its sons and daughters.

