Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, Mr. President, let me
congratulate you and the delegation of Gabon on your
assumption of the important functions of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to thank Ambassador Araud and the
French delegation for the dynamic and skilful manner
in which they presided over the Council in February.

We are also grateful to Ambassador Yukio Takasu
for his briefing on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), the
regular 90-day review and the work that has been done.
In the period under review, the Committee continued to
act in strict compliance with the provisions of
resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007) and 1803 (2008).
It is important that, in the future, the Committee apply
the spirit and letter of those resolutions in the interests
of finding an effective resolution to the Iranian nuclear
problem solely through political and diplomatic means.

The situation concerning the Iranian nuclear
programme continues to be complex. The talks of the
permanent five members of the Security Council plus
Germany (P5+l), the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and Russia have made considerable
diplomatic efforts, which have to date not produced the
desired results. However, we believe that there is an
opportunity for negotiations, and in particular to agree
on a convincing and mutually acceptable fuel-exchange
model for Tehran's research reactor. The successful
implementation of such a project would be a genuine
step towards restoring trust in the solely peaceful
nature of the Iranian nuclear programme and the best
way to meet the humanitarian needs of the Iranian
people.

We continue to advocate the resolution of the
issues related to the Iranian nuclear programme
through dialogue and interaction with the Iranian side.
The core of the Russian position has always been and
will continue to be based on talks to find diplomatic
solutions and on involving Tehran in joint efforts under
the IAEA's mandated involvement. We call on Tehran
to make the necessary accommodations to ensure the
very prompt resumption of a broad dialogue with the
P5+l with a view, among other things, to achieving a
negotiated settlement of the situation concerning the
Iranian nuclear programme. We are convinced that
such a settlement would respond to the basic interests
of the entire international community and of Iran itself.

