Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Haris Silajdzie, Chairman
of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. My
delegation is particularly pleased that his country is
participating in this debate for the first time as a
member of the Security Council.

We also welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative and European Union (EU) Special
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and thank
him for his briefing. The report he presented
introduced (S/2010/235) reflects the challenges and
complexities of the situation. I would also like to
reaffirm Croatia's full and continued support for him
and his Office, and to express our appreciation for the
personal effort he invests in carrying out his mission.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the European Union
in a few minutes. Here, I wish to make some additional
comments.
Croatia strongly supports the clear and
unambiguous European and Euro-Atlantic perspective
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Our support for and
commitment to the European perspective for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as for all the countries of South-East
Europe, was formalized in the delivery of our
translation of the EU acquis communautaire to the
prime ministers at the Croatian-Slovenian regional
conference in Brdo, near Kranj, in March this year. We
believe that membership in the European Union is the
future of all countries of South-East Europe as the most
suitable framework for their overall development. We
also warmly welcomed the recent invitation extended
by NATO to Bosnia and Herzegovina to join its
Membership Action Plan, a step that Croatia strongly
and actively supported.

For Croatia, the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and equality of the three constituent peoples are the
basic preconditions for the country's stability and
sustainability. Assisting Bosnia and Herzegovina in
reaching sustainable stability and functionality is one
of our regional priorities.

As we just heard, the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina have made significant progress in the area
of visa liberalization requirements. Croatia is strongly
convinced that this progress should be recognized and
hopes to see visa liberalization implemented in the
course of this year. The citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina deserve the same privileges as the citizens
of other countries of the region. Any delay would only
benefit those advocating the status quo, and the peoples
and citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina would
continue to bear the consequences beyond their direct
responsibilities.

The stability, security and progress of South-East
Europe are in Croatia's strategic interest. We firmly
support all the countries of the region in their reforms,
and we offer them our assistance and experience on
their EU and NATO integration paths. Following the
success of the Zagreb summit, we believe that the time
is ripe to re-energize the process. Thus, we look
forward to the upcoming conference to be held in
Sarajevo on 2 June - marking the tenth anniversary of
the Zagreb summit and bringing together ministers of
foreign affairs of the EU and the region - as an
additional impetus for Bosnia and Herzegovina to
continue more energetically with the necessary reforms
and to further its efforts towards Euro-Atlantic
integration.

However, Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to
face considerable problems, some of which are
challenging its very foundations as established by the
Dayton Peace Agreement. Regrettably, we have heard
that in most other areas only limited progress has been
noted and that some serious challenges have been
raised by the authorities of Republika Srpska to State
institutions and their functioning, as well as to the
authority of the High Representative. Croatia urges the
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to find
strength and reach compromise on issues key to a
sustainable future for the country, its peoples and
citizens. There will be no progress without
consensus - which has to come from within - and
which Croatia, together with other friends of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, strongly advocates.

Croatia calls for negotiations on constitutional
reform to be continued as soon as the new authorities
are formed after the October elections. Further delays
on constitutional reform could have long-term
consequences for the country's future, constitutional
reform being a key precondition for successful Euro-
Atlantic integration. Croatia advocates constitutional
amendments that would provide full equality for all
constituent peoples, as well as for all citizens, applied
throughout the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In this process, the political views of the
representatives of the three constituent peoples should
be valued equally, as the country's stability depends on
respect for the constitutional principle of the collective
equality of all three constituent peoples - Bosniaks,
Serbs and Croats - and all citizens. We have stated on
several occasions that there cannot be a Bosnia and
Herzegovina without Croats in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Their political and cultural survival is
vital to the continued existence of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as these two elements are closely
intertwined. Given the singular position of Croats in
Bosnia and Herzegovina as the smallest and most
vulnerable group, it is all the more important that their
voice be considered on a basis of equality, both ethnic
and civic, as guaranteed in the Constitution and as
arising from the history of the country. All three
peoples must feel that Bosnia and Herzegovina is their
country, and they should feel safe and protected
throughout its entire territory. Their fundamental rights
and freedoms, as well as their civic and ethnic rights,
should be protected throughout, and their right
guaranteed to return safe and protected to their pre-war
homes.

The fight against impunity for war crimes is yet
another important factor in the normalization of the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Croatia firmly
believes that the mandate of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia cannot be declared
complete without bringing to justice the two remaining
fugitives, Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic, indicted for
the most atrocious crimes committed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in Croatia. It is also important that, at
the same time, national courts fulfil their lasting
responsibility and address other war crime cases.

In such circumstances, Croatia believes that it
would be premature to begin the closure of the Office
of the High Representative this year. In this regard,
Croatia is concerned by the general sense of fatigue in
the international community and believes that a strong
international commitment is still very much needed in
order to help improve conditions that will move the
current situation forward and help remedy the
remaining fundamental problems.

Before closing, I would like to reiterate that
Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina enjoy a very
close, friendly and cordial relationship on many levels.
Strong Croatian support has been duly recognized by
Bosnia and Herzegovina and is manifested by our
intense and frequent communication at the highest
level, underscored by a number of visits exchanged. As
noted in the High Representative's report, over the past
months both President Josipovie and Prime Minister
Kosor visited Sarajevo, while the Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina
visited Zagreb. The Government of Croatia and the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina are
preparing a joint session, which should take place next
month. We therefore believe that the observation made
in paragraph 20 of the High Representative's report,
implying strained political relations, is surely
inadvertently imprecise.

