Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We are grateful to Mr. Jan Kubis for his briefing on
the situation in Afghanistan and for presenting the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/721). We also
thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for his detailed statement.

We are pleased to note that, in comparison with
previous reports, the one under consideration today
is more appropriate and objective in its evaluation of
trends in the situation in Afghanistan, which continues
to be of some concern. However, unfortunately, we
would note that, once again, the report does not touch
upon the true nature of the threat emanating from
the Taliban/Al-Qaida, since neither organization is
mentioned, as is also the case with regard to other
terrorist armed groups whose aggressive activities in
the country led to an increase in the number of Afghan
civilian and military deaths. The acuteness of that
problem is illustrated by the attacks by the opposition
in the spring, including the seizing ofa number of areas
in the country, including parts of Kabul. Every now and
then it seems as though there is a certain element of self-
serving reassurance in NATO's decision to withdraw
its military presence from Afghanistan. We do not
suscribe to such well-meaning approaches, all the more
so since during the 2014 presidential elections - whose
successful holding we sincerely wish for the friendly
Afghan people - fighters intend to demonstrate all
their destructive capacity.

We are particularly concerned about the rise in
terrorist activities in the three north-eastern Afghan
provinces of Badakhshan, Takhar and Kunduz. In
October alone they grew by 30 per cent. The number of
militants from the Taliban and the Islamic Movement of
Uzbekistan in those provinces rose to 5,000 individuals.
Yet just around three to five years ago northern
Afghanistan was far more calm and prosperous. We do
not conceal the fact that we are extremely concerned
at the situation that may arise in the Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan and the bordering region of Central
Asia after the withdrawal of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF).

In that regard, we can ask a reasonable question.
How appropriate is it to hasten the transfer of
responsibility for security in the country from the
international military presence to the Afghan military,
and making that all follow an artificially imposed
withdrawal timeline? How long will the coalition forces
cope with the tasks mandated by the Security Council
for stabilization and the preparation of an effective
and viable Afghan security and law enforcement force
and armed forces? All of those issues require detailed
and self-critical reporting from NATO to the Security
Council at the end of next year.

For our part, we stand ready to continue interacting
with NATO in Afghanistan after 2014, with the
understanding that the new alliance mission will have
an appropriate international legal base in the format
of a Security Council resolution. Without that, the
practical agreements existing in Afghanistan today
would legally collapse. We feel that after completing
the task of stabilization, foreign contingents will no
longer need to be present in the country.

We have no doubt that the rise in the influence of
fighters both facilitates and has brought about the 50 per
cent increase in the production of opiates this year.
There is a horrifying statistic i the number of drug
addicts in Afghanistan is more than 1 million, which is
almost 3 per cent of the Afghan population. Moreover,
according to the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission, of that total 300,000 are children. The
issue, which is a threat to peace and stability not only
in Afghanistan but in the region and the whole world,
requires collective efforts and the participation of all
players. The problem cannot be ignored by saying that
the ISAF mandate has no counter-narcotics element.
The time has come to look, in an unbiased manner, at
the formats for possible cooperation between NATO
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO), first and foremost in counter-narcotics and
10st opportunities, all the more so given that the CSTO
has solid experience in stemming drug flows on the
perimeter of the northern border of the Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan.

Russia fully supports the efforts of the Afghan
Government in the progress it is making in the national
reconciliation process, including through dialogue
between the High Peace Council and representatives of
the armed opposition, under the leading role of Kabul,
and on the basis of the well-known triad of principles:
laying down arms, recognizing the Constitution of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and decisively cutting
ties with Al-Qaida and other terrorist organizations.

At the same time, it is obvious that, as the
international contingents withdraw from Afghanistan
and with progress in establishing the Afghan National
Security Forces, the motivation for the armed opposition
to come to an agreement will diminish. The story of the
Qatar office, which the Taliban supposedly temporarily
closed without even waiting for its requests to be met,
is just another demonstration of that. Taking that into
account, we believe that demonstrating flexibility
with regard to easing the Security Council's sanctions
regime with respect to the Taliban is possible only ifthe
Taliban take steps towards compromise.

We share the view on the need to activate and
strengthen the role of regional cooperation by assisting
with Afghanistan's revival as a peaceful, independent
and economically flourishing State. We are convinced
that the most optimal platform for synchronizing
regional efforts to provide assistance to Afghanistan
is the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, in which
almost every country in the region is represented,
including Afghanistan. At the same time, we think it
unjustified that sometimes excessive emphasis is placed
on the Istanbul Process. Its added value has not yet
been proven. Participation in working group meetings
is often low, and a number of States have demonstrated
slight interest in its proceedings.

Achieving significant results in stabilizing
Afghanistan is possible only through our collective
efforts. If we want to achieve maximum results with
our outside partners, we need to coordinate our efforts.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
has provided invaluable assistance. Its role will only
increase with ISAF's withdrawal.

For our part, we shall continue our active efforts for
the stabilization of the situation in Afghanistan, both
bilaterally and by participating in large-scale regional
projects aimed at ensuring the sustainable economic
development of the country and of the Central Asia
region. We have consistently and respectfully supported
the efforts of the Afghan Government in establishing
conditions conducive to long-term stabilization in the
country and in the region on the basis of the friendly
partnership that has traditionally existed between
Russia and Afghanistan. That is in line with the national
interests of our countries and contributes to a stable and
multisectoral development of the whole region.

