Mr. Moura (Brazil): Thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate. I also thank Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello for his updating of the situation in East
Timor, and I ask you, Mr. President, to convey the
Brazilian Government's appreciation of the efforts
undertaken by Mr. Vieira de Mello and his team in
discharging the mandate of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).

We are all aware that UNTAET has very
innovative features as a multidimensional
peacekeeping operation. The scope of its mandate
makes it comparable only to those initiatives that
embody all the efforts of the international community
to restore peace and security. Some analysts have
stressed that East Timor is a test case for the United
Nations, to the extent that the Organization is
confronted with the complex challenge of building a
new nation.

The destruction and violence unleashed last
September add to the complexity of the situation. The
plight of an entire population and the devastation of its
territory are the backdrop against which we should
gauge the effectiveness of our efforts and of our
resolve. East Timor came to the fore in the United
Nations, and it is in our best interest to turn a test case
into a success story.

The first steps have already been taken, although
much remains to be done. UNTAET managed to halt
political violence, and the embryo of the future State is
already in place. But the signs of impatience and
frustration cannot be overlooked. The positive aspects
notwithstanding, it seems that for the regular Timorese
the changes have not kept pace with the expectations.

Let me single out four areas of problems that
should be tackled as a matter of priority: economy and
employment, education and training, security and
political participation.

In the area of economy and employment, the
main challenge is the transition from relief,
reconstruction and rehabilitation to long-term
development. International agencies are starting to
focus on long-term development and job creation,
which is essential for the integration of East Timor into
the global economy. It is important to create an
enabling environment for business as well as to help
develop those sectors that have good prospects for
sustainability, such as coffee and seafood exports, to
name just two.

It is most welcome that UNTAET and the
Timorese leadership are engaged in negotiations with
Australia to define a new Timor Gap Treaty that will
allow the new country to benefit from the exploitation
of the deposits of oil and gas lying in the Timor seabed.

The goal of establishing a modern market
economy and efficient State institutions leads us to the
second area of concern: education and training.
Renewed efforts are necessary to eradicate illiteracy,
provide basic education, train the workforce and
prepare the Timorese people to take the helm of the
private and public sectors.

The third area is security, in its broader sense. It
is not only political violence that we must ward off, but
also the violence of regular crimes. If sustainable
economic growth is combined with increasing
employment rates and the provision of basic public
services, the social instability and public unrest will
certainly diminish. Moreover, the independent East
Timor will need institutions capable of upholding the
rule of law and of settling controversies that may arise
from social relations.

The law-abiding citizen is not created by decree.
The emergence of such citizens hinges very much on
the perception that judicial remedies are available and
that everyone is equal before the law.

The fourth area is political participation. We must
instil in all Timorese the enthusiasm for taking their
destiny in their own hands. In this context, the National
Consultative Council has played a key role in the
decision-making process under the aegis of UNTAET.
The participation of East Timorese in the
administration is also important and must be increased.

Besides the "Timorization" of UNTAET,
participation also implies the setting up of a checks-
and-balances system, one that ensures accountability
and transparency in all matters pertaining to public
affairs and lays the basis for a functioning democratic
State.

As an expression of the solidarity of Brazilian
society with the cause of East Timor, Brazil, during its
tenure as a non-permanent member of this Council,
took an active role in the reintroduction of the item on
East Timor into the active agenda of the Council and in
the follow-up actions that led to the referendum and its
choice for independence.

That same solidarity is reflected in our
participation in the International Force in East Timor
(INTERFET) and in our presence in UNTAET. We in
Brazil were proud to receive Xanana Gusmao and other
members of the National Council of Timorese
Resistance (CNRT), who went to Brazil to examine the
possibility of establishing a mechanism of cooperation.

Despite our budgetary constraints, Brazil is
committed to supporting in a concrete manner the
development of East Timor. Last May Brazil
established a representation office in Dili that is
intended to lay the foundations for bilateral
cooperation. The Brazilian Agency for Cooperation is
sending a mission to East Timor in order to start the
implementation of projects in education, capacity-
building and public health. For a developing country
such as Brazil, these initiatives represent a sizeable
effort that should be understood in the context of the
cultural and historical bonds that unite the Brazilian
and the Timorese people.

The process of reconstruction of East Timor goes
beyond UNTAET. The future independent state of East
Timor needs international cooperation to consolidate
the rule of law and its incipient economic system. We
know that the mobilization of attention and resources is
far more difficult when a particular case is no longer a
flashpoint. It is imperative, however, to maintain the
momentum of this cooperation.

In this regard, it is important to continue cutting
through the red tape to enable the disbursement of
funds through the United Nations and international
financial institutions. It is also important that the
resources pledged during the donor conferences that
took place in Tokyo last year and Lisbon last week are
delivered in due time.

In East Timor the United Nations and the
international community have embarked on a sort of
unprecedented exercise in political theory and practice.
We are bearing witness to the birth of a nation-State
that is supposed to embody the universal values whose
proclamation is to a large extent a product of United
Nations-sponsored multilateral negotiations. The
success of the exercise depends, though, on giving a
palpable meaning to the lofty principles enshrined in
international documents. In other words, these
principles will make sense for East Timor only if they
are shored up by the improvement of day-to-day
realities on the ground, at the very grass-roots level.

