Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing, as well as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivan
Mrkie, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo,
Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, for their statements.

The Security Council is meeting for the second
time since the historic agreement of 19 April between
Serbia and Kosovo, reached under the auspices of the
European Union. The agreement was quickly followed
by regular meetings between the authorities of the two
countries in order to ensure its implementation. The
substantial progress that has been made shows their
willingness to move towards normalized relations. We
note with satisfaction the measures taken by Kosovo
to grant substantial autonomy to the communities in
Kosovo with a Serbian majority; similarly, we welcome
the Serbian authorities' closing of a number of police
stations in northern Kosovo, thereby putting an end to
the existence of independent parallel structures. We
call on the parties to maintain their commitment to the
Serb community in northern Kosovo in order to enable
it to take ownership of the process of normalization.
In that regard, the two parties should work together
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe to ensure the success of the municipal elections
scheduled for 3 November, by promoting the broadest
possible participation of the Serbian community in
Kosovo. It is crucial that the elections be transparent.
Lastly, we call on the parties to arrive at an agreement
in Brussels on 8 September on the issues of energy and
telecommunication.

At the end ofJune, we reached a new milestone in the
European rapprochement of these two countries. First,
a decision was taken in principle to open EU accession
negotiations with Serbia; the first intergovernmental
conference will be held by January 2014 to enable Serbia
to achieve its European destiny. Secondly, the European
Council has approved the opening of negotiations aimed
at signing a stabilization and association agreement
with Kosovo. That first contractual link between the
young State and the European Union ushers in a new
phase for the European partners and is a tangible
symbol of a European future for Pristina. Such positive
developments require that the international community
act on them. We therefore call on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to adapt its presence to the situation on the ground in
Kosovo and in collaboration with the Kosovo authorities.
UNMIK continues to carry out important but residual
functions. It is also essential that the Kosovo authorities
cooperate actively with the Special Representative of
the European Union, Mr. Zbogar, and the European
Rule of Law Mission (EULEX), which is carrying out
crucial work in implementing the agreements arrived at
in the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. Lastly,
all the parties must respect the freedom of movement
of the soldiers and personnel deployed within the
framework of the Kosovo Force and EULEX.

France remains committed to the realization of
a sovereign, peaceful, democratic and multi-ethnic
Kosovo, living in peace with its neighbours. We believe
that Serbia should become one of the pillars of stability
in the Balkans, and today we are again a little closer to
those two goals.

