The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia in
document S/ 1999/882.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia dated
16 August 1999 (S/1999/882).

"The Security Council reaffirms its commitment
to a comprehensive and lasting settlement of the
situation in Somalia, bearing in mind respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence and unity of Somalia, in accordance
with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at the increasingly evident effects of the lack
of a functioning central government in Somalia. It
regrets the fact that most children receive no health
care and that two generations have had no access to
formal education. It is concerned that some Somali
natural resources are being exploited, mainly by
foreigners, without regulation and monitoring. It
expresses its deep distress over reports that the
absence of law and order in the country risks creating
a haven for criminals of all kinds.

"The Security Council welcomes the progress
that has been made in the development of a greater
uniformity of approach on the part of the international
community in addressing the crisis in Somalia. It

recognizes that the Standing Committee on Somalia,
created a year ago, has been instrumental in
monitoring the evolution of the Somali situation and
working for a greater coordination of efforts by the
various external actors, in order to avoid contrasting
influences and to give weight to common actions. It
calls for the strengthening of the coordination of
these efforts aimed at securing peace and stability in
Somalia.

"The Security Council expresses its full support
for the efforts exerted by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) to find a political
solution to the crisis in Somalia. In this context, it
welcomes the initiative of the President of Djibouti
aimed at restoring peace and stability in Somalia,
which was outlined in his letter of 23 September
1999 to the President of the Security Council
(S/1999/1007). It endorses the call made by the
President of Djibouti to the warlords to recognize
fully and accept the principle that the Somali people
are free to exercise their democratic right to choose
their own regional and national leaders. The Council
looks forward to the finalization of the proposals of
the President of Djibouti at the forthcoming IGAD
Summit and stands ready to work with IGAD and
the Standing Committee to help bring about national
unity and the restoration of a national government in
Somalia. It calls upon the leaders of the Somali
factions and all others concerned to cooperate
constructively and in good faith in the efforts to
resolve the crisis.

"The Security Council strongly calls upon all
States to observe and improve the effectiveness of
the arms embargo imposed by resolution 733 (1992)
of 23 January 1992 and to refrain from any actions
which might exacerbate the situation in Somalia. It
urges Member States having information about
violations of the provisions of resolution 733 (1992)
to provide this information to the Committee created
pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) of 24 April 1992,
with a view to supporting the work of the
Committee.

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at the continuing deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in Somalia. It urges all States
to contribute generously to the appeals of the United
Nations to ensure continued relief and rehabilitation
efforts in all regions of Somalia, including those
aimed at the strengthening of civil society. In this

 

context, it encourages enhancement of the operational
capacity of humanitarian agencies in Somalia through
donor support.

"The Security Council expresses its appreciation
for all United Nations agencies, other organizations
and individuals carrying out humanitarian activities in
all regions of Somalia. It calls upon the Somali
factions to ensure the safety and freedom of
movement of all humanitarian personnel and to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian relief. In this
context, it strongly condemns attacks and acts of
violence against and the murder of humanitarian
workers in Somalia and reiterates its position that
those responsible for these acts should be brought to
justice.

"The Security Council expresses its satisfaction
that despite all the difficulties, approximately half of
Somali territory continues to enjoy relative peace. In
this context, it notes the beginning of provision of
some basic services to the people of Somalia by local
administrations in some parts of the country.

"The Security Council welcomes the efforts of
civil society in Somalia. It is encouraged by the
political initiatives of Somalis, through regional
conferences, often organized by traditional leaders and
informal cross-clan contacts, to find a peaceful
solution to the crisis. In this context, it underlines the
active role of Somali women's groups.

"The Security Council welcomes the continuing
efforts of the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS) in
Nairobi.

"The Security Council encourages the
Secretary-General to review the role of the United
Nations in Somalia, as a prelude to the United
Nations playing an enhanced role, aimed at
achieving a comprehensive and lasting settlement of
the situation in Somalia. This review would include
the possible relocation of some United Nations
programmes and agencies, as well as UNPOS, to
Somalia. The review should also consider the
security situation carefully, as well as the resources
that would be necessary to provide a secure
environment for United Nations operations in
Somalia.

"The Security Council takes note of the
recommendation in the report of the Secretary-
General of 16 August 1999 that the international
community should consider establishing mechanisms
which would allow financial assistance to flow into
secure and stable areas of Somalia even before a
formal central government and other institutions are
re-established, with a View to promoting the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence and unity of Somalia.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1999/31.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 11.40 am.
