Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): Allow me first to thank
Germany for having organized this important open
debate. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, his Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, and the Executive Director of
UNICEF for their briefings and for their tireless efforts
dedicated to protecting children affected by armed
conflict. I would also like to align Slovenia with the
statements of the European Union, the Human Security
Network and the Group of Friends of Children and
Armed Conflict.

Today's debate is based on the Secretary-
General's latest report (S/2011/250), which shows that
2010 was not a very positive year for children affected
by armed conflict around the world. There have
nevertheless been some improvements, among which I
would like to highlight the signing of new action plans
and the progress made in implementing existing action
plans. We welcome the fact that the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict gave
briefings to a sanctions committee that resulted in its
adding the practice of recruiting and using children as
a criterion for sanctions. We hope that this practice will
be adopted by other committees.
Although positive steps have been taken to hold
persistent perpetrators of grave violations against
children accountable, we believe that the Security

Council should impose further targeted measures on
such perpetrators that will prevent them from
committing any other grave violations against children.
Slovenia would also like to voice its support for the
Secretary-General's recommendation encouraging
concerned Member States to facilitate contact between
the United Nations and non-State actors in order to
ensure broad and effective protection of children.

We are pleased to see that the mechanism for
protecting children affected by armed conflict that was
developed subsequent to resolutions 1539 (2004) and
1612 (2005) has produced important and visible
results. We would like to commend the Working
Group, and in particular Germany and other previous
Chairs of the Group, for the work it has done over the
past five years. The Working Group has become a
credible and well-established subsidiary body of the
Council. We encourage it to use all the tools at its
disposal, including more field Visits and the
organization of urgent or informal meetings, which will
enable it to be even more responsive.

Two-thirds of the country situations discussed in
the Secretary-General's report include attacks on
schools and hospitals. Almost half of children who do
not attend school are children in conflict situations.
Education gives children the possibility of a future
without insecurity. This has been confirmed on many
occasions, including at the 2009 thematic dialogue in
the General Assembly on education in emergencies,
and General Assembly resolution 64/290 on the same
topic last year.

Slovenia strongly supports the expansion of the
new trigger on attacks on schools and hospitals, by
expanding both the Secretary-General's list of parties
to the conflict who engage, in contravention of
applicable international law, in attacks on schools and
hospitals, and of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism. That decision further develops the
protection framework for children affected by armed
conflict and is a step in the right direction. We hope
that in the not-too-distant future it will encompass all
six grave violations against children in armed conflict.

Both Optional Protocols to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child are part of the normative
framework for the protection of children affected by
armed conflict. Slovenia therefore supports the
campaign for universal ratification of the Protocols by
2012. Slovenia will also continue to be engaged in
rehabilitating disabled children affected by armed
conflict and in efforts to remove landmines and other
unexploded ordnance.

Children should not suffer because of armed
conflict; they should not be victims of any grave
violations and should enjoy their rights fully. Today's
adoption of resolution 1998 (2011) is an important step
in that direction, and it is for this reason that Slovenia
has joined in co-sponsoring the resolution.

