Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting oer. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and share
his serious concerns about the situation in Kosovo. We
are grateful to Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), for his informative briefing on the situation
in Kosovo. In general we share his assessments. We
also thank Mr. De Serpa Soares, Under-Secretary-
General for Legal Affairs and United Nations Legal
Counsel, for the clarifications he provided. We also
listened attentively to Ms. Vlora Citaku's statement,
but frankly there is nothing to thank her for other than
for being an eloquent exemplar of lies, insinuations and
historical fantasies inciting hatred that are not worthy
of the Security Council Chamber. And that is instead
of simply apologizing for the marauding acts of her
compatriots, which to be honest is what many of us
were expecting.

In spite of the fact that the events of 28 May in
northern Kosovo were not included in the Secretary-
General's report under consideration on the situation
in Kosovo (S/2019/461), we believe it would have
been entirely logical to make them a priority focus
for today's meeting considering the all too blatant
illegality of the Kosovo authorities' outrageous actions.
Under the unlikely watchword of combating organized
crime, Kosovo Albanian special forces invaded Serb
municipalities in northern Kosovo. As a result, 28
people were arrested, mostly Serbian police officers.
Mikhail Krasnoshchekov, a citizen of the Russian
Federation and staff member of UNMIK, was beaten
and detained while carrying out his duties. Ms. Citaku
has just provided us with a completely absurd version
of the actions of Mr. Krasnoshchekov, whose last name
Pristina did not even bother to write down correctly.
Apparently he was felling trees for barricades, put his
chainsaw carefully in the trunk, stood in front of the
barricades and then refused to provide his identification
as an UNMIK staffer. Does she even believe such
rubbish herself? An investigation is understandably
under way, but I have two questions for Mr. Tanin.
Did Mr. Krasnoshchekov produce his UNMIK staff
identification, and was he beaten? Ms. Citaku just
claimed that none of that happened. However, we
have a large number of photographs that confirm the
opposite. Incidentally, there are quite a lot of videos
on the Internet showing the Kosovo special forces'
thuggish and unpunished actions. I would be grateful
for answers.

I would like to remind the Council that during
the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina with the
participation and support of the West, an understanding
was reached that the Kosovo Special Police Unit, who
are armed with long guns, would not enter the northern
areas where Serbs live. It was an unwritten gentleman's
agreement of sorts. However, in the past few years
such incursions have happened again and again with
the full connivance of the Kosovo Force, which is
mandated by the Security Council to ensure peace
and security in Kosovo. We believe that those actions
were intentional, deliberate and meant to provoke.
Such zealous crime-fighting has not previously been
typical of the Pristina authorities, and the timing of the
attack was not accidental. As it happened, on the eve
of the events President Aleksandar Vueie of Serbia had
indicated in a statement in Parliament his willingness
to work on a compromise solution to the Kosovo issue.
However, the Kosovo Albanian authorities nevertheless
decided to show that they were already the boss in the
north. Incidentally, just the week before, the Serbian
parties had had a major win over Albanian parties in
the municipal elections. The attempt to take control
of the north legally had failed, so they switched to the
second option of doing it by force.

People in the Balkans remember the events of the
1990s very well. One careless word or gesture is enough
to lead to new bloodshed and for simmering conflict to
catch fire with renewed force. Why was it necessary

to consciously provoke such a situation? Kosovo's
Western backers have all but ignored this aggressive
action, including a crude, premeditated Violation of
a United Nations staff member's immunity. Today
our United States colleagues could not even manage
a few words in defence of United Nations staffers'
immunity. While Pristina, through Ms. Citaku, had
just made it unambiguously clear that it does not intend
to respect United Nations immunity going forward.
Its erosion is likely to have serious consequences for
both the Organization and its members. I think we all
understand that perfectly well. If we let things slide
now, United Nations personnel in other parts of the
world could find themselves in a similar situation in the
future, and then it will be too late to appeal to universal
diplomatic norms.

Pristina has launched a propaganda campaign
against both the United Nations and Russia. Its motives
are clear - first, discredit UNMIK and get it closed
down, and secondly, affirm its so-called statehood at
any cost. The so-called Ministry for Foreign Affairs of
Kosovo has declared Mr. Krasnoshchekov persona non
grata. As was already emphasized today, that procedure
is not applicable to United Nations staff and can be used
by States only in the context of their bilateral relations.
Yet even in those cases the Kosovars have no right to
take such a step because they do not have international
legal standing as a subject. Clearly, an understanding
of the finer points of international law is not Kosovo
officials' strong point.

The European Union Rule ofLaw Mission in Kosovo
has advised us to entrust the investigation ofthe incident
to the very Kosovo police who as we understand it were
responsible for it. Proposing to seek the truth from the
Kosovo's outlaw police force, who knowingly violated
all written and unwritten norms in beating up a United
Nations staff member and then began creating a false
picture of the events with the support and participation
of Kosovo's highest authorities, is an absurd mockery.
It devalues the European Union's role in Kosovo and
its claims to be helping to ensure the rule of law there.

I would like to point out that this is not the first time
that there has been a provocation involving a Russian
staff member working for UNMIK. A Russian UNMIK
volunteer was previously detained by the Kosovo police
under false pretences. And now the so-called Foreign
Ministry of Kosovo is asking the Secretary-General to
reduce the United Nations presence, which is supposedly
discrediting itself, and to conduct the much-discussed
review of the Mission. These are all links in the same
chain. Representatives of some States, permanent
members of the Security Council, are cultivating the
same behind-the-scenes tactics as the Secretariat, and
we are aware of that. Fabricated stories, with no basis in
reality, about so-called Russian spies are now becoming
a trend in the West. We firmly reject such unscrupulous
manoeuvres. The mandates of peacekeeping missions
should be considered at the Security Council table, not
rewritten in the corridors.
The years of indulgence that the Pristina authorities
have had from the West have resulted in their deliberate
defiance oftheir patrons. The so-calledKosovo Albanian
Government, led by Ramush Haradinaj, is keeping
to its course of exacerbating the crisis and is clearly
unwilling to hold a substantive dialogue. The calls from
Brussels for normalizing relations, which for some
reason are addressed to both parties, only strengthen
one party's feeling that everything is permitted,
pushing it to take maximalist approaches with no room
for compromise outcomes. The 100 per cent tariffs on
goods from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina that
Kosovo imposed in November are still in force, and
we view the so-called Kosovo Assembly's resolution
on Serbian genocide, adopted on 16 May, in the same
context, something that serves only to incite hatred
between the two peoples. This entire flurry of anti-Serb
actions is designed to overcome Kosovo's permanent
internal political impasse in Kosovo and is a reflection
of the fractured relations between clans in Pristina,
which the representatives of various Kosovo Albanian
political forces have themselves spoken about frankly.

We continue to insist that the decision made on
14 December 2018 by the so-called Parliament to
transform the Kosovo Security Force into a fully fledged
army is a flagrant violation of resolution 1244 (1999),
which includes a totally clear requirement that any
armed Kosovo Albanian groups must be demilitarized
and permits only international forces to have a presence
on Kosovan territory. We would like to point to the lack
of transparency in the activities of the NATO Bondsteel
military facility in Kosovo. What is the true reason for
that base's existence? Could it be a stealthy way to pull
Kosovo into NATO?

Russia's position on the Kosovo settlement is well
known. We support Belgrade and Pristina in arriving at
a viable and mutually acceptable solution on the basis of
resolution 1244 (1999). In our view, forcing a so-called
final normalization between Belgrade and Pristina
and tying it to any artificial deadlines is destructive.
A sustainable solution to the Kosovo problem is not

possible without the endorsement not only of the parties
concerned but also of the Security Council, as this is
a matter related to the maintenance of international
peace and security. There is no alternative to dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina. In that connection, we
would like to remind the Council of a key agreement
reached within that framework on the formation
of a community of Serb-majority municipalities in
Kosovo, which the Kosovo Albanian authorities have
been sabotaging for the past six years. Implementing
that key element of the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations between
Kosovo and Serbia, signed in Brussels on 19 April
2013, is a crucial indicator for the possibility of any
future substantive discussions. We want to draw the
Secretariat's attention to the importance of carefully
monitoring developments in the situation, which, as the
facts I have stated show, requires a Close watch on the
part of the international community.

It is also clear to us after today's meeting that
those who fly in the face of common sense and the
deteriorating situation on the ground by insisting
on reducing the time allocated to discussion of the
Kosovo issue in the Security Council have been utterly
shamed. Our discussion has once again affirmed that
without the Security Council's close attention, the
Kosovo Albanian authorities will end up having total
faith in their impunity and ability to do as they please,
which risks driving the region into a new bloody
clash, something that neither Council members nor the
leadership of Serbia and its neighbours want.

