Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): The last time
we spoke before the Security Council we emphasized in our
statement that resorting to the military alternative is never
welcome. We would only wish to further proclaim that
View. Unfortunately, though, on the basis of events in
Kosovo over the last couple of days, we can only come
even more surely to the conclusion that military force
sometimes is the only alternative left.

We want to join all who believe that the most prompt
cessation of all military action is desirable. But have any of
the demands made by the Security Council in past
resolutions, or the demands of the Contact Group, been
accepted? Has Belgrade accepted the peace plan?

Unfortunately the Serbian defence against the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) has primarily
consisted of an intensified campaign against its own
civilian population, particularly the Kosovar Albanians.
But this goes beyond the issue of courage and morality.
It goes to the heart of the only two visible strategies
pursued by Belgrade: "Let NATO bomb; we will hurry up
to create faits accomplis on the ground by completing the
tactic of ethnic cleansing. If some Serbs are hurt, if they
have to die, and if more Kosovars are killed, so be it, so
much the better."

Does anyone remember the ethnic cleansing and
genocide committed against Bosnians? I must say that I
feel deeply disturbed, even insulted, when after the
experience in Bosnia some rush to condemn military
measures to confront Belgrade's continuing resistance to
peace and escalated ethnic cleansing campaign. Who are
the real victims and who are the victimizers?

Should those rushing to complete ethnic cleansing
hope to garner sympathy while the civilian victims of
such cleansing wonder if they are being forgotten, or even
ignored? Did we learn something from the Bosnia
experience, at least gain sensitivity to the victims of
genocide?

Let me set aside my moral outrage. Let me turn to
the alternatives of realpolitik. Do the supporters of this
draft resolution believe that a unilateral end to NATO's
action would produce anything positive for Kosovo, for
Bosnia and Herzegovina or for the region as a whole?
The Belgrade authorities would only then claim a victory,
the victory of a brave fighter standing up to the mightiest
military force on earth. The new mythology of the Battle
of Kosovo, 1999, would be written and the current
Belgrade authorities would use this as a revitalized tool,
a weapon of war, against the Kosovars, Bosnia and our
other neighbours; indeed, as a tool to further enslave the
emotions and minds of the Serb people themselves.

If this draft resolution had been adopted or even
succeeded in garnering significant support, this would
have been a defeat for peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Let me emphasize: that would have been a defeat for
peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are not here to
preach morality, but we are here to plead for the cause of
peace in our country and the region as a whole.

Let me take note of one final point - and I am very
happy to see that the Secretary-General has been here
throughout this entire debate. Like many other Members
of the United Nations, we are concerned by the
implications of this matter: the NATO military action

 

being undertaken without the sanction of the United Nations
Security Council. However, we would be even more
concerned and dismayed if the Security Council were
blocked and there were no response to the humanitarian
crisis and to the legal obligation to confront ethnic
cleansing and war crime abuses.

The Security Council has on numerous occasions
called for Belgrade to refrain from its disastrous policies in
Kosovo. Belgrade has refused to heed the Security Council.
Then the Contact Group was given the mandate of bringing
peace. The Contact Group made several fair and
progressive proposals for peace. The Kosovar Albanians
accepted a proposal. Belgrade rejected the peace proposal
and actually responded by intensifying its resort to military
force against the Albanian Kosovars. Finally, all the
Contact Group members except one resorted to the only
step available, the step that had been threatened for quite
some time against Belgrade's obstinacy.

Is the Security Council now to be used as a
marginalized institution to actually block or criticize the
only viable response in order to bring peace and to stop
vast human rights abuses? Remember, these abuses are
themselves the most serious violations of the United
Nations Charter. I do not need to cite the Ambassador of
Slovenia, Danilo Tiirk, on this point.

When the war against Bosnia and Herzegovina was
being waged, the United Nations was too frequently
criticized, even savaged, for its ineffectiveness in stopping
the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina - the human rights
violations, genocide and aggression that we suffered.
Unfortunately, even we were too frequently a part of
pointing the finger at the United Nations. For this we would
like to apologize to all those who may have misunderstood
us in our time of deep need.

Now, in hindsight, it is clear that responsibility in the
failures and successes of Bosnia lay with the United
Nations Members themselves, particularly the most
powerful: the members of the Security Council. The same
responsibility now exists with respect to Kosovo. Let us not
once again allow the Security Council and the United
Nations to be seen as ineffective in, or even as an obstacle
to, the necessary steps for peace or, even more so, for
stopping the vast human rights abuses.

In the alternative, should we debate here in the
Security Council the necessary response to what is going on
in Kosovo, to what Belgrade is doing in Kosovo, as we did
for Bosnia and Herzegovina for three and a half years? Do
we have the luxury of that time? Are we to set aside daily
the lives that are being wrecked and lost?

Why does Bosnia and Herzegovina speak before the
Security Council today? Well, first of all, let me mention
that there is the issue of self-interest. And I would like to
correct one point: Bosnia and Herzegovina's airspace is
closed on the basis of our own decision. I believe the
case with Croatia is the same.

There is also an issue of history. Just before my
statement, I heard the representative of Cuba speak of the
fight of the Serbs against Nazism. The Bosnians were part
of that fight. My uncles died in that fight. The greatest
resistance to the Nazis was found in Bosnia. I do not with
to see history once again rewritten here on another point.

There is also a moral obligation. We in Bosnia came
and pleaded before the Security Council, and then pleaded
outside the Security Council to the Contact Group and
others, for any salvation, any response. Thanks to many
of the countries around this table - France, the United
Kingdom, the United States and many others - that
response finally came. We say it was late, but it was
welcome. We do not wish to see now a response come
too late for the Kosovars. We do not wish to see once
again a response come late once again for Bosnia, if once
again injustice, nationalism and ethnic cleansing are
allowed to go undisturbed in our region.

I would be here before the Council if the issue were
Sierra Leone or any other situation that deserved its
urgent attention.

Unfortunately, in today's world it seems that we
cannot hope for the United Nations and the Security
Council to always be effective and prompt in bringing
peace. That is unfortunately the reality that we deal with.
But at least we should not allow the Security Council and
the United Nations to be seen as an obstacle.

