The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of the Central African Republic, Cote
d'Ivoire, Egypt, Japan, Kenya, Senegal and Togo, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In accordance with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fernandez
(Central African Republic) took a seat at the Council
table; Mme. Kaba Camara (Cote d'Ivoire),
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. Takasu (Japan),
Mr. Mahugu (Kenya), Mr. Ka (Senegal) and
Mr. Kpotsra (Togo) took the seats reserved for them
at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations. Members of the Council have before them
the third and fourth reports of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic,
which are contained in documents S/ 1998/ 1203 and
Addendum 1 and S/ 1999/98, respectively. Members of the
Council also have before them document S/ 1999/ 122, which
contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by Canada,
Cote d'Ivoire, Egypt, France, Gabon, Japan, Kenya,
Senegal, Togo and the United States of America.

I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to the following other documents: S/l999/116
and 5/1999/121, letters dated 22 December 1998 and 4
February 1999, respectively, from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council;
S/1999/ 132, letter dated 9 February 1999 from the
Charge d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of
the Central African Republic to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council; and
S/1999/200, letter dated 24 February 1999 from the
Permanent Representative of the Central African Republic
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council.

(spoke in English)

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall first give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.


