Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America): I would like to thank all of today's briefers. Before I begin my remarks today, I must take a moment to raise a point of profound concern for my Government - the release yesterday by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights of a database of companies operating in, or connected to, Israeli settlements in the West Bank. We are astonished and deeply disappointed by the decision of High Commissioner Bachelet. The United States has long opposed the creation or release of that database, which was mandated by the discredited Human Rights Council in 2016. Its publication only confirms the unrelenting anti-Israel bias so prevalentat the United Nations. The United States will never provide any information to the High Commissioner to support the compilation of such lists. We further express our support for the United States companies referenced. We call upon all States Members of the United Nations to join us in rejecting that effort, which facilitates the discriminatory Boycott, Divestment, Sanctions campaign and delegitimizes Israel. Attempts to isolate Israel run counter to all of our efforts to build conditions conducive to Israeli- Palestinian negotiations that lead to a comprehensive and enduring peace. Turning to the subject of today's briefing, it has been a number of years since the Council specifically discussed the critical issue of transitional justice; therefore, we very much appreciate and thank Belgium for convening and presiding over such an important discussion. Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) calls for comprehensive approaches to transitional justice. We recognize the vital role that transitional justice plays in uncovering difficult truths, acknowledging abuses and fostering reconciliation. United Nations tribunals can play an integral role in that regard, and we call for more equitable burden-sharing in financially supporting those courts. Transitional justice must be tailored to local circumstances, with communities playing a central role in its design and implementation. It must incorporate the perspectives of victims and survivors, including religious and ethnic minorities and civil society. Transitional justice is also a political process. Political leaders have a pivotal role to play in setting the tone for justice and accountability during transitions. They should develop a public record of abuses, reform security sectors responsible for abuses and reintegrate those members of the forces into society. Transitional justice processes must be nationally owned, inclusive processes that account for victims' needs. It is imperative that the needs of women and girls be reflected in transitional justice mechanisms, which will help address the unique barriers to women's participation in peace processes and _ transitional justice initiatives. That is essential because women's direct participation in peace negotiations increases the sustainability of peace agreements. We know the characteristics of effective transitional justice measures. Our task is to ensure that they animate our pursuit of justice for victims and accountability for perpetrators. Furthermore, when considering transitional justice strategies, we must take countries' existing legal and institutional structures into account. In South Sudan, the people have told us that there can be no peace without justice. We call on South Sudan's leaders to implement all aspects of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan, including those related to transitional justice. The establishment of the African Union (AU) hybrid court for South Sudan is critical to securing lasting peace in a country devastated by conflict. That is why we contributed $4 million to the African Union to help create that institution, which will uphold the rule of law, accountability and justice. We would also like to recognize the comprehensive approach to transitional justice implemented in the Central African Republic. There, the Peacebuilding Fund supported the latest AU-led peace process, ensuring that it linked back to the inclusive consultative process of the Bangui Forum on National Reconciliation of 2015. We were pleased that some women-led civil society groups were consulted in the peace agreement, but are concerned that no women were signatories. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic has supported the vetting of security forces and a comprehensive assessment of past human rights abuses and atrocities, all of which has enabled transitional justice and security sector reform efforts to proceed. The United Nations Development Programme has worked to build the capacity of Central African police, justice and corrections institutions, with funding from the United States Department of State, thereby shoring up Government institutions to support justice and accountability in the Central African Republic. We have also seen the creation and implementation of the Special Criminal Court. That comprehensive United Nations approach has supported several key components of transitional justice in the Central African Republic. The United States is committed to supporting all efforts that ensure coherent, comprehensive and integrated United Nations approaches to transitional justice. We underscore that transitional justice processes must be nationally owned, inclusive and gender-sensitive if they are to fully account for the needs of victims. The Council and the United Nations can rely on the full support of the United States for transitional justice initiatives.Together we can ensure that the voices of survivors and victims are heard, that their needs are met and that their dignity is honoured.
