Mrs. Zappia (Italy): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council and on organizing this timely debate. I also
join my Canadian friend in congratulating you on the
elegance you have brought to the Council. I hope that
it will bring new impetus to your work in the Council.

Italy welcomes presidential statement S/PRST/2019/4,
adopted today under Indonesia's leadership, and
joins the Council in recognizing the added value of
the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations in relation to training
and capacity-building and in welcoming the efforts
undertaken by the Secretary General through his Action
for Peacekeeping initiative. I also thank today's briefers
for their contributions to the discussion.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would like to
add some remarks on my national capacity.
United Nations peacekeeping Missions are still
an essential instrument for global peace and security.
Whenever they are effective in delivering their mandate,
protecting civilians and contributing to lasting stability,
our commitment to and investment in peace operations
can be considered productive. This should encourage us
to enhance our efforts.

Training plays a critical role in guaranteeing the
high level of effectiveness, efficiency and performance
required of the Blue Helmets. Training and capacity-
building activities should be viewed not as one-off
activities, but rather as tools to enhance operational
effectiveness throughout a mission's life cycle. Thus,
training activities should take place before and after
deployment and be calibrated to the specific context
of every mission, also encompassing, as appropriate,
innovative issues, such as the environmental
management of peacekeeping operations.

We believe that a steady dialogue between
the Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing
countries, as well as among troop and police
contributors, and their own training centres, is essential
in order to share experiences and best practices, develop
common standards and provide information on training
opportunities in different fields. Partnerships are also
crucial in the training sector. Therefore, we support
enhancing synergies between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, in particular
the African Union, and as a member of European
Union (EU) Italy welcomes the EU-United Nations
cooperation to this end. We also promote triangular
cooperation in training and capacity-building.

Italy commends the initiatives taken by the
Department of Peace Operations (DPO), the
Department of Operational Support and the Department
of Management Strategy, Policy and Compliance to
implement the Action for Peacekeeping principles. Italy
welcomes the multiform mechanisms established by the
DPO to coordinate and share information on training
activities and gaps. Tools such as the light coordination
mechanism, the Peacekeeping Capability Readiness
System and the uniformed capabilities requirements
go in the right direction and Italy stands ready to
strengthen their performances.

Italy is the largest provider of Blue Helmets within
the Group of Western European and other States and one
of the most generous contributors to the peacekeeping
budget. As such, Italy places training and capacity-
building activities at the core of its commitment to
peacekeeping. Fruitful and articulate cooperation is
already in place with the United Nations and several
Member States. Over the past five years, our military
training centres - including the Center of Excellence
for Stability Police Units, located in Vicenza, the
Post-Conflict Operations Study Centre in Turin and
the Security Force Assistance Centre of Excellence,
located near Rome - have provided specialized
training and capacity-building to well over 10,000
military and police officers from 118 countries and 17
international organizations.

The Italian training pledges for 2019 encompass
a wide range of courses for more than 700 military
and police units. Our training curricula comprise
different subjects, including protection of civilians
and the responsibility to protect, cultural heritage,
environmental protection, women and peace and
security, gender protection, ammunition disposal and
mine clearance, together with courses for patrol leaders.
We strongly believe that training plays a critical role
in increasing women's participation in peacekeeping
operations, and for the current year we are offering a
new set of courses on the gender perspective and the
deployment of female engagement teams.

(Spoke in French)

Parts of our training courses for police forces are
also taught in French.

(spoke in English)

I would like to conclude by paying the most
respectful tribute to all the men and women who are
serving the values of the United Nations in the field,
bringing peace and security where they are most
needed, as well as to those who have lost their lives
doing so over the years.

