Mr. Klein: I should like to thank members for
their generous comments, which I will relay to my
colleagues in the Mission. 1 can assure the Council that
they will be very much appreciated.

We heard a little this morning about the past
record of the United Nations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and that at times we have been weighed in
the balance and found wanting; that is certainly true.
When the Secretary-General appointed me, he gave me
one very strong directive: to rebuild the reputation of
the United Nations. I thoroughly support the
observations made here today by some members about
how much can be done when all the members of this
Council work together on the ground. Five years ago,
the reputation was somewhat in tatters. Today, working
together, we are respected, and we can, I think, use to
great effect the unique moral and legal force of the
United Nations Charter and the political neutrality of
representing the nations of the world and the values
they hold in common.

Having now led two United Nations missions -
the first was in Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium - I must tell members that the Council
defines the success or failure of missions. It does so by
the mandate it gives us, the resources it provides and
the leadership it ultimately appoints. As I said earlier,
we have a Mission that includes 93 nationalities -
they represent half of the nations of the United
Nations. Some 46 nations are represented in the
International Police Task Force. It can be done when
the Council gives us the clear guidance that we need.
At the same time, I am reminded of an old proverb that
my Alsatian grandmother taught me: if you start out
without knowing where you are going, you are
probably going to wind up somewhere else. So the
Council's guidance is always essential.

In his history of civilization, the great historian
Arnold Toynbee wrote that every nation, every
people - indeed, every institution - has an agenda,
either conscious or unconscious. Those who do not
have an agenda become the victim of other people's
agendas. I hope that the Council will define the agenda.
Let it be the collective voice of the Council, on behalf
of the international community, that defines the
agenda.

