Mr. Richardson (United States of America): The
United States commends and congratulates the former
Government and UNITA for the recent events in Luanda,
including the National Assembly's 8 April passage of a law
establishing a special position of trust and honour for the
leader of the largest opposition party, the 9 April seating of
the UNITA members of Parliament, and, most important,
the 11 April formation of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation. These events mark the passage of
the highest hurdle of the peace process, the moment in
which the parties reunite into one entity focused on the
common goal of bringing a better life to all Angolans.

We all recognize that the formation of the unity
Government is not an end in itself and alone does not
guarantee the success of the peace process. There will be
times in the future when the new partners in governance
will disagree strongly on questions of policy and become
discouraged with the process. Nonetheless, the formation of
the unity Government is an essential step forward and
represents a commitment to political pluralism and
reconciliation. The parties must stay the course and work
together to build on the foundation they established last
week.

Of course, more needs to be done. Of highest priority
is the rapid induction of selected former UNITA personnel
into the armed forces and police, and the demobilization of
the others. The unity Government will need these military
and police units that include former UNITA personnel for
the next difficult task, that is, the extension of State
administration to all parts of the country. The parties must
work closely together to ensure that the people in the areas
not yet under Government control are given the legal
protections and humane treatment afforded to other Angolan
citizens.

A special responsibility falls upon the largest party,
the MPLA, to ensure that UNITA is taken on as a true
partner, that it is given meaningful roles to perform in the
Government, and that it is provided with sufficient
resources to carry them out. UNITA also bears a major
responsibility in assuring the success of the unity
Government. We strongly encourage the president of
UNITA, Mr. Savimbi, to take advantage of the special
position now legally established for him by meeting
frequently with President Dos Santos in Angola to share
his views. We hope that Mr. Savimbi will meet with
President Dos Santos at the earliest opportunity. We call
upon all members of the unity Government to work
cooperatively for effective and representative government.

The international community still has an important
role to play in supporting the process of national
reconciliation and reconstruction. Today we are renewing
the mandate of UNAVEM. III until 30 June 1997. We are
also signalling our intention to consider a follow-on
observer mission to assist the parties to complete the
remaining tasks of the peace process. Demobilization and
resettlement, refugee assistance, demining, strengthening
of democracy and governance, economic reform, and
management development are other areas in which
Angola needs international support. The United States is
committed to providing over $90 million in assistance this
year. We call upon other Member States to make a
substantial commitment.

As this peace process matures, we continue to be
concerned by persistent reports of Angolan involvement
in the conflict in Zaire. Further destabilization of Zaire is
not in Africa's interest. We call upon all Angolans to put
an immediate halt to such actions and to give their full
support to the international effort led by the United
Nations/Organization of African Unity Special
Representative, Mr. Sahnoun, to reach a negotiated
settlement to the conflict on the basis of the United
Nations five-point peace plan.

Finally, the United States would like to recognize the
unflagging work of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye, in bringing
about the formation of the unity Government. We wish
the unity Government full success in completing all the
tasks agreed to in the Lusaka Protocol and in establishing
a firm foundation for Angolan peace and prosperity.

