Mr. Kalomoh: Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for organizing this meeting and for
allowing me to introduce the progress report of the
Secretary-General on the recommendations of the
Security Council mission to Central Africa
(S/2004/52), which is before members. The report
summarizes advances attained in addressing the
recommendations made on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, on Burundi and on preparations for an
international conference on the Great Lakes region.

With regard to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as Council members are aware, the transitional
Government was established in June 2003, at about the
same time as the Council mission was visiting the
region. The transitional Government's comprehensive
programme of work for the transitional period was
approved by the new Parliament in December, and the
implementation of that work programme is well under
way.

Progress has also been made in normalizing
relations between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its neighbours, but much needs to be done
in that area, with the support of the international
community. The pace of the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement or
repatriation of Rwandese, Ugandan and Burundian
armed elements has accelerated beyond even our own
expectations. The International Committee in Support
of the Transition has been meeting in Kinshasa on a
regular basis, under the chairmanship of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. The
Committee has been instrumental in resolving several
deadlocks that had arisen between and among the
parties.

With regard to the situation in the Ituri district,
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo (MONUC) assumed
responsibility from the Interim Emergency
Multinational Force on 1 September 2003, following
the adoption by the Council of resolution 1493 (2003).
In Bunia, MONUC has been enforcing a weapons-free
policy, and the first phase of the Mission's military
expansion outside Bunia is now under way. It should be
recalled that MONUC's military deployments in Ituri
are intended to stabilize the region to enable the Ituri
Interim Administration to begin functioning and to
facilitate its integration into the national transitional
process.

Concerning support for the reconstruction of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, a Consultative
Group meeting of the country's development partners
was held on 17 and 18 December 2003 in Paris. At that
meeting, donor countries and organizations pledged
more than $3.9 billion in assistance to the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo for the period 2004-2006.

I now turn to the situation in Burundi. As
described in the report before the Council, significant
progress has been achieved towards implementation of
the recommendations of the Council mission. The
deployment of the African Mission in Burundi (AMIB)
was completed in October 2003, and the Mission has
been carrying out outstanding work. However, in spite
of the vital support and financial contributions
provided by a number of donors, AMIB continues to
face serious financial and logistical difficulties. United
Nations agencies in Bujumbura, with political guidance
from the United Nations Office in Burundi, are
assisting AMIB within their respective mandates. In
the area of donor assistance for economic recovery, at a
forum of the development partners of Burundi held in
Brussels in mid-January this year, donors pledged a
total of $1 billion to support Burundi's socio-economic
recovery in the period 2004-2006.

The prospects for peace in Burundi improved
considerably with the conclusion of a comprehensive
ceasefire agreement between the transitional
Government and the Conseil national pour la defense
de la democratic - Forces nationales pour la defense
de la de'mocratie (CNDD-FDD) of Pierre Nkurunziza
and the subsequent integration of FDD representatives
into the transitional institutions. The implementation of
the agreement has so far proceeded well.

As Council members may be aware, since the
publication of the report, President Ndayizeye of
Burundi and a high-level Forces nationales de
liberation (FNL) (Rwasa) delegation met, for the first
time, in the Netherlands from 18 to 21 January 2004,
thus providing further grounds for optimism. The
Secretary-General urged the parties to pursue these
discussions with a view to having the FNL join the
peace process as soon as possible, thus paving the way
for the establishment of a full-fledged peacekeeping
operation in Burundi.

As noted elsewhere in the report, the challenges
that lie ahead in Burundi are enormous, as the
transitional period is expected to end in November
2004. I take this opportunity to inform the Council that
the United Nations multidisciplinary reconnaissance
mission is set to arrive in Bujumbura today to examine
the situation on the ground and assess how the
transitional Government can best be supported in order
to ensure the successful conclusion of the peace
process - bearing in mind that this process will end
with the elections in November 2004.
As noted in the report, advances achieved in the
peace processes in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Burundi over the past six months have
created a new momentum in favour of convening an
international conference on the Great Lakes region. In
this connection, since the launching of the conference's
preparatory process in June 2003, a number of
important steps have been taken with the support of the
United Nations, the African Union and donor countries.

The core countries' National Coordinators have
so far held three meetings to discuss the objectives,
themes and structure of the conference. As a result, the
outline of the conference has started to take shape.
Another important development was the setting up of
the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes region, which
will be an important partner throughout the preparatory
process and the actual holding ofthe conference.

Under a revised timetable approved by the
National Coordinators of the core countries last month,
the conference's first summit is scheduled for
November 2004, in the United Republic of Tanzania.
However, as noted in the progress report, the increased
level of activities in the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region requires additional staff resources for
that Office. The preparatory process risks being
delayed, or even seriously affected, by any lack of
necessary budgetary provisions for staff and other
resources for the Office ofthe Special Representative.

As described fully in the Secretary-General's
progress report and reflected in my remarks today,
substantial progress has been made in the peace
processes in both Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo since the Security Council
mission to the region last June. However, much
remains to be done to consolidate these historic
advances and to build sustainable peace in the region
as a whole. The international community's commitment
to continue supporting peace efforts in the subregion is
therefore as critical as ever.

The reports we have received from the region
indicate that the parties greatly appreciate the visit of
the Security Council mission to the region, as it
provided an added impetus encouraging the parties to
fulfil their commitments to the peace process in both
Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The parties, as well as countries visited by the mission
such as South Africa, the United Republic of Tanzania
and Uganda, welcomed the mission as an
encouragement to the parties and Governments in the
countries involved to continue to support the peace
process in both Burundi and the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo.

