Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to begin by thanking Ambassadors Sangqu, Wittig
and Puri for their briefings, and I associate myself with
the statement to be made later by the deputy head of
the delegation of the European Union.

We recently commemorated the tenth anniversary
of the 11 September attacks. Even though Osama Bin
Laden is dead, terrorism, whether related to Al-Qaida
or not, remains a major threat to international peace
and security. To counter this continually evolving
threat, the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, in keeping with its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
must adapt so as to devise the most appropriate tools to
deal with it.

It was in that spirit that the Security Council
decided to reform the sanctions regime against
Al-Qaida last June. We had several objectives. It had
become necessary, more than 10 years after the
regime's establishment, for developments in the
situation on the ground to be reflected in its
architecture. In addition to the fact that the Taliban and
Al-Qaida have fundamentally different objectives, the
relationship between them had become increasingly
strained as the historical leaders of both movements
died off. It was thus no longer relevant to deal with
them in the same manner. It was also important to
ensure that the regime against the Taliban had a more
direct impact in terms of incentivizing the quest for a
political solution to the situation in Afghanistan.

Lastly, we welcome the fact that this review is in
line with the process of ensuring procedural
improvements. Resolution 1989 (2011) strengthened
the role of the Office of the Ombudsperson regarding
the Al-Qaida sanctions regime by ensuring it a decisive
role regarding the delisting of individuals and entities.
This not only represents an advance in terms of the
rights of the individuals and entities on the list, but
also enhances the credibility of the sanctions regime.
By removing from the list individuals and entities that
no longer belong on it, we have transformed the list
into a living mechanism that reflects the current status
of the threat.

Combating terrorism at the international level
also requires the full implementation of Security
Council resolutions. For more than 10 years now, the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) has been giving in-depth
consideration to the resources and needs of each
Member State with respect to combating terrorism.
That task could not have been carried out without the
support that has been provided since 2004 by the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED),
whose outstanding work, guided by its Director, Mike
Smith, I should like to commend.

The review of the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) is coming to an end and must now be
followed up on a regular basis. The Committee has at
its disposal a number of effective mechanisms for
monitoring the process of identifying gaps and
achieving improvements in the legislative apparatus of
Member States. The promotion of the rule of law and
of a judicial approach to combating terrorism are
essential in that respect. I would mention here the
workshop organized by the CTED, held in Ankara last
July, which brought together prosecutors specializing
in counter-terrorism.

Finally, in the context of the regionalization of
the terrorist threat, closer cooperation between the
affected States and more consistent international
support should underpin our work. The United Nations
has a key role to play in that respect and must continue
to do so by taking advantage of its activities at the
regional level, as is the case in West Africa with regard
to transnational threats and in particular the terrorist
threat in the Sahelian region.

Nuclear, radiological, biological and chemical
terrorism remains one of the main threats to our
security. As emphasized in the report just submitted to
the Council by the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004),
progress has been made in addressing those threats.
The challenges and activities related to resolution 1540
(2004) have since 2004 largely been mainstreamed
within the United Nations, and States have taken
numerous measures to implement the resolution.
However, a great deal remains to be done, and we
welcome the fact that the mandate of the 1540
Committee has been renewed for 10 years.

Resolution 1977 (2011) provided the Committee
with the resources to more effectively carry out its
mandate, but they must be put to use. We must
formally establish a group of experts, and the
Committee itself must work to that end by submitting
its recommendations to the Council as soon as
possible, in accordance with the resolution. The
Committee must also set out, as provided for in the
resolution, specific priorities for its work in its annual
programme and work on sharing experiences and best
practices.

It is only by fully utilizing these new instruments
that we will enhance the effectiveness of the 1540
Committee and help countries to counter terrorism in a
concrete manner.

France is determined to promote the effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We recently
submitted to the Committee our national action plan,
which outlines our actions at the international level in
support of the resolution and the competences that we
can mobilize to lend assistance to the countries that
request it.

During its presidency of the Group of Eight
(G-8), France was active in the dialogue of the G-8
working group with the 1540 Committee experts, in
particular regarding issues relating to assistance. As
members know, my country coordinates the
Committee's Working Group on Assistance, and
progress has already been made in that respect. The
Committee thus has a follow-up mechanism for
requests for and offers of assistance, which includes a
regularly updated database, as outlined at the
G-8 meeting held in October.

We also welcome the specific visits made to
countries, with the holding of a first visit to
Washington, DC, in September and several others at
the preparation stage. Moreover, a number of areas are
under consideration with a view to improving the
Committee's procedures in terms of assistance, better
responding to the needs of countries in that regard, and
continuing dialogue with all relevant organizations.

Lastly, we should also continue our efforts to
achieve coordination among the United Nations bodies
that are involved in counter-terrorism and strengthen
cooperation with other entities, such as, for instance,
the recently established Global Counterterrorism
Forum. We are counting on the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force to help move
this cooperation forward.

