Mr. Takasu (Japan): At the outset, I, too, would
like to express my deep shock and sorrow over the
serious devastation caused by the earthquake in Haiti. I
recall that, last year, one of the highlights of the
Council's work was a visit to Haiti, and we were really
impressed by the leadership of Hedi Annabi and his
team as well as the Government and people of Haiti.
We therefore stand by the people and Government of
Haiti and United Nations staff and their families in this
most unprecedented difficulty. Japan is ready to extend
every possible measure of support.

I thank the Chinese presidency for organizing this
important debate on this subject with the participation
of so many representatives of regional organizations.
We are grateful to our guests for their interesting and
valuable presentations. The Secretary-General kindly
laid out the framework and principle of cooperation
with regional organizations.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is enshrined in Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter. It constitutes an integral
part of the United Nations architecture for international
peace and security. Strengthening such cooperation is
therefore important in promoting the objectives of the
Charter. Regional organizations have first-hand
understanding of the local conditions and can make
best use of their expertise for peace and security in the
region.

At the same time, what I would like to emphasize
is that, as the statements of respective regional
organizations made clear this morning, every regional
organization has an inherent historical background,
distinct objectives and diverse membership. In
formulating strategies for cooperation, we need to fully
take into account the specific characteristics, situation
and capacity of each of them. We are also mindful of
the need to uphold international norms and standards.
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations should therefore be complementary and
not mutually exclusive.

The Charter provides in article 54 that the
Security Council shall be kept informed of the
activities of regional organizations. Today's thematic
debate gives a timely opportunity to have such a
strategic dialogue. High-level dialogue and
information-sharing are the first and critical step for
better cooperation. The United Nations can share its
experience and lessons, which regional organizations
may draw on in addressing the issues.

The consultation mechanism with the African
Union is more advanced than others. The regular
interaction and strategic dialogue initiated in 2007
between the African Union and United Nations should
therefore be emulated with other organizations.

In my view, the United Nations can promote four
types of cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations.

First, the United Nations should encourage
regional organizations to prevent and resolve conflict
peacefully. Finding a regional solution to a regional
issue is frequently effective, and the United Nations
can complement and reinforce its efforts in compliance
with international standards.

The African Union (AU) and subregional
organizations such as the Economic Community of
West African States are the best examples of this as
they undertake increasingly active peace initiatives in
many parts of Africa.

In Asia, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) is promoting the Treaty of Amity
and Cooperation in Southeast Asia and principles for
the peaceful settlement of disputes. Many States of the
region, including Japan, have signed this Treaty, which
is a testimony to the fact that it is an effective measure
for confidence-building not only in the region, but also
beyond ASEAN.

We also acknowledge the important role of
organizations such as the League of Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, the
Organization of American States, the European Union,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the Pacific Islands Forum, among others,
which strive for the prevention and peaceful solution of
conflicts in their respective regions.

Secondly, the United Nations and regional
organizations may promote peace jointly or in parallel.
This type of complementary cooperation starts with
peace mediation. The most notable examples are,
obviously, the joint nomination by the United Nations
and the AU of the Chief Mediator for Darfur, Mr.
Bassole, and the appointment of co-facilitators
President Obasanjo as United Nations Special
Representative and President Mkapa as AU envoy for
the Great Lakes region. The United Nations taking the
regional perspective into account in appointing a joint
mediator can be a model case for other regions.

The joint or parallel deployment of peacekeeping
and other field missions in the same area of operations
is also important. The hybrid arrangement of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) is such an example, of course. This
type of complementary cooperation is most useful in
the area of peacebuilding, including in electoral
support, cross-border drug and small arms trafficking
control, mine action and security sector reform. Of
course, each region may be in a different situation, but
the sharing of experiences among regional
organizations may be useful.

Cooperation between regional organizations and
the United Nations has been significantly enhanced by
the active support of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) in the past few years. It may be worth
considering creating a subregion-specific rather than a
country-specific configuration of the PBC to discuss
the challenges common to the countries of the
subregion.

Thirdly, I refer to what might be called sequential
cooperation. This type of cooperation can be most
useful in the case of a peacekeeping operation in which
a regional organization has taken initiative in advance
and conditions have become mature enough to be taken
over eventually by the United Nations. The case in
point is, of course, Chad and the Central African
Republic, where the United Nations took over the
peacekeeping mission from the European Union. In the
Sudan, UNAMID succeeded the African Union
Mission in Sudan, which was initiated by the AU. The
AU Mission in Somalia, with logistical support from
the United Nations, is at the forefront of stabilizing the
country until the future status is decided by the
Security Council.

It is important to mobilize international support
for the efforts of regional organizations to strengthen
the capacity of peacekeeping personnel and assets to
meet United Nations standards. I would like to
emphasize that the United Nations and regional
organizations should work together to help Member
States through training and capacity-building.

F ourthly, regional organizations or countries may
provide security support that is essential to carrying
out the activities of United Nations missions. In some
United Nations missions, situations may not be secure
and stable enough for the Organization to remain on
the ground without such assistance. Cooperation from
regional organizations is critical to the successful
implementation by United Nations missions of their
mandates. Such cooperation can obviously be found in
Afghanistan, where the International Security
Assistance Force supports security for the country and
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
is charged with the political role. Similar essential
security supports were provided at the early stages of
the United Nations missions in East Timor, Kosovo and
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
Security Council should pay tribute to those who made
sacrifices in support of United Nations peace activities
in those places.

In conclusion, it is very clear that all four types
of cooperation are indispensable if the Security
Council is to discharge its responsibilities under the
Charter effectively. We should therefore continue to
encourage and promote every possible type of
cooperation. Japan will do its best to support regional
organizations in strengthening their capacities in
conflict prevention, mediation, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. In particular, we are interested in
supporting peacekeeping training centres in Africa and
Asia; in creating and training peacebuilding experts in
Asia and elsewhere through our centre in Hiroshima;
and in building national police capacity in many
countries, including Afghanistan, Chad and Somalia. I
hope that such assistance will contribute to cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in promoting peace and security.

