Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I wish to join
others in expressing our condolences to the people
of the United States for the loss of former President
George Herbert Walker Bush.

(spoke in French)

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this debate on post-conflict reconstruction.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
their insightful remarks.

Let me start by commending the Government
and the people of Cote d'Ivoire for their resilience
and efforts to restore peace and stability and boost
economic growth. Positive stories like your country's,
Mr. President, are rare and far apart, but they serve as
an important source of hope and guidance to many.
Your experiences have also been valuable for our work
in the Security Council, including in our joint work
regarding the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel.

Post-conflict reconstruction and transition can
be successful only in the context of broader political,
economic and social reforms. As this debate has
illustrated, there is a multitude of challenges that need
to be addressed, including the effects of sexual and
gender-based violence. The resulting trauma, stigma,
poverty and poor health can echo across generations.
In response, socioeconomic integration support is
necessary to restore community cohesion. Ensuring
justice and reparations for victims remains crucial
across the board, as well as being a key component in
restoring the fabric of society.

The foundation for such restoration and
reconstruction is laid by peacekeeping operations.
Formulating appropriate mandates with a
comprehensive political solution at the core is key. An
exit plan anchored in national development planning
processes to ensure national ownership needs to be
formulated at an early stage of the mission. Integrated
work across the United Nations system is also needed to
ensure that transitions are just that - a transition rather
than a termination of one kind of support and possibly
the beginning of another for reconstruction.

Predictable and coherent peacebuilding during and
after transitions, including how we finance the system,
is another vital part of a comprehensive approach.
The Peacebuilding Fund is an important tool in that
regard. The commitment, as formulated in the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, to support United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes is also critical.

As Chair of the Liberia configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), Sweden had the
honour to work with Liberia through its transition. As
the peacekeeping mission withdrew, the PBC worked to
support and enhance national ownership, as well as to
sustain international attention, including by mobilizing
financial and political support. Many important lessons
were learned from the transition in Liberia, and the
PBC can now also function as an important platform to
share those lessons.

Peace and security must not be seen in isolation,
but rather as closely connected to socioeconomic
factors that drive both resilience and fragility. The joint
United Nations-World Bank report Pathways for Peace:
Inclusive Approaches to Preventing Violent Conflict
identifies exclusion, inequality and power imbalances
as principal causes of conflict and violence. In many
countries, growing inequalities fuel social unrest and
impede sustainable economic growth. Consequently,
policies that strive towards equality, in its broadest
sense, create more peaceful societies.

As the economy starts to grow again in the
aftermath of conflict, it is important to pay attention
to rising economic inequalities. Sweden has introduced
the multi-stakeholder initiative Global Deal for
Decent Work and Inclusive Growth, developed in
cooperation with the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development and the International
Labour Organization. It builds on the notion that a
well-functioning social dialogue and sound industrial
relations are key elements for coming to terms with
a wide array of societal challenges by forging trust
and paving the way for inclusive growth. As part of
recovering, it will at some stage also be important to
gain capacity to participate in the international trading
system in a free, equitable and sustainable way. To
eradicate poverty and promote sustainable and inclusive
growth and development, we need more trade, not less.

As the Secretary-General pointed out earlier,
we need a holistic approach. The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, as well as the African
Union's Agenda 2063 and the sustaining peace
resolutions, offers that framework for long-term
approaches to building societal resilience and tackling
the root causes of conflict. It is all there. We know what
needs to be done, and we have to do it. In line with
the sustaining peace resolutions, we must move away
from the sequential approach to conflict, which often
results in silos of conflict prevention, humanitarian
action, human rights, peacekeeping, peacebuilding,
the rule of law and development. And, of course, the
women and peace and security agenda is not an add-on,
but must be universally integrated if sustaining peace
is to be achieved. We thank the Secretary-General for
constantly reminding us how critical it is to link the
three fundamental pillars of the United Nations, namely,
peace and security, development and human rights.

To end where I started - with the Peacebuilding
Commission - the PBC is well placed to contribute
to this holistic approach; it should be better utilized.
The PBC is a key adviser to the Security Council when
it comes to sustaining peace. The Commission can
convene actors for broader peacebuilding perspectives
spanning across the peace and security-human rights-
development nexus. It can also assist with regional
approaches, work to strengthen national ownership and
develop partnerships for innovative solutions.

In its current role as coordinator between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
Sweden has worked to deepen the dialogue between
the two bodies. The PBC has made important progress
on targeted context-specific advice and engagement in
transitions and mandate discussions. We believe that
there is broad support for consolidating those gains and
solidifying the cooperation between the Council and
the PBC. In order to capture best practices and further
deepen the dialogue between the Security Council and
the PBC, Sweden has presented a draft presidential
statement on the Commission's support to the Council's
efforts on sustaining peace. We look forward to Council
members' constructive engagement on that initiative.

Sweden will continue its cooperation for successful
transitions and reconstruction and, by doing so, also
remains committed to the sustaining peace agenda.

