Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): My delegation is grateful
to the Secretary-General for the report and updated
information on recent developments in Angola. We thank
Mr. Prendergast for introducing the report. Let me also
welcome to the Security Council the Vice-Minister of
External Relations of the Republic of Angola, Mr.
Georges Chicoti. We thank him for his very important
statement. I also welcome back my colleague and friend
Ambassador Fowler.

The refusal by UNITA to, among other things,
disarm its troops and allow the extension of State
administration to areas under its control; the refusal of
Savimbi to join the Government of National Unity; and
its declaration of war against the legitimate and elected
Government of Angola were no small measures. All these
actions threatened the very foundation of the existence of
the Republic of Angola, its unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity. The Government of Angola had no
other option but to apply the necessary decisive military
force against the rebel movement UNITA in order to
defend its people and territory. It is against this
background that the Republic of Namibia supports the
Government of the Republic of Angola in its all-out
campaign against UNITA.

My delegation has on several occasions in this body
alerted the members of this Council to UNITA's, and in
particular Mr. Savimbi's, intransigence and defiance.
UNITA never honours and implements obligations in
good faith. We wish to recall that the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) has declared Mr.
Savimbi to be a war criminal, a position which was in
turn supported by the Organization of African Unity
(OAU). Namibia therefore supports the position
maintained by the Government of Angola in rejecting
dialogue with Mr. Savimbi, who has so far not fully
implemented the Lusaka Protocol, which is the only
viable mechanism for the peaceful resolution of the
conflict. In this regard, we welcome the President of
Angola's statement that the Lusaka Protocol was still a
valid basis for the peace process in Angola, as well as his
New Year's message indicating the Government's
openness to dialogue with all valid interlocutors.

The time has come - and it is indeed overdue -
for the Security Council, in view of the fact that many of

 

its resolutions have been violated and its numerous
presidential and press statements disregarded, to stand
united and to avoid being manipulated by UNITA. The
Council must take a firm stand and demand that UNITA
fully comply with its remaining obligations under the
Lusaka Protocol by demilitarizing its forces and joining the
Government of Angola for peace, development and
stability, not only in Angola but in the region as a whole.

The international community, and the Security Council
in particular, must not allow Angola and the region to be
plunged into the tragedy of death, starvation and total
anarchy. In this connection, we welcome the recent
appointment of Ambassador Ibrahim Gambari as Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Africa, with special
focus on Angola. We have no doubt as to Mr. Gambari's
commitment.

Let me also say a word about the establishment of the
United Nations Office in Angola. We welcome the progress
being made on this issue and emphasize that the views of
the Angolan Government should continue to be taken into
account.

With regard to humanitarian situation, my delegation
is confident that the conditions of the civilian population
will change for the better with the extension of State
administration to areas which were under the control of
UNITA. It is very important that the extension of State
administration in these areas be accompanied by increased
assistance on the part of the international community. The
importance of the economic and social reconstruction of
these areas cannot be emphasized enough. Furthermore,
Namibia wishes to appeal once again to the donor
community to provide adequate funds to the United Nations
Consolidated Inter-agency Appeal for Angola for the year
2000.

It is regrettable that Angola is still one of the countries
most affected by landmines, with 6 million to 7 million
landmines scattered around the country. Those mines,
indiscriminately planted along roads and footpaths by
UNITA, have not only been responsible for the 90,000
persons killed or permanently maimed by this silent killer,
but also impede the delivery of assistance to the needy, the
repatriation of refugees and returnees, and the use of land
for agricultural production. Therefore, the urgent assistance
of the international community to the Government of
Angola in its efforts to clear these mines will certainly
create safety and security for the free movement of persons
and goods around the country.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Chairman of the sanctions Committee on Angola,
Ambassador Fowler, for his comprehensive and
illuminating report on his recent visit to Angola. Since the
establishment of the expert panels to study the violations
of sanctions against UNITA - and, indeed, with the
steadfast commitment and dedication of Ambassador
Fowler - progress has been achieved in tightening
sanctions against UNITA. Ambassador Fowler has the full
support of the Namibian Government.

However, there are some disturbing reports that there
are some Member States that are still violating these
sanctions against UNITA. Therefore, it is incumbent upon
this Council to stand united and firm in responding
positively to the expert panel's report that will be
submitted in a few weeks' time on what measures to take
against those violating the Council's sanctions. This
remains a very serious challenge to the Security Council's
collective authority and, indeed, to the international
community as a whole.

Sanctions have worked in other situations, but have
failed to work against UNITA. I am, however, optimistic
that with the consensus emerging among Council
members, sanctions against UNITA will definitely work.

