Mr. Vaultier Mathias (Portugal) (spoke in French):
First of all, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on
convening this open debate.

Portugal fully aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered by the observer of the European
Union and would like to make some comments in its
national capacity.

Conflict prevention, which is a founding principle
of the United Nations and is enshrined in Article 1 of
the Charter of the United Nations, is something that
my country highly values when it comes to promoting
sustainable peace. We support the United Nations
system reform process launched by the Secretary-
General, and in particular the emphasis it places on
conflict prevention, the primacy of policy and the use
of diplomacy as the preferred means towards achieving
sustainable peace. The implementation of those
reforms as of 1 January 2019 will constitute a new step
in reaffirming our collective commitment to the central
role of the United Nations in conflict prevention. Those
three components of reform address the importance of
increased cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations based on a broad and integrated
partnership towards peace support. We must expand on
the dual concept ofpeacekeeping and peace enforcement
to include early warning, mediation, coordination,
political messages and strategic communication in
order to prevent the outbreak and escalation of conflict.

WithregardtocooperationamongtheUnitedNations,

States and regional and subregional organizations in
conflict prevention, management and resolution, we
advocate for a comprehensive approach and, at the
same time, close cooperation with local, regional and
international partners so as to strengthen regional
and local ownership. We see regional organizations
as first responders in international crises that use
their resources and mobilize good offices to reduce
tensions and sometimes even address the deep roots of
conflict, of which include severe underdevelopment. As
such, we support the strengthening of the cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union in
the context of peacekeeping operations. In that regard,
we also support complementary action by the European
Union, including through trilateral cooperation and
regional strategies.

Since the Mediation Support Unit was established in
2006 within the Department of Political Affairs, several
other organizations, such as the European Union, the
African Union (AU), the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the Organization
of American States and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, have launched similar initiatives, thereby
demonstrating the multifaceted cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations and
strengthening the leadership role of the United Nations
in that area. The action undertaken by the Group of
Friends of Mediation within the United Nations, the EU,
the African Union and the OSCE is another example. It
also bears mentioning that regional organizations are
useful platforms for dialogue and cooperation towards
the promotion of global governance. For its part, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries brings
together very diverse countries from four different
continents. They share two things in common: language
and common values. That is the strength of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries - as an
integral intermediary, it provides added value within
the context of wider international cooperation.

In order to better reform the mandates of the
Security Council, particularly those in the most
vulnerable environments, it is increasingly essential to
consider a new operations framework for situations that
demand significant mobility and rapid responses, in
particular with regard to assisting unprotected civilians
and deterring possible attacks. The rapid reaction force
within the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
where Portugal currently has its largest contingent,
of roughly 160 soldiers, is a concrete example of
the increased effectiveness being sought out for the
Council's mandates.

In conclusion, and with regard to the performance
of peace operations, it is clearly essential to ensure
that human rights and humanitarian law are respected.
Nonetheless, we believe that it is also necessary to
promote a greater gender balance in the military, police
and civilian components of peacekeeping operations,
not only with a view to more accurate representation
but also with the aim of improving the capacity of
missions by involving all segments of the population.
In that context, it is also increasingly important to
integrate into our collective action the contributions of
young people in conflict prevention and resolution.

