The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Cote
d'Ivoire.

My delegation would like to congratulate Mr. Mark
Lowcock on his excellent briefing on the humanitarian
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic.

Cote d'Ivoire remains particularly concerned about
the precarious humanitarian situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic, which has recently been aggravated
by the military escalation in the north-west of the
country, including in the demilitarized zone in the Idlib
governorate, which was established in accordance with
the agreement signed by the Russian Federation and
Turkey on 17 September. This new military escalation,
following allegations of the use of chemical weapons
in Aleppo by armed groups, is an impediment to the
ongoing peace process and threatens the lives and well-
being of millions of civilians living in the region. My
delegation would like to remind all stakeholders of their
responsibilities to ensure safe, prompt, unimpeded
and sustainable access for humanitarian assistance to
persons in distress throughout the Syrian territory. In
that regard, we welcome the arrival of a United Nations
and Syrian Arab Red Crescent humanitarian convoy
at the Rukban displaced persons camp on 3 November
after a lO-month interruption. That delivery provided
relief for the people seriously affected by weather, the
sanitary conditions and the lack of basic goods.

My delegation voted in favour of renewing for one
year the mechanism for the delivery of cross-border
humanitarian aid, which expires on 10 January 2019.
For the fourth consecutive year, that allows the United
Nations and its partners to continue their humanitarian
assistance work despite the many challenges. We thank
Kuwait and Sweden for their work in that regard. Cote
d'Ivoire emphasizes the fact that all parties to the
conflict have the obligation to respect international
humanitarian law and human rights, including the
responsibility to protect civilians.

In conclusion, my country remains convinced that
only a lasting political solution will put an end to the
Syrian crisis. The intra-Syrian negotiations conducted
under the auspices of the United Nations and the
Astana and Sochi processes constitute the legitimate
frameworks to achieve that. In that regard, Cote d'Ivoire
urges the warring parties to agree on the formation of
the constitutional committee, which is meant to draft a
new constitution. That will be a decisive step towards
organizing transparent, inclusive and peaceful elections
with a view to restoring lasting peace and stability in
Syria.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

