The President (spoke in Russian): 1 shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of the Russian Federation.

I regret that Ambassador Power left the Chamber.
Lately, she has tried to avoid direct polemics with me
in public, and I am sorry about that, particularly since I
will have to say a few words in response to her attacks
011 US.

Ambassador Power unfortunately resorted to
a method she likes. She distorts Russia's position,
presents it in some absurd way and then criticizes her
own absurd rendering of that position. I noticed that
Mr. O'Brien said not a word in his statement about the
fact that for more than seven days now, neither Russia
nor the Syrian air force has been bombing Aleppo. She
says that we want to be thanked for that. We certainly
do not need their thanks, but Secretary of State Kerry
talked for weeks about how there had to be seven days
with no bombing. It must be a pretty important point
if the United States Secretary of State talks about it
for weeks. And does it seem a proof of objectivity in a
United Nations report (S/2016/873) when that fact goes
completely unmentioned in the report? When a United
Nations Under-Secretary-General says that bombings
occur daily, hourly, and on top of that adds that they are
practically dropping chemical weapons on the heads of
the citizens of Aleppo, is that a standard of objectivity?
Excuse me, that is not objectivity, it is deception.

Turning now to the leaflet that was shown. That
is certainly a very controversial fact. These things are
showing up everywhere on the Internet, which means
that the leaflet was dropped yesterday or today. And
even Ambassador Power explained that they were
dropping them from Russian and Syrian planes.But our
military command says that for the past seven or eight
days our planes have not been within 10 kilometres of
Aleppo. That must mean that American planes were
dropping them, right? Or that the whole thing is a false
rumour, of which there are a great many on the Internet,
and who knows where else. Presenting such stuff to the
Security Council and expecting it to be taken seriously
is simply ludicrous. I operate on the belief that we are
more serious than that here.

Ambassador Power says that the citizens of eastern
Aleppo were not leaving because they are terrified of
what awaits them. That is understandable. I completely
agree that of course both living in and leaving the
city is frightening. We proposed to the United States
that our armed forces could be stationed together with
American forces on the Castello Road, which could then
be freely used both for humanitarian convoys' access
to eastern Aleppo and for leaving the city. The United
States turned that down. What about that attitude from
the humanitarian contingent - "What shall we do?
What shall we do?" We said what we could do - have
Russian and American soldiers standing together on
the Castello Road. No, they said, "You do it". Let the
Russians put themselves in danger and be shot at by
terrorists? We will not do that. That is just dishonest.
Ambassador Power rightly emphasized the
fact - and we have discussed it at times - that the
residents of western Aleppo are also under fire. Indeed,
20 people are dying every week, and 50 or 60 are
being injured, on top of which they are under severe
psychological strain. I am sorry that Samantha Power is
not here. A few days ago, in a separate conversation with
her, she said that the United States was working on the
issue. They are working on it, and nothing is happening.
There has been no improvement. That means that their
prote'ges in eastern Aleppo are not doing their bidding,
and that they do not know how to stop this horror. Who
are they to criticize us and the Syrian Government,
who are trying to suppress this breeding ground where
terrorists and the other insurgents in eastern Aleppo
are endangering its citizens?

Nor should we be talking only about eastern
Aleppo when we discuss Syria - and, incidentally,
the humanitarian situation, civilian deaths and so
forth. A couple of months or more ago, the coalition,
supposedly with French planes, made a strike on
Manbij in northern Syria. It was reported that more
than 100 people died - an entire village was destroyed.
Ambassador Power promised that there would be an
investigation. We heard nothing. As for what happened
there or who did the bombing, we heard nothing.
Recently, two Belgian planes, also from the coalition,
bombed a Kurdish village. Six people died and some
were injured. The Belgians say it was not them. So
who was it? Ask the coalition. So why are they so upset
about our bombing and say nothing about their own?
Not to mention what is going on in Iraq, where there are
reports that injust the past few days almost 50 civilians
died and 100 people were wounded near Kirkuk. Let
us hold a briefing on the situation in Iraq and those
bombings in which Mr. O'Brien can undoubtedly give
us a demonstration of his oratorical talent.

Just the other day in Yemen, as we all know, 200
people in a funeral procession were killed and 500 more
were injured when it was bombed. The British delegation
issued a draft statement expressing regret. Regret. They
could not even bring themselves to condemn it. When
we told them that was not strong enough, they were
very happy to abandon the whole thing. Almost 1,000
people killed or injured, and all they have is regret.
How about that for standards? Many of us will have to
ask forgiveness for sins in Syria, in Iraq and many other
situations that we are acquainted with.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council
