Mr. Williamson (United States of America): I
would like to thank Mr. Vieira de Mello for his good
work and for his report this morning.

The briefing heard this morning illustrates yet
again that East Timor is on the right track. I take
advantage of the presence of Cabinet Minister Ramos-
Horta to ask him to convey to the members of the
Constituent Assembly our commendations for the
progress they have achieved thus far in moving through
the difficult process of drafting a first constitution. At
the same time, I would urge them, all East Timorese
involved in the political process, and the United
Nations to stay on track for the elections in April and
independence on 20 May.

The United States supports a rollover of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) through May, as proposed in the
draft resolution we expect to approve tomorrow. In
April, once United Nations planning and East Timor's
political developments become clearer, the Council
should begin work on a resolution establishing the
post-independence role of the United Nations, already
foreshadowed in the presidential statement we adopted
in October 2001.

I would like to reaffirm the support of the United
States for the successor mission concept, as discussed
in October and fleshed out more extensively in the
most recent report. At the same time, I would like to
stress that neither UNTAET nor a successor United
Nations mission can eliminate all the challenges that
face an independent East Timor, as with those that any
developing nation will face in meeting the needs of its
citizens and achieving economic prosperity.

United Nations peacekeeping is not a substitute
for, or a short cut around, the long-term development
process. In his most recent report, the Secretary-
General speaks of independence day, 20 May, as a new
starting point from which the international community
and an independent East Timor will need to forge a
new kind of partnership. We look forward to East
Timor's moving into normal relationships with the
international community and assuming responsibility
for its own affairs, within the context of a decreasing
peacekeeping role and an increasing traditional
development framework. To get there, the United
Nations and the East Timorese need to work with the
widest range of bilateral donors, interested agencies
and non-governmental organizations to ensure that
other appropriate mechanisms of support are put in
place as the extraordinary measures financed through
peacekeeping assessments progressively diminish
within the next two years.

The United Nations must help this process by
staying on schedule with the downsizing it has set for
itself between now and independence, and I laud
Mr. Vieira de Mello for doing that so well. The
Organization must do so by carefully planning to move
from the independence day successor mission numbers
to a goal of zero peacekeeping finance support by mid-
2004.

We welcome ongoing efforts to reduce
UNTAET's military force level to 5,000 by May, and
we support plans to downsize the United Nations
civilian police (CIVPOL), keeping the focus on
executive policing and the increasingly important work
of training the East Timor Police Service. The progress
made with the East Timor Police Service and Defence
Force is an example of how to move East Timor
towards self-reliance, transferring operational
responsibilities to East Timorese authorities as quickly
as possible.

The United States pledges to continue its bilateral
support for East Timor, as well as its support within the
United Nations context. We also look forward to
working with an independent East Timor to help
develop the entrepreneurial and commercial activities
that will be crucial to its prosperity. And we look
forward to independence, not because of some
celebration, as there is too much work ahead to
celebrate too long, but because East Timor's progress
is truly historic.

