Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for
having convened this emergency meeting of the
Security Council. We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.

China is seriously concerned by the large-scale
Israeli air attacks against Gaza that have taken place
since 27 December, which have caused an escalation of
the tension in Gaza. We strongly condemn all actions
that have caused casualties among civilians. In the
early morning hours of Sunday, 28 December, the
Security Council adopted a statement by the President
to the press. We note with regret that the appeal made
by the Council in its press statement by the President
has not been heeded.

We urge Israel to immediately halt its military
activities. Palestinian armed factions should also cease
their launching of rockets. The parties concerned
should, with the support of the international
community, re-establish the ceasefire as soon as
possible.

The Israeli air attacks have further exacerbated
the already dire humanitarian situation in Gaza. We
urge Israel to immediately open all border crossings
into Gaza to facilitate unhindered access to Gaza for
humanitarian relief materials. The Chinese Government
has decided to provide the Palestinian National
Authority with $1 million in emergency humanitarian
assistance so that they can acquire essential materials.

We call upon the international community to take
effective actions to alleviate the difficult humanitarian
situation in Gaza, and we support urgent action by the
United Nations in that area.

Two weeks ago in this Chamber, the Security
Council adopted resolution 1850 (2008), reaffirming
the determination of the international community to
promote the peace process in the Middle East. In the
current circumstances, the Security Council should
take action to ensure that the objectives of that
resolution are attained.

We have taken note of the fact that Libya has
introduced a draft resolution, and we hope that all
parties concerned can, on the basis of consultations,
reach consensus on the draft resolution as soon as
possible.

We hope that the Middle East Quartet will
intensify its efforts and exert its influence. The
international community and other partners should also
play a constructive role. We hope that, with the joint
efforts of the international community, military action
can be halted as soon as possible and that the situation
can be eased, so that all parties concerned can return to
the negotiation table as soon as possible.

