Mr. Mwinyi (Tanzania): At the outset, allow me
to join other speakers in welcoming His Excellency
Mr. Aminu Wali, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Nigeria, to New York. I would also like to thank you,
Sir, for having convened this open debate. We extend
our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
briefing on this important matter and his reports on this
subject (S/2013/480).

This debate is extremely relevant to the work of the

Security Council, whose role is not merely to respond
to conflicts after they have unfolded but also to prevent
them. Security sector reform (SSR) is among the
many ways of safeguarding conflict-prone countries
and ensuring post-conflict societies do not relapse
into conflict, by building strong, transparent and
accountable security sector institutions. This debate
takes place hardly a week since Tanzania, Japan and
the Slovak Republic held a seminar on inclusivity in
rebuilding States, focusing on inclusivity in security
sector reform. Tanzania pioneered the establishment of
the Peacebuilding Commission and strongly maintains
its belief in the centrality of SSR in rebuilding post-
conflict societies.

We wish to reiterate some of the issues that we
deem absolutely important in advancing SSR, not only
in societies emerging from conflicts, but in developing
countries in general. First, let me address ownership.
It is important that the country in question, where
SSR is being undertaken, take full ownership of the
process. Ownership entails more than consent. It is also
about commitment and, most importantly, inclusivity.
To attain the requisite legitimacy, the security sector
reform process must involve all stakeholders, including
youth, women, traditional leaders, religious leaders and
civil society. It is also important that it involve former
combatants after peace talks have been exhausted,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration has
been accomplished andjustice has been administered.

Secondly, on durability, it is of paramount
importance that security sector reform be undertaken
as an ongoing process rather than an event, particularly
when implemented under the mandate of the Council.
Post-conflict countries undertaking security sector
reform must be assisted until they attain the capability
to assist themselves. We also believe that sustainability
in the security sector reform process can only be
attained if the process is undertaken hand in hand with
the development of the concerned countries.

Thirdly, on the involvement of regional actors,
our involvement in peace processes over the past five
decades has clearly demonstrated the importance
of regional actors in conflict prevention, resolution,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We encourage the
international community and the countries concerned
to make effective use of the enormous resources that
we can offer to our neighbouring countries in terms
of knowledge and skills in the area of security sector
reform and others. After all, we aspire to the well-being
of their nations and peoples, which is paramount for
regional stability and development.

We note with great appreciation that such value
is fully acknowledged in the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, the full implementation of
which by all stakeholders is poised to restore peace and
stability in the Great Lakes region of Africa.

