Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to begin
by offering the sincere condolences of Ethiopia to
Ambassador Maria Mejia Velez following the death and
destruction caused by the landslide in Colombia this
past weekend. We are in sympathy and solidarity with
the families of the victims as well as with the people
and the Government of Colombia.

Let me also join others in expressing our thanks
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Arnault for his briefing on the latest report of the
Secretary-General on Colombia (S/2017/252) and the
activities of the United Nations Mission in Colombia
over the past three months.

The significant developments that have taken
place in the process of the implementation of the
peace agreement, including the disarmament of former
combatants of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia (FARC), which started recently, is very
encouraging, as is the bilateral ceasefire and the
cessation of hostilities between the Government and
the FARC, which has been holding with no casualties
registered. Of course, we understand that this is only
the beginning of a long and arduous process, and we
take note of some of the difficult and sensitive issues
involved which need to be handled carefully, including
the amnesty law, reintegration and the transformation
of FARC into a political party, as highlighted in the
report of the Secretary-General. We also recognize
the potential complications ahead in relation to the
upcoming general elections due to take place in
May 2018.

This notwithstanding, the progress made recently
has been remarkable, leading to a renewed sense of
hope and optimism for lasting peace in Colombia.
Both parties deserve to be commended for reaffirming
their political will and commitment to advancing the
implementation the Peace Agreement. It is imperative
that the parties continue to stay the course and that the
positive momentum generated recently be sustained
so as to achieve the difficult transition to peace. The
parties certainly need the continued support of the
international community, with full respect for the
peace process by the parties and by the Colombian
people in general. In that regard, we reiterate our
appreciation to the countries of the region and other
international partners that continue to closely support
the implementation of the Peace Agreement.

The role of the United Nations Mission in Colombia
continues to be very important, and we are pleased to
note that the Mission has reached its full operational
capacity. We express our appreciation to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Arnault as
well as the United Nations personnel in Colombia for
all their efforts to supporting the Peace Agreement.

Finally, we look forward to our visit to Colombia
next month, which will afford us an opportunity to
express support for, and solidarity with, Colombia
and to convey a strong message of encouragement to
the parties for their commitment to implement to the
Peace Agreement.

