Mr. McNee (Canada): Thank you, Mr. President,
for having organized today's debate on security sector
reform and for the strong leadership that Slovakia has
shown on this important issue. Canada believes that
that this cross-cutting issue, which today forms such a
significant part of United Nations field operations,
would benefit from a more comprehensive and
coherent policy approach. We applaud the Council's
initiative in launching that effort through a formal open
debate.

An effective, legitimate and accountable security
sector is a prerequisite for surviving the fragile post-
conflict period and building sustainable peace. A badly
managed security sector, by contrast, inhibits
development, discourages investment and increases the
risk of a relapse into violent conflict.
Building a well-managed security sector requires
not only military and police reforms, but also the
construction of an impartial and accessible judicial and
corrections sector. To be sustainable, these reforms
must be based on transparency, gender equality,
civilian protection, democratic norms and respect for
human rights. Security sector reform (SSR) is a long-
term investment - one that must figure prominently in
any peace operations mandate, as well as in longer-
term peacebuilding strategies.

As with many thematic issues before the Security
Council, SSR is not an abstract concept, but one with
direct operational implications for Council-authorized
missions. The Council's responsibility for integrating
the reform of basic security sector apparatus in its
peace support missions is well established. However,
while recent resolutions pertaining to integrated
mission mandates have all, to some measure, included
SSR-related provisions, there are still significant
discrepancies. For the most part, the mandates
approved by this body recognize the importance of
military and police reform as the cornerstone of
effective security sector reform. However, other
equally critical and complementary elements of
security sector reform, notably justice and corrections,
are not consistently addressed. In addition, there are
few mission mandates that make specific mention of
governance-related SSR activities designed to
strengthen the capacity for civilian control and
accountability or the mainstreaming of gender equality
within SSR.

Systematic undertreatment and underfunding of
longer-term elements of SSR, such as judicial and
governance reform, can have catastrophic results. It
makes little sense to reform the military if governance
structures are insufficiently robust to sustain control
over the armed forces. Similarly, the
professionalization of the police sector is a wasted
effort if the judicial sector cannot process cases in a
timely and legitimate manner.

The cost of such errors is measured not only in
dollars, but also in the untold misery of ordinary
people. Nowhere has this tragic myopia been in greater
evidence than in Haiti, where insufficient attention to
security sector reform has contributed to the repeated
cycle of violence, corruption and insecurity that have
necessitated the approval of no less than five new
missions over the past 15 years.
That is not to suggest that SSR is the sole
responsibility of the Security Council. Rather, the
Council's early engagement must address - and

finance - all relevant parts of the security and justice
sector in tandem if these reforms are to stand the test of
time. Canada therefore urges the Council to
systematically include all elements of security sector
reform in integrated mission mandates, including
justice reform and oversight bodies. Further, when
authorizing integrated missions, the Council and the
Secretary-General must ensure a coherent link between
mandates and resources.

The upcoming renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission of Assistance in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) affords an invaluable opportunity to
translate this understanding into concrete action.
Canada urges the Council to ensure that UNAMA is
allocated the requisite resources to support
comprehensive SSR across Afghanistan, including in
the more volatile provinces and regions of the country.

While the Council bears particular responsibility
for SSR in the immediate aftermath of conflict, long-
term success demands efforts which bring to bear the
capabilities of a much wider community of actors.
Most important, it must include the commitment and
engagement of local authorities.

We are gratified to note that the Peacebuilding
Commission affirmed that nationally led SSR should
form a key element of the peacebuilding strategies for
Burundi and Sierra Leone. Canada urges the Council to
work closely with the Peacebuilding Commission to
ensure that SSR efforts in the field successfully
straddle the transition from peace operations to long-
term peacebuilding missions.

Canada believes that the United Nations would
benefit from a shared understanding of what is entailed
in SSR and from a clear delineation of roles and
responsibilities within the United Nations system.

(spoke in French)

Canada therefore welcomes today's decision to
request a report by the Secretary-General. We hope that
the report will, inter alia, include recommendations on
the following matters: how to improve coordination
and implementation of SSR in the field; the
advisability of establishing an internal coordinating
mechanism and, if so, how to link its work to that of
the Peacebuilding Support Office; and best practices
for coordinating the transition from short-term to long-
term SSR efforts.
Transparent, just and accessible security
institutions are not a luxury; they are the fundamental
guarantors of security for individuals and the best
defence against renewed violence and instability. Only
concrete steps and a willingness to make flexible and
pragmatic use of all available levers will enable us to
meet our responsibility to the vulnerable.

In this regard, let me conclude by drawing the
Council's attention to the deteriorating situation in
Guinea, where poor governance and inadequate civilian
control over security forces have contributed to a
mounting crisis. We urge the Council to place the
situation in Guinea on its agenda for immediate
consideration, and for the Secretary-General to
consider deploying an envoy on an expedited basis to
explore options for a negotiated solution, before the
situation on the ground worsens.

Once again, let me assure the Security Council
that Canada will continue to devote resources to
security sector reform. The Council can count on
Canada's support as it works to build a more coherent
and comprehensive approach to security sector reform.

