Mr. Fulci (Italy): As this is the first time that I am
speaking in a formal meeting of the Security Council
under your able leadership, I should like to begin by
expressing to you, Sir, and to your collaborators the
warmest congratulations of the Italian delegation and our
best wishes for the complete success of your presidency.
At the same time, I wish to thank your predecessor,

 

Ambassador Ibrahim Gambari, and the Nigerian delegation
for the excellent job done in leading the Council during the
month of October.

Italy welcomes the adoption of today's Security
Council resolution, which deals with the problem of serious
violations of humanitarian law and human rights in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and in the former Sectors North, South
and West in Croatia. My country has consistently
maintained that any and all violations of human rights in
the former Yugoslavia - whoever their authors may be -
must be firmly condemned and, if possible, punished. The
resolution adopted by the Council today, in whose drafting
Italy participated in the framework of the Contact Group,
is a move in this direction.

In this context, we believe that the main focus must be
on the extremely serious case of persons from Srebrenica,
Zepa and, more recently, Sanski Most, who remain
unaccounted for. Here, I must add that I am very grateful
to our German colleague for taking up this subject, with a
very eloquent statement, in our informal consultations.

As for the male population of Srebrenica and Zepa, we
must recall that for several months now, despite repeated
appeals by the Security Council, the Bosnian Serb
authorities have denied the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and other international
humanitarian agencies access to persons detained or
unaccounted for, as well as to sites considered suspicious.
In the light of the news reported by the international media,
and especially of the indications provided by the Permanent
Mission of the United States, concerning possible mass
murders in the area of Srebrenica, which are tragically
reminiscent of similar episodes during the Second World
War, this attitude is totally intolerable and totally
inadmissible.

Another point addressed by today's resolution is the
cooperation of the parties with the International Tribunal on
the former Yugoslavia. In this regard, we wish to recall
that, while representatives of the Tribunal are already
present and operating in Zagreb and Sarajevo, the
representative assigned to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) has not yet received
the necessary authorization from the Belgrade authorities.
This disappointing situation has been illustrated by the
President of the Tribunal, Judge Antonio Cassese, who
visited New York this week in connection with the General
Assembly's discussion on the report of the International
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. We hope very much
that the Yugoslav Government will issue these
authorizations as soon as possible, thus confirming the
constructive spirit that it has shown in the framework of
the latest developments in the negotiations.

Today's resolution also deals with the problem of
human rights violations in Croatia's former United
Nations protected areas. The news from various sources,
including the United Nations Confidence Restoration
Operation in Croatia and the United Nations humanitarian
agencies, is unquestionably of concern - to such an
extent that it hardly helps to create the necessary
conditions for a return of refugees to their places of origin
and to guarantee safe and stable living conditions for the
Serbian population in territories where they lived
peacefully for centuries.

In conclusion, I wish to observe that today's
resolution is to be seen in the general framework of the
peace process, whose latest developments in Dayton my
delegation is following with great hope. We believe, in
fact, that a political solution to the conflict in the former
Yugoslavia cannot, in any case, be independent of a
solution to the serious humanitarian problems that have
occurred in recent years, which have horrified the
conscience of the whole international community.

This is why Italy voted in favour of the resolution.

