Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the briefing given us by the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr.
Jean-Marie Guehenno. We have been made aware of
the delicate situation of recent weeks in Kosovo. I
should like, through him, to convey to Mr. Holkieri,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
all the personnel of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), our
support in their efforts to fulfil resolution 1244 (1999).

We have been following the events and violence
in Kosovo with great concern. We reiterate that those
responsible for those despicable acts must be brought
to justice. Those acts have led to deeply regrettable
loss of human life, hundreds of people injured and
enormous material damage. We must prevent impunity
from taking a grip in Kosovo. Let me once again repeat
Chile's most vigorous condemnation of these acts.

It is too soon to reach definite conclusions about
what has happened. However, we would urge that an
assessment process of this crisis continue with a View
to learning lessons and making such adjustments as
might prevent the recurrence of such deplorable acts.
We recognize the efforts made in this regard, both by
UNMIK and by the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government. What is clear is that if the international
community were to hesitate today in its efforts to
achieve a democratic, multi-ethnic Kosovo, in keeping
with resolution 1244 (1999), the perpetrators will have
won.

The Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan
presented in March is a key instrument in achieving the
standards contained in the document "Standards for
Kosovo" published in December of last year in Pristina
and endorsed by the Council at that time. The Kosovo
Standards Implementation Plan, the legal basis and
guidelines for which are contained in the document
"Standards for Kosovo", envisages a genuinely multi-
ethnic, stable and democratic Kosovo. Everyone must
contribute to this undertaking. Cooperation between the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and
UNMIK will be fundamental for implementing the
Standards Implementation Plan. Belgrade's
contribution is also crucial.

The value of the Implementation Plan resides in
the set of guidelines that it provides to achieve a
quantitative and qualitative assessment of concrete
improvements regarding the standards. Future reviews
will be a fundamental aspect of this. We look forward
with great interest to these results regarding what has
been achieved.

We repeat that, without a significant and
sustainable return of internally displaced person and
refugees despite the recent setbacks, without
appropriate freedom of movement, without the
disappearance of the parallel institutions and without
constructive dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
and between UNMIK and the Kosovo Assembly, the
construction of a multi-ethnic and democratic society
that can include all the inhabitants of Kosovo, without
exceptions, will not be possible.

