Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank our briefers
this morning.

The United Kingdom welcomes the Secretary-
General's seventh report on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) (S/20l9/492). We extend our
thanks to the Secretariat staff for their continued
professionalism and the support they provide to the
Secretary-General in producing a thorough and well-
evidenced report.

When I last addressed the Security Council in
this format in December (see S/PV.8418), I explained
that the policy of the United Kingdom towards Iran
was motivated by three objectives. The first, and
most critical, of those objectives was to uphold the
global non-proliferation regime and prevent Iran from
achieving a nuclear capability that would threaten
the Middle East and Europe beyond it. The United
Kingdom participated in negotiations on, and we remain
committed to, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA). We believe that is the best way to prevent
the emergence of a nuclear-armed Iran. The JCPOA
is an essential part of the global non-proliferation
architecture. It is critical for our national security and
for the shared security of our partners and allies.

We therefore once again express our regret at the
United States decision to leave the JCPOA, reimpose
sanctions on Iran and not fully renew waivers for
nuclear non-proliferation projects in the framework
of the Plan. Those actions are contrary to the goals
set out in the Plan and in resolution 2231 (2015). We
continue to work hard to operationalize the Instrument
in Support of Trade Exchanges (INSTEX) to ensure
that legitimate business with Iran can continue. We
have also participated in core projects within the deal,
including taking on a co-chairing role on the Arak
modernization project.

As long as Iran remains in full compliance, the
United Kingdom will do everything it can to support
the deal. We are working extremely hard on INSTEX
with our E3 partners, France and Germany.

We welcome the latest International Atomic
Energy Agency reports of February (see S/2019/2l2)
and May (see S/2019/496) and the Secretary-General's
report (S/2019/492), which confirm that Iran continues
to uphold its commitments under the JCPOA, as we
heard from our briefers this morning. But we are deeply
concerned that this meeting is taking place just as Iran
is threatening to cease performing its commitments
under the JCPOA by exceeding its low-enriched
uranium stockpile limit. If Iran does go over these
limits, the non-proliferation benefits of the deal will be
eroded. I therefore urge Iran not to undertake activity
that will go beyond the limits specified in the JCPOA
and to continue to implement its commitments in full.
The second United Kingdom objective, as I shared
with the Council in December, was the necessity to
constrain Iran's actions, which threaten the stability
of the region. I made clear that while resolution 2231
(2015) was an endorsement of the JCPOA, it was
understood by all in the Council at the time of adoption
that it was designed not just to address nuclear issues,
but to continue to impose binding restrictions to curb
Iran's ballistic-missile and proliferation activity, which,
as I said earlier, threaten the region and beyond.

As we also heard this morning, Iran continues to
conduct ballistic-missile activity that is inconsistent
with resolution 2231 (2015). Iran has denied that these
activities are inconsistent with the resolution because
it claims it does not intend to put a nuclear weapon on
those missiles. As the Secretary-General's report notes,
the United Kingdom, France and Germany have set out
clearly in letters to the Council how these missiles are
designed to be capable of delivering a nuclear payload.
To be clear, "designed to be capable" means having the
capabilities by virtue of technical design. The stated
intent is irrelevant.

As our letters set out, we use Missile Technology
Control Regime (MTCR) Category 1 to make our
assessment of nuclear deliverability. The technical
specifications under MTCR Category 1 constitute
the only widely internationally accepted definition
of nuclear deliverability. In addition to the 35 States
participating in the MTCR, these criteria have also been
widely adopted among non-MTCR Governments with
respect to implementing obligations under resolution
1540 (2004). These are therefore the most objective
criteria available to assess consistency with resolution
2231 (2015).

Just to quote from the criteria: in the context of
resolution 2231, and consistent with the MTCR criteria,
"designed to be capable of delivering a nuclear weapon"
means capable of carrying a payload of 500 kilograms
or more over a range of 300 kilometres or more.

Iran has also transferred missiles to a number
of armed groups, in Violation of several Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 2231 (2015),
2216 (2015) and 1540 (2004). The latest report of the
Secretary-General contains concerning information
regarding the firing of a surface-to-surface missile
in January from the area of Damascus towards the
Golan Heights and the transfer of technical know-how
for unmanned aerial vehicle production to Iraq, in
Violation of arms-transfer restrictions. It also mentions
the attack on Abha airport on 12 June, although the type
of projectile used in the attack has yet to be determined.

The United Kingdom considers the transfer of such
weapons to be in contravention of Security Council
resolutions 2231 (2015) and 2216 (2015). There is
firm international consensus that such proliferation of
missile technology to non-State actors is destabilizing
for the region and escalates already high tensions. We
call for these activities to stop.

The actions are part of a pattern of Iranian
behaviour that poses a serious danger to peace and
stability in the region. On Monday, I told the Council in
closed consultations that following our own assessment
of a range of evidence, the United Kingdom had
concluded that it was almost certain that the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps carried out attacks on two
tankers on 13 June. We are also confident that Iran bore
responsibility for the 12 May attack on four oil tankers
near the port of Fujairah.

There can be no justification for attacks on
maritime traffic that contravene international rules on
freedom of navigation and maritime transport and that
further threaten peace and security in the region. The
current tensions and instability serve no one. As the
Secretary-General has made clear, the world cannot
afford a conflict in this region. Therefore, I want once
again to call for de-escalation, for dialogue and for full
respect for international rules.

The final objective I set out in December was
the hope that Iran could normalize its economic and
diplomatic relations with the region and beyond and
assume its rightful role as a prosperous, responsible
Power constructively engaged. We still believe that this
is possible.

The United Kingdom will continue to play its full
part alongside international partners to find diplomatic
solutions to reduce the current tensions and to uphold
the landmark JCPOA nuclear agreement. I urge Iran to
join us and do the same.

