Mr. Spokauskas (Lithuania): I would like to thank
the Ambassador for his report and efforts in steering
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) during this crucial year.

Lithuania welcomes the fact that, since agreement
was reached on the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) in Vienna five months ago, all sides have been
taking the necessary steps according to the agreed-
upon schedule. Implementation day is undoubtedly the
next important milestone, and Lithuania hopes that
Iran will complete its nuclear commitments fully and
in good faith.

At the same time, the international community's
ability to verify the implementation of those
commitments is indispensable, and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) must be granted
full access by Iran, as well as all the time it needs
to thoroughly verify Iran's fulfilment of its nuclear
commitments. Resolving the outstanding issues
regarding Iran's nuclear programme, including its
possible military dimension, is another important
element in building the international community's
trust. In that regard, we note the IAEA report on the
final assessment of past and present outstanding issues
regarding Iran's nuclear programme, which states
that a range of activities relevant to the development
of a nuclear explosive device were conducted in
Iran prior to the end of 2003, with some continuing
thereafter. The report also states that the Agency has no
credible indications of Iran's activities relevant to the
development of a nuclear explosive device after 2009.
In that regard, Lithuania welcomes the IAEA Board
of Governors adoption by consensus earlier today of a
resolution on JCPOA implementation, verification and
monitoring in Iran.

As efforts to reach implementation day continue,
all Security Council sanctions remain in effect and
must be robustly implemented by all Member States.
The Sanctions Committee must also fully implement
its mandate and take appropriate action in response
to sanctions violations. As on previous occasions,
Lithuania cannot ignore the fact that Iran, while taking
steps under the JCPOA, continues to disregard certain
provisions of Security Council resolutions, in particular
those related to ballistic missile programmes and
conventional arms. In that regard, we note with concern
the latest conclusion of the Panel of Experts that the
launch of the Emad medium-range ballistic missile on
10 October was a violation by Iran of resolution 1929
(2010), which prohibits launches using ballistic missile
technology. The 1737 Committee should now carry
out its mandate in considering and taking appropriate
action in response to that violation.

No less important is the need to focus on continuing
reports of conventional arms transfers by Iran to
countries in the Middle East, in contravention of the
Council-imposed arms embargo. The latest reports on
Iran's possible involvement in the supply of weapons
to Yemen should be taken seriously and taken up by
both the 1737 Committee and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014).

Upon the IAEA-verified implementation by Iran
of the nuclear-related measures, previous Council
resolutions on Iran will be terminated, but will be
subject to re-imposition in the event of significant
non-compliance. However, specific restrictions on
the transfer of proliferation-sensitive goods, ballistic
missile activities, as well as a conventional arms
embargo, will come into force. The Council will be
responsible for monitoring the implementation of those
restrictions and has to be fully prepared to undertake
that task. Lithuania calls for a swift agreement on
the practical arrangements needed for the Security
Council to fully implement resolution 2231 (2015), and
underscores the need to involve all Council members in
that process.

In conclusion, let me reiterate Lithuania's belief
that, if implemented fully and in good faith, the JCPOA
will become a fundamental element in building trust
between Iran and the international community, and
will contribute to regional and international peace and
security.

