Mr. Gallardo (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Antonio Guterres, for
his important briefing. The problem of refugees and
displaced persons is one of the most complicated
matters currently facing the international community.
Peru is grateful to him for the work he is doing to
protect refugees and displaced persons throughout the
world, as well as for his ongoing search for solutions to
problems they face. Peru would also like to point out
its profound respect for humanitarian workers who
have been injured or killed while carrying out their
duties.

The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) still has very
challenging tasks ahead of it. It must face numerous
prolonged refugee situations, which have increased in
number due to new emergencies that have arisen in
various parts of the world. It must face ever-growing
signs of intolerance and mistrust in our societies, as a
result of which the status of asylum is losing ground. It
must deal with migration flows, and must continue to
manage various humanitarian crises, such as the
situation in Darfur.

Against this backdrop, Peru encourages UNHCR
to continue to find imaginative ways to ensure a life
with dignity for all the refugees and displaced persons
in the world. We support UNHCR's cooperation with
other United Nations organizations, non-governmental
organizations and Governments. We welcome the
recent agreement signed between the UNHCR and the
Governments of the Sudan and Kenya to facilitate the
repatriation of more than 70,000 Sudanese in the first
quarter of this year. We understand that the repatriation
operation will be based on voluntary returns, and that
this is the first of seven agreements that in the coming
months UNHCR will negotiate to the same end with
the countries neighbouring the Sudan.
We can conclude that the refugee situation has
changed and has become an example of
interdependence. This situation shows how the
problems of one country can have immediate
consequences for other countries. It also exemplifies
the interdependence between refugee problems and
human rights questions. Human rights violations are
not only one of the main causes of massive exodus;
they also rule out the option of voluntary repatriation
as long as the violations continue. Another
phenomenon that has been on the rise in recent years is
that of internally displaced persons: people who have
been forced to flee their homes but who remain on the
territory of their own country, thereby excluding them
from the refugee protection system.

