Mr. Danesh-Yazdi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
wish to begin, Mr. President, by thanking you for
having convened this meeting today and congratulating
you for your skilful stewardship of the Council's work
this month. I would like to avail my delegation of this
chance to thank Mr. Michael Williams for the job that
he has done for our Organization and also for his
briefing to the Council today. I wish him all the best in
his new endeavours.

As the realities on the ground well indicate, and
as reported to the Council today, throughout the period
under review the Israeli war machine has continued its
work brutally and relentlessly, shattering the lives and
livelihoods of the defenseless Palestinian people. Even
in the past several days, as the Palestinian people and
Muslims across the globe were observing the 38th
anniversary of the Israeli arson of Al-Aqsa mosque in
the holy city of Al Quds Al Sharif, the Israeli regime
continued with its carnage against the Palestinian
people, killing many, among them women and children,
in Khan Younis, Beit Hanoun, Nablus and elsewhere in
the occupied Palestinian territories.

The appalling crimes of extrajudicial killings and
targeted assassinations committed by the Israeli regime
have continued unabated, while other Israeli crimes
such as the destruction of homes, infrastructure and
agricultural lands, the illegal expansion of settlements,
the detention and imprisonment of thousands of
Palestinians, the construction of the expansionist wall
and the imposition of collective punishment on the
entire Palestinian population have persisted.

Numerous United Nations documents have
reported that, owing to Israeli practices, the whole
Palestinian population has been terrorized, their
properties have been destroyed and a humanitarian
crisis has been imposed on a whole population. United
Nations rapporteurs have rightly described these brutal
Israeli practices and policies as ethnic cleansing.
Moreover, as a result of the Israeli regime's blockade
of the Gaza Strip, the humanitarian and economic
situation there has deteriorated to a dangerous extent.
On 9 August 2007, the United Nations warned that
Gaza could face an economic meltdown with
"disastrous consequences" unless its main crossings
were reopened. In this regard, the deputy chief of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East warned that "Gaza risks
becoming a virtually 100 per cent aid-dependent,
closed down and isolated community within a matter of
months or weeks, if the present regime of closure
continues."

It is therefore high time for the international
community to urgently weigh in, in order to counter the
Israeli regime's inhumane policies and practice of
imposing humanitarian disaster on the defenseless
Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip and elsewhere in
the Palestinian territories. It is indeed unfortunate that
while the Israeli regime has grown more brazen at
every turn in committing war crimes and crimes
against humanity, the Security Council, because of the
unqualified support rendered to the Israeli regime by
the United States of America, has remained
incapacitated and unable to take any meaningful action
to counter those atrocities.

A particular reference should also be made to the
Israeli regime's concealment and unabated pursuit of a
nuclear arsenal during the past several decades. The
Israeli Prime Minister's acknowledgement of his
regime's unlawful possession of nuclear weapons in his
interview with a German television channel on
11 December 2006 revealed the real nature of the
regime's clandestine nuclear activities, which pose a
serious and continuing threat to international and
regional peace and security.

It is undisputable that nuclear weapons in the
hands of a regime marked by their long catalogue of
various crimes, such State terrorism, aggression and
occupation, present a real threat to regional and
international peace and security. This therefore require
urgent and decisive action by the Security Council.
Indeed, this regime should face a united front and must
be kept under continuous pressure to cease its terrorist
acts, relinquish its nuclear programme and place all its
nuclear facilities under international monitoring.

The Israeli regime has persisted in its aggressive
policies towards Lebanon and the occupied Syrian
Golan. A year has passed since the Israeli regime
attacked Lebanon. According to United Nations special
rapporteurs, "serious violations of human rights and

humanitarian law had been committed by Israel"
during its aggression against Lebanon. They also
reported that:

"Israel's Air Force attacked more than 7,000
targets in Lebanon, its Navy conducted 2,500
bombardments, and its Army fired tens of
thousands of shells and rockets. As a result, 1,191
people were killed and more than 4,000 wounded.
One third of the dead and wounded and close to
half of the internally displaced persons were
children. Tens of thousands of homes and much
public infrastructure were damaged or destroyed.
An estimated 1 million persons were displaced
and entire villages were virtually destroyed."

In addition to these figures, their report indicates
that the Israeli regime attacked medical facilities and
hospitals.

The regime, in yet another show of its contempt
for Security Council resolutions, is now adamantly
violating resolution 1701 (2006) on a daily basis,
including through violations of Lebanese airspace.

The aforementioned examples of persistent Israeli
crimes and atrocities attest to the fact that the regime
has based its policies and practices on occupation,
aggression and bloodshed, and that its mischievous
calls and expressions of readiness for peace with the
Palestinians are but a malicious smokescreen to buy
time and create division among the Palestinians and the
countries in the region, in order to pursue its wicked
expansionist policies and criminal practices against the
Palestinians and other Arabs under its brutal
occupation and oppression.

The Palestinian people, backed by the entire
international community, in particular the Muslim and
Arab world, will indeed continue to be resolute and
unwavering in their efforts towards the attainment of
their inalienable rights. In this context, the Palestinian
factions should put the national aspirations of the
Palestinian people ahead of their political differences
and join hands to end the occupation of their homeland
and restore their nation's denied and inalienable right.

We have repeatedly rejected the internal clashes
in the Palestinian territories and have invited all
Palestinian groups to work for national reconciliation
and to settle their differences through dialogue on the
basis of inclusion and cooperation, rather than
exclusion and confrontation. If history is any guide,
efforts by any faction in Palestine to exclude others are
doomed to fail. Hamas, which came to power through
an election that the whole international community
recognized as fair, free and democratic, and as a party
with a deep popular base among the Palestinian people,
cannot be excluded. Nor can Fatah be neglected, with
its long history of resistance against occupation and its
popularity among the Palestinian people.

The Islamic Republic of Iran has constantly
expressed its concern over the dire consequences of the
sanctions and blockade imposed by certain quarters
against the Palestinian people for exercising their
democratic rights. Sadly, the international community's
failure to address the Palestinians' genuine cause, and
the flagrant interference of certain Powers in internal
Palestinian affairs, has led to the recent unfortunate
events.

The Palestinian question indeed lies at the heart
of the Middle East crisis. Undoubtedly, a durable peace
in Palestine and the Middle East will only be possible
through justice, full restoration of the rights of the
Palestinian people, an end to discrimination and to the
occupation of Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese
territories, the return of all Palestinian refugees and a
democratic mechanism through which all the
inhabitants of Palestine, as well as Palestinians driven
out of their homeland, would have the possibility to
determine their future in a democratic and peaceful
fashion.

Before I conclude, I would like to place on the
record that my delegation rejects the baseless
allegations raised against my country in the Council
today by the representative of the Israeli regime. Those
are but preposterous - and, indeed, tired - practices
to distract the international community's attention from
the criminal policies and abhorrent practices and
atrocities of the Israeli regime in Palestine and
elsewhere in the region. It is evident that no amount of
slander, deception of smear campaigns by the Israeli
regime can cloud the obvious fact that that regime
poses the most real, serious and urgent threat faced by
the region and the world today, and should be
countered urgently by the international community.

