At the outset, I would like to express our appreciation to Mr. Mladenov, for his tireless efforts, especially in these difficult circumstances, and thank him for his comprehensive briefing. The situation on the ground regrettably continues to deteriorate, and as mentioned in Mr. Mladenov's briefing, settlements have expanded significantly and demolition of homes have accelerated, in violation of international humanitarian law and relevant United Nations resolutions. These unlawful policies and illegal activities are dangerously imperilling the viability of the two-State solution and have led to increased tensions in the occupied Palestinian territory and beyond. Moreover, the international community should urge Israel to abide by its obligations under the international law and to refrain from any attempts to implement its long-planned de facto annexation of the Palestinian land, in grave breach of international law and further shredding the contiguity of the Palestinian territory. The Secretary-General warned that "such steps, if implemented, would be devastating to the possibility of reviving negotiations and regional peace, while severely undermining the viability of the two-State solution". Tunisia is deeply concerned with the deteriorating humanitarian situation especially in Gaza and the lack of significant steps aimed at putting an end to the hardships of the people living there. the situation of the public health is precarious as a result of the destruction of hospitals and lack of drugs and medical equipment. It's hence fundamental that the international community continue its vital humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian people, especially at this critical juncture to strengthen the Palestinian capacity in response to COVID-19 pandemic. It is likewise crucial to allow and facilitate rapid and unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief for civilians in need. We also insist on the necessity of providing continued support for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, as it is still facing huge financial difficulties, including to fund immediate response to the COVID-19. In closing, Tunisia renews its commitment to maintaining its steadfast and principled support for the Palestinian question and the indivisible and inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, which are not time-bound. We stress our attachmentto peace as a strategic choice and reaffirm our support for any constructive efforts to revive the peace process based on international resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the two-State solution as the only path to achieving a lasting, comprehensive and just peace. A peace that puts an end to occupation and leads to the establishment of the independent sovereign Palestinian state based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
