Mr. Lucas (Angola): Angola thanks the Malaysian
presidency of the Security Council for convening
this open debate on an issue of critical importance,
namely, the fate of children caught in the middle of
armed conflicts and the suffering that they endure. The
international community pledged to find solutions to
this problem of extreme gravity. The adoption today of
resolution 2225 (2015) is a further step in that direction.
Children are supposed to lead their lives as children,
surrounded by love and care, and not have their childhood
stolen by war, abduction and abuse. We welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia in presiding
over this debate. We also welcome the remarks by the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui. We
also thank the Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF,
Ms. Yoka Brandt, and the Director of the Facilitation
for Peace and Development, Ms. Eunice Apio. We
were deeply touched by Ms. Apio's testimony on the
despicable actions of the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA) and its consequences.
We face daunting challenges in protecting millions
of children in countries affected by armed conflict,
including, just to mention the most notorious cases, the
Central African Republic, Iraq, Syria, South Sudan,
Yemen, Libya, Myanmar, Nigeria, Palestine, Gaza,
Afghanistan, Somalia and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Children are exposed to the most egregious
violations of their fundamental rights, among which is
the denial of the most basic one - the right to life.
Extreme violence has risen to unprecedented levels. Too
often it targets children, prompting worldwide outrage.
The latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/409)
gives a tragic account of that reality worldwide.

Preventing the outbreak of conflicts is still the
best way to protect children, but unfortunately the
international community still lacks the appropriate
tools for effective preventive action. Meanwhile, the
protection of children in armed conflict is best achieved
through a comprehensive strategy of protection and
humanitarian response.

The increasing trend in the mass abductions of
children is a matter of the utmost concern. Abduction
is a precursor to other forms of violations of children's
rights. Abducted children are used as messengers
and porters, as spies, as human shields and suicide
bombers. They are held as sexual slaves for ransom,
retaliation and indoctrination by extremist groups for
the commission of horrendous crimes.

Developing ways to prevent the abduction of
children by armed groups would be the most effective
strategy for reducing the number of child combatants
under the yoke of terrorists. However, success in
preventing such trends has been disappointing. In Iraq
and Syria, over 1,000 girls and boys were abducted by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. In Nigeria,
Boko Haram abducted hundreds of women and girls in
major attacks in Chibok and across the country's north-
east. The case of the LRA is the most notorious and
abhorrent. Violence and hatred against children seems
to be the only motivation of LRA actions. We condemn
in the strongest terms the mass abduction of children
by armed terrorist groups and call on affected Member
States and the entire international community to do
everything in their power to pursue the perpetrators
and hold them accountable for such horrific crimes.
We urge the immediate release of all abducted children
and the provision of adequate support to permit them
to rebuild their shattered lives and fulfil their potential.
Appropriate measures to rehabilitate and reintegrate
those children should be put in place by concerned
States and by international community actors as a
matter of priority. Angola is particularly committed to
this issue. We have been affected by the phenomenon in
the past but have been able to find acceptable solutions
for the reintegration of former child soldiers.

We welcome the expansion of the listing criteria
in resolution 1612 (2005) to include abduction as
an additional reason for listing in the annexes of the
reports of the Secretary-General and for the United
Nations monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave
violations against children in situations of armed
conflict. That will ensure that those responsible for
abductions are identified and held accountable, without
using double standards, as the President rightly pointed
out in his statement.

In that regard, resolution 2225 (2015), which
was adopted today and which my delegation was
honoured to sponsor, expanded the listing criteria,
thereby strengthening the Council's response to grave
violations of the rights of children, taking note of the
fact that abduction is a serious violation of international
humanitarian law and may amount to a war crime or a
crime against humanity.

The report of the Secretary-General highlights the
problem caused by the deprivation of liberty imposed
on children as a result of their alleged association with
extremist groups without due review to the legality of
such detention. The situation of the children should be
carefully considered, since many of them are in fact
victims and should be treated as such. Additionally,
Member States must ensure that trial procedures are
consistent with international juvenile-justice standards
and the principle of preserving the best interest of the
child and their specific needs and vulnerabilities.

Currently we are witnessing an increasing trend of
attacks against schools and hospitals. Military forces
and non-State armed groups have turned schools into
shelters, detention facilities, barracks and military bases.
As a tactic of war and given their basic obscurantism
and fundamentalist hostility to the idea of granting
universal education to children, extremist groups target
schools. That constitutes an egregious social abuse, as
it deprives children of their basic right to education and
endangers the safety and lives of students and teachers.
Member States and the international community must
do more to protect or help protect schools, students and
teachers in situations of armed conflict and ensure that
schools remain a safe place, while also respecting their
civil-society character.

We recognize that United Nations peace operations
play a vital role in the protection of children, the
fulfilment of which requires adequate training, and
we welcome the engagement and progress made by the
"Children, Not Soldiers" campaign in its first year of
existence.

We further encourage the Member States that have
not yet done so to sign and ratify the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on
the involvement of children in armed conflict and to
adopt and implement legal measures to prohibit and
criminalize the recruitment and use of child soldiers.

We conclude by praising the Malaysian delegation
for its commitment as Chair of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and
its efforts to advance the protection of children caught
up in the midst of war. We furthermore commend
Malaysia for its efforts to advance the fight against the
criminal scourge groups that abduct children and abuse
and use them in committing the most abominable of
crimes.

Once again, we thank the Malaysian presidency
for providing this opportunity to discuss these very
important and critical issues.

