Mr. Mufloz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like at the outset to express condolences to the
Government of Great Britain for the terrorist attack
attributed to Al Qaeda that occurred in Istanbul and
took the life of the Consul-General of the country, as
well as the lives of many others. We also express our
condolences to the Government of Turkey for the
victims resulting from that criminal attack and the
attack that took place last weekend. We intend to
submit a draft resolution on this matter during this
afternoon's meeting. We hope that it will be adopted
unanimously.

We are grateful for the presence here today of the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Tanzania; the
Minister of the Presidency for Parliamentary and
Diplomatic Affairs of Mozambique; the Special Envoy
of the Chairperson of the Commission of the African
Union for the Great Lakes Region; and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

The regional dimension of conflicts has become
clear with regard to other parts of Africa, as has the
fact that there is great usefulness in cooperation
between the Security Council and regional and
subregional organizations in Africa. We need only
mention the essential presence of the Economic
Community of West African States - working in
direct cooperation with the Security Council - in
Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire. My comments also apply
fully to the appeal by the Council for the holding of an
international conference on the Great Lakes region,
based on the conviction that instability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo could quickly
spread to other countries of the region, that the peoples
of the region have linguistic, cultural and social ties
that bind them closely together and that, in the final
analysis, conflict can be resolved only in a regional
framework.

Chile supports the holding of the conference. We
see it as a further sign that the African peoples have
taken their destiny in their own hands, generating
African solutions to African problems. We commend
the active participation of important organizations,
including the African Union, in support of this effort.
We also welcome the fact that the first meeting of
national coordinators was held in June, and we hope
that the rather tight provisional timetable proposed by
the Secretary-General in his report can be kept to.

In short, we believe that it is essential that the
international community provide decisive support for
the conference, so that the goals set out by the
Secretary-General and the Security Council can be
achieved. In this context, we enthusiastically support
the presidential statement to be made later on this
matter.

