Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to
congratulate you Sir, on your patience and your efforts
this day. I will be very brief, and will distribute the
full text of my statement in Arabic and English to all
representatives. The Government of Iraq also thanks
the members of the Security Council for their adoption
of presidential statement S/PRST/2014/l, supporting
Iraq in its fight against terrorism.

I congratulate the Palestinian people on the
launch of the International Year of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People.

Another year has passed and the peace process
in the Middle East still stumbles. The international
community seeks to reach a peaceful settlement.
Meanwhile, Israel continues to pursue its arbitrary and
illegal practices, depriving the Palestinians of their
rights and freedoms. Israel continues to persist in its
settlement policies, constructing and building new
settlements and a separation wall, and continuing to
seize more Palestinian land every day. Israel has also
imposed a blockade on Gaza and arrested numerous
Palestinians, and continues its practice of collective
punishment, in addition to the provocations posed
by extremist Jewish settlers, which can only escalate
tensions in the Middle East.

Iraq supports the international community's efforts
to make a success of the process ofpeace in the Middle
East, based on unwavering principles, including those
enunciated in United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Quartet road map. We commend the efforts of the
Palestinians and the Government of President Mahmoud
Abbas. We also pay tribute to the continued good
offices and good will of the United States to encourage
both sides to reach a two-State solution to resolve the
conflict. In this regard, we hold Israel responsible for
not implementing binding resolutions of the Security
Council and urge the international community and the
Security Council to bring pressure to bear on Israel to
honour its commitments and to implement the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly.

Finally, we must work diligently to restore stability
to the troubled Middle East, with all its conflicts that
threaten international peace and security. Finding a
just solution that will enable the Palestinian people
to exercise their right to self-determination in a State
based on the 1967 borders, with its capital in East
Jerusalem, is a noble goal to which we aspire and that
would achieve security and stability in the region.

