Ms. Sison (United States ofAmerica): The Security
Council and the international community have found
common cause in our fight against terrorism, but we are
continually reminded of how much more we have to do.
In 2017, terrorists have targeted villagers in the Sahel
and worshippers in the Sinai. Even here in the great
global city ofNew York we have twice seen the dangers
posed by self-radicalized individuals. But the world is
adapting and we are getting better at fighting terrorism.

In the Middle East, the coalition to defeat the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham has liberated almost
all of the territory of the so-called Islamic State, and
later today the Security Council will adopt a landmark
draft resolution to give us new tools to counter the
threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters.

Here at the United Nations this is been a remarkable
year of change and reform. This year has seen some
of the greatest changes to the United Nations counter-
terrorism architecture in over a decade. Under the
Secretary-General's leadership, the United Nations
has taken important first steps towards streamlining,
elevating and focusing its counter-terrorism efforts with
the establishment of the new United Nations Office of
Counter-terrorism. To further those reform efforts, today
the Security Council has adopted resolution 2395 (2017)
to update and strengthen the mandate of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED).
Established by the Security Council 13 years ago,
CTED has grown to become a critical counter-terrorism
body. In 2017, CTED again showed its great value:
CTED experts visited more than 20 countries to assess
their implementation of counter-terrorism resolutions,
held many important briefings and open meetings
and engaged outside experts from Governments, civil
society, academia and the private sector.

CTED now has new leadership. We warmly
welcomed Ms. Michele Coninsx and applaud her vision
for a strong, dynamic CTED.

The overarching goal of the resolution adopted
today, which renews CTED's mandate for another four
years, was to strengthen CTED even further. Today
more than ever before we need a CTED that is agile and
able to respond to new threats. I would highlight three
goals of today's important resolution.

First, resolution 2395 (2017) aims to help CTED
focus squarely on its core mandate a visiting Member
States to assess their implementation of counter-
terrorism resolutions. We hope it will foster even better
CTED assessment reports built around actionable
recommendations to counter terrorism. Ifwe strengthen
CTED's ability to carry out this core mandate, we
can better ensure its recommendations are acted on
throughout the United Nations system and beyond.

Our second goal was to strengthen CTED's role
as an early-warning system for the Security Council
and its Counter-Terrorism Committee. CTED can help
the Counter-Terrorism Committee identify and assess
cutting-edge counter-terrorism events, trends and
threats. This requires broad engagement, and not just
with Member States but also civil society, academia
and the private sector. We must also look to media,
cultural and religious leaders with an emphasis on
women, youth and locally focused organizations.

Thirdly, this resolution aims to establish firmly
CTED's place in the reformed United Nations counter-
terrorism architecture. Our goal was to promote a
close and cooperative relationship with the new United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism. For example, we
want to see CTED's assessments and recommendations
directly inform the technical assistance and capacity-
building efforts undertaken by other parts of the
United Nations.

In addition to advancing those goals, the resolution
adopted today recognizes one of the greatest lessons
we have learned in the fight against terrorism.
After many years of experience, the international
community has come to recognize that effective
counter-terrorism strategies must be comprehensive
and balanced strategies that prioritize all four pillars
of the global United Nations counter-terrorism strategy.
In practice, this means counter-terrorism efforts must
be multifaceted, tailored to local conditions and take
into account ethnic and religious minorities. Successful
counter-terrorism efforts must simultaneously focus
on strengthening criminal justice systems, tackling
terrorist financing, bolstering civil aviation security
and protecting soft targets and critical infrastructure.
And just as terrorists target, exploit and recruit women,
we must respond by integrating gender as a cross-
cutting issue throughout our counter-terrorism efforts.
That is why this mandate calls for CTED to integrate
a gender perspective in its work and - for the first
time in a CTED mandate - focuses on the impact of
terrorism on children.

One of the most essential elements of a balanced
counter-terrorism strategy is countering violent
extremism. The prevention and countering violent
extremism has now become a core component of
effective counter-terrorism strategies worldwide.
Today's resolution acknowledges the importance of
this preventative work. It also brings us closer to
an all-of-UN counter-terrorism effort that includes
critical prevention elements whenever and wherever
appropriate. The United States is also encouraged
that CTED's mandate now reflects the reality that we
will never defeat terrorism without respecting human
rights. Heavy-handed counter-terrorism responses and
repression are gifts to terrorists. Putting human rights
at the core of our counter-terrorism efforts does not
weaken our response to terrorism, it strengthens it. For
this reason, we encourage CTED to ensure that respect
for human rights is integrated throughout its work.

We thank our colleagues at CTED and in the
Council for their hard work and shared commitment in
the struggle against terrorism.

