The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.

Bolivia thanks the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for
his detailed briefing and presentation of the report
(S/2017/508) of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan,
and welcomes this opportunity to express its
overwhelming support for his work. Similarly, Bolivia
thanks the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan
for the information that he provided to the members of
the Security Council today. Through its Ambassador,
Bolivia reiterates its condolences to the Government
and the people of Afghanistan for the victims of the
recent terrorist attacks that Afghanistan has endured.
Those responsible for those acts must be brought to
justice and punished to the full extent of the law.

Bolivia commends the visit by the Secretary-
General to Afghanistan and shares his concern
about the proliferation of various terrorist groups in
Afghan territory and the need for a more coordinated
international response to counter terrorism. We also
underscore the Secretary-General's reference to the
need for the United Nations to continue support for the
Kabul process, led by Afghanistan and in line with the
strategy of the Afghan Government.

We would be remiss if we did not mention our
concern about the high number of internally displaced
persons. According to the report presented by
Mr. Yamamoto, between January and mid-May more
than 100,000 people became internally displaced
within the country. We call for concerted efforts aimed
at the sustainable return of citizens, with international
organizations providing concrete and tangible support,
in particular for enhancing assistance to internally
displaced Afghans and Afghan refugees so as to
facilitate their voluntary, safe and dignified return
and their sustainable reinsertion into their society
of origin so that they can contribute to the stability
of Afghanistan.

We commend the work of United Nations Mine
Action Service, which has been working to provide
education at transit centres to ensure that returnees are
informed of the existence and danger of antipersonnel
mines, explosive remnants of war and other improvised
explosive devices. We also highlight that 18
communities have been declared mine-free, thereby
making it possible for approximately 20,000 people in
an area of nearly 10 square kilometres to move freely
about their community.

With respect to political events, we recognize the
major efforts made by the Government and the people
of Afghanistan, and we reiterate our commitment to
defend the country's sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity. We recall the interconnected nature
of the challenges facing the people of Afghanistan and
sustainable progress relating to security, development
and governance, which are mutually reinforcing.

With regard to the report of the Secretary-General,
it is very important to highlight the work on the peace
agreement between various factions, such as Hizb-i
Islami, and on negotiations to release prisoners. We
recognize and express our gratitude for the efforts of
the Government, which devised a road map in April
based on the need for a process of inclusive dialogue
that brings all parties involved to the negotiating table
wiht a view to strengthen institutions through which
differences of a political nature can be channelled.

Bolivia is also grateful to UNAMA for its logistical
and technical work in a broad-based, Afghan-led
process in support of new local peace initiatives in nine
different provinces aimed at the non-violent settlement
of disputes and conflicts.

UNAMA recorded 5,687 security-related incidents
in Afghanistan between January and March of this
year - an unprecedented number, including in areas
that previously had been considered secure. We strongly
condemn the attacks of recent days, and we call on the
international community to take firm measures so as to
ensure the strengthening of, and support for the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces and to achieve
a stable and democratic Afghanistan - to which
end there is a need to shore up its ability to maintain
security and stability in the entire country.

We welcome the multilateral and bilateral initiatives
mentioned in the report, such as the various regional
initiatives in Central Asia and the conferences on
Afghanistan held in Moscow in April and in Kabul on
6 June - otherwise known as the Kabul process -which
proposed to coordinate efforts at the regional level and
make it possible for our brotherly country to emerge
from the situation which it is undergoing.

We reiterate the crucial importance of encouraging
regional cooperation as an effective means to promote
security, stability and economic and social development
in Afghanistan, while recognizing the importance ofthe
contributions of neighbouring and regional partners.

Lastly, we must recall that the conflict has been
ongoing for several years, and different types of
solutions, including a military solution, have been tried.
We have come to a point where there are now more
than 100,000 troops in Afghan territory, while, at the
same time, terrorist groups have multiplied, with the
increased presence of groups like Da'esh. We therefore
call on the entire international community, in particular
countries in the region, to contribute positively so that
the Government and the people of Afghanistan, as well
as the groups involved, can achieve a reconciliation that
is inclusive of everyone.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Pakistan.

