Mr. Parrilla (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, and to wish you every
success during your presidency. Allow me also to express
my thanks for the contribution made by the presidency of
Botswana. I pay a special tribute to our colleague,
Ambassador Legwaila.

Barely 11 months ago the Security Council met to
consider the tension created by the confiscation by the
Government of Israel of Palestinian lands situated in East
Jerusalem.

At that time we warned that if unlawful practices in
contravention of international law against the Palestinian
people continued, in flagrant violation of the Palestinian
people's inalienable right to self-determination and in
breach of international instruments and a large number of
resolutions of the General Assembly and of this Council
itself, and that, if practices aimed at destroying the
economic infrastructure of the Palestinian people and at
impeding its efforts for peace, reconstruction and
development continued, the expectations aroused by the
peace agreements would be in jeopardy and the possibility
of attaining just and lasting peace in the area would become
more remote.

At that time we stated that those circumstances
compelled the Security Council, for once, to take firm and
serious action and we warned that failing to do so would
amount to sending the wrong message, which instead of
contributing to the progress of the peace process might
damage it, perhaps irreparably. On that occasion it was not
possible to adopt the draft resolution prepared by the Arab
Group; nor was the Council able to adopt any practical
measure whatsoever, paralysed by the veto of the United
States.

Today the Council is meeting once again, convened
urgently upon the request of the Arab Group to consider
new actions that form part of the same hostile policy
applied by the occupying Power against the Palestinian
people and which continue to endanger the agreement on
the Declaration of Principles, its timetable and the peace
process as a whole.

The border-closure measures, based on so-called
security considerations, the restrictions on the freedom of
movement of the Palestinian people in its own territory, the
impediments to trade and commerce, the demolition of
dwellings, the confiscation of Palestinian lands and the
expansion of Israeli settlements in those territories have
quite logically caused alarm and have been firmly
repudiated by the international community.

We are all aware that this meeting was preceded by
consultations during which only one delegation voiced
opposition to any action being taken - even in the form
of a presidential statement - in response to the events
now under our consideration. And that delegation insisted
instead on a mere statement to the press. The opposition
is isolated, but it does have veto power.

How will the Security Council deal with this
situation, which has come about twice in less than a year?
What about our speeches, our documents and those
hundreds of hours of negotiations on democratization and
reform in the United Nations and in the Security Council?
How can we explain the gulf dividing all the rhetoric
about the new post-cold-war world and the facts of daily
life? How can we prevent the double standard from being
imposed once again on the Security Council?

The Cuban delegation wishes to affirm once more
that the right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination, to have its own State, to live in peace, to
develop its economy and to build a better future for its
children are inalienable rights that cannot be trampled
underfoot or be dependent on the wishes of the occupying
Power or its protectors.

The international community welcomed the peace
agreements hopefully. Today that hope is threatened. The
implementation of the Declaration of Principles and the
continuation of the negotiations on the status of
outstanding issues, including the question of Jerusalem,
are in jeopardy. Today the whole of the peace process is
threatened by actions that take us further away from a
lasting peace for all, one that includes the return of all
occupied Arab territories.

What then are the objectives of these actions? Could
it be that these actions, using the pretext of terrorism -
which deserves our condemnation, and which we
resolutely condemn - might also serve to incite the
forces that oppose the establishment of a climate of peace
between the peoples of Israel and Palestine?

Cuba demands an end to the unlawful actions against
the Palestinian nation and calls for compliance with the
pertinent resolutions of the General Assembly and of the

 

Security Council itself. The new escalation of aggression
against Lebanon, endangering the physical safety of
innocent civilians in that country, has now further
compounded the actions aimed at the Palestinian people and
is a tragic manifestation of the consequences of Israel's
aggressive policy for the peace and security of that part of
the world. The Security Council cannot close its eyes and
remain impassive in the face of these events. Nor can it
permit the imposition of a collaborative silence, which
would distance it from its mandate under the Charter of this
Organization.

Cuba hopes that the United Nations and the Security
Council will fulfil their historic responsibility in respect of

the question of Palestine and of peace and security in the
Middle East.
