Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for a very
comprehensive and insightful briefing. I also thank
Mr. Hagai El-Ad, Executive Director of B'Tselem, for
his contribution.

I would also like to align myself with the
statement to be delivered later today on behalf of the
European Union.

Despite our constant calls for de-escalation in the
Middle East, there has, unfortunately, been no progress
at all. On the contrary, we have failed to prevent further
loss oflife. Recent developments in the Gaza Strip, where
thousands of Palestinians have demonstrated, some of
them violently, are very worrying. Unfortunately, at least
six Palestinians were killed and hundreds injured. Once
again, we call on all sides to act with utmost restraint
in order to avoid further casualties. On the one hand,
Israel should respect the principle of proportionality
in its use of force. On the other, protests at the Gaza
border fence, fuelled by Hamas and the Islamic Jihad,
have led to violence, which affects both parties to the
conflict. Recurring rocket attacks from Gaza aimed
at Israel, as well as the launching of incendiary kites
and balloons from the Strip, which have been aimed at
nearby Israeli communities, are unacceptable and must
stop. Very worrying signals are also coming from the
West Bank, where a Palestinian woman was killed by
stone-throwing. On the Israeli side, three civilians have
also been killed in recent days and weeks, including two
Israelis killed by a Palestinian co-worker at the Barkan
Industrial Park. We firmly condemn such incidents and
call for a swift investigation to bring those responsible
to justice.

The humanitarian situation of 2 million people in
the Gaza Strip is still alarming. Limited access to basic
services, including health care, chronic energy crises
and the lack of fuel, can easily lead to the escalation of
social tensions that may destabilize the situation in the
region even further. In that regard, we commend the
efforts of Special Coordinator Mladenov to alleviate
the humanitarian crisis in the Strip, including the
fuel-delivery deal reached last week, thanks to his
engagement. The danger of Gaza's collapse is real.
That is why we strongly urge all parties to de-escalate,
exercise maximum restraint and prevent incidents that
jeopardize the lives of both Palestinians and Israelis.

Our main goal and commitment should be the
resumption of a meaningful peace process. We still
believe that only by returning to meaningful bilateral
negotiations, based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions and international law, will it be possible to
bring positive input to the process. That is the only path
towards a two-State solution and the resolution of all
final-status issues. The creation of a political horizon,
as well as an appropriate framework for political
progress, will be possible only by working together
with our regional and international partners, starting
with the Middle East Quartet. We wish to especially
underline the engagement of the United States and its
peace proposal, which, when revealed, could help with
the reactivation of the Middle East peace process.

We support the two-State solution, under which
the national aspirations of both parties to the conflict
would be met, including the Palestinian right to self-
determination and independence, as well as the Israeli
right to ensure its security. Unfortunately, the two-State
solution seems to be at risk of fading away. The likely
demolition of Khan Al-Ahmar in the very near future
and subsequent Israeli settlement plans, potentially
splitting the West Bank into two parts, would make the
two-State solution almost impossible.

We are closely following Egyptian-led discussions
on intra-Palestinian reconciliation and hope that
that process will be successful. We, therefore, urge
all Palestinian factions to work together to achieve
the sustainable development of that process, thereby
allowing the Palestinian Authority to resume its full
responsibilities in Gaza. One single and legitimate
Palestinian Authority could be an important step
towards ensuring the unity of a future Palestinian State
and providing a basis for a sustainable peace agreement.

In conclusion, let me underline the severe funding
difficulties of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). Collective efforts by the international
community have enabled UNRWA to continue
providing essential services until the end of this year.
The termination of UNRWA's important activities
could well cause instability and create a vacuum that
would serve only the extremists. We should do our
utmost to preserve the crucial role played by UNRWA
in the region.

