Mr. Arancibia Fernandez (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Under-Secretary
for Humanitarian Affairs General Stephen O'Brien
for his briefing and express our full support for the
work that has been entrusted to him. We also take
this opportunity to acknowledge all of those who are
endeavouring to alleviate the suffering of the civilian
population of Syria.

Six years after the beginning of this serious
conflict, we are dismayed at the situation that the
people of Syria are continuing to face. According to
reports issued by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, led by Under-Secretary-General
O'Brien, today 13.5 million people are in need of
humanitarian assistance, caught up in a conflict that
has resulted in the internal displacement of 6.3 million
people. In the month of March alone, as Mr. O'Brien
has noted, 84,000 people have been newly displaced.

We are deeply concerned to see that despite the
ceasefire that is in effect in keeping with resolution
2336 (2016), of3l December 2016, attacks by the parties
to the conflict against civilians and infrastructure
continue. We firmly believe that the agreements reached
must be implemented and respected so that the civilian
population can remain on the margins of the conflict.

We deplore the fact that, according to the press
statement issued by the World Health Organization on
15 March, more than half of hospitals and primary-care
facilities in Syria are either closed or only partially
functioning and that their capacity has been even
further reduced by indiscriminate attacks on medical
infrastructure. We are concerned at the fact that despite
the ceasefire and regional agreements, security-related
problems in general, particularly in the context of
sporadic disputes, have had an impact on the capacity
to deliver humanitarian assistance to those in need.

We would also call attention to the worrisome
fact that the security forces of the parties involved are
continuing to remove certain first-aid items, including
surgical and other equipment, from the medical supplies
carried by humanitarian assistance convoys, thereby
reducing their capacity and effectiveness to assist those
persons who urgently require such aid.

We remind the parties to the conflict that they
must provide absolute and unconditional access to
humanitarian assistance in Syria. We urge them to abide
by their obligations under international humanitarian
law and to refrain from hampering the delivery of
humanitarian assistance so that it can reach those in
need, whether they be in easy-to-reach or hard-to-reach
areas. There have also been reports of administrative
problems in terms of the approval of monthly plans
for humanitarian assistance, and we therefore call on
all parties involved to ensure greater coordination and
cooperation with the Government of Syria in order to
prevent such problems from recurring.

We deplore the fact that in February, more than 400
innocent civilians, including women and children, lost
their lives owing to cowardly attacks by Da'esh and
to military operations carried out by the forces on the
ground. We unequivocally believe that all actions to
fight terrorism must be taken in a coordinated manner
with the Government so as to prevent the deaths of
innocent civilians, in full respect of the provisions of
resolution 2254 (2015) and 2336 (2016).

In this context, we acknowledge and commend the
tremendous efforts being made by the Government of
Syria to fight Da'esh, a combat that is being waged
on behalf of us all. We strongly condemn all terrorist
attacks as criminal and unjustifiable, regardless oftheir
motivation and wherever, whenever and by whomsoever
committed. We reaffirm the need for all States to
combat terrorism by all means, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and other obligations
under international law.

Lastly, we reiterate that the Plurinational State of
Bolivia firmly and expressly believes that the only way
to put an end to this sensitive conflict is through an
orderly and inclusive Syrian-led political process. We
therefore reiterate our support for the progress made at
the Astana and Geneva meetings. We have high hopes
that these dialogues will bear fruit.

