Let me first start by congratulating the President of the Security Council and the Dominican Republic on their assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month. Even in these unprecedented times, the President has proven, as always, to be exceptional in his leadership. We would also like to express our gratitude to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, and his team for his briefing, tireless efforts and continued coordination with all stakeholders. The meaning behind multilateralism goes back centuries. It is the idea that we can gain more by working together than alone, that cooperation and dialogue can prevent conflict and create opportunity, and that joint solutions are more likely to stick. That is more true today than ever as we witness the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) around the world. According to a 31 March op-ed in the Financial Times, the five world leaders of Jordan, Germany, Singapore, Ecuador and Ethiopia asserted that we need a global alliance to fight the pandemic. They said that the most convincing way to address the global dimension of this crisis is through enhanced cooperation and solidarity, that we must assemble a truly global alliance to mobilize human ingenuity and solidarity and that we must articulate the benefits of a global response as a global public good. Today we call on the international community to take a closer look at how the pandemic is affecting the peoples, economies and countries of the Middle East, which is already wracked by high numbers of unemployed youth, conflict and large numbers of refugees. The impact of COVID-19 threatens to leave in its wake significant economic turmoil across the region. It might also sow the seeds for more social unrest and instability in the region. Jordan fully supports the appeal of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres to warring parties throughout the world for an immediate ceasefire so as to enable the human family to tackle our common enemy: COVID-19. That appeal was the first step to help address the repercussions of the pandemic. Conflicts must stop, especially in the Middle East, and must be replaced with hope, peace and prosperity. Our Palestinian brethren are facing difficult economic conditions that require us to intensify our efforts in support of their perseverance and resilience. We share Mr. Mladenov's concerns about the socioeconomic consequences of the COVID-19 health crisis on the Palestinians, particularly the most vulnerable - those living in Gaza. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees (UNRWA) is in urgent need of support so that it is able to continue to provide its health, education and social services to Palestinian refugees in Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, the West Bank and Gaza - especially at this dire time of the COVID-19 pandemic. Today and every day, we continue to stress the need to guarantee the rights of more than 5 million Palestinian refugees, especially their right of return and compensation. In that context, we welcome the appointment of Mr. Philippe Lazzarini as the Commissioner-General of UNRWA. Along with our partners, we will continue to provide UNRWA's leadership with every possible political and financial support to ensure that the Agency can keep providing vital services to Palestinian refugees and can secure the $14 million it urgently needs to face the coronavirus in its fields of operations, since its current funds will only last through the end of May. The Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Jordan and Sweden and the Commissioner- General of UNRWA held a meeting on 14 April to discuss the critical need for 63/99 64/99 international and regional support of UNRWA as it faces increased financial and operational pressures, compounded by the COVID-19 pandemic. They called on the international community to respond to UNRWA's flash appeal and emphasized the importance of the Agency's work as a critical component for regional development, stability and security. I avail myself of this opportunity today to reaffirm that the establishment of an independent Palestinian State along the 4 June 1967 lines, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side in peace with Israel on the basis of a two-State solution that fulfils the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, in accordance with international law, is the only path to a comprehensive and lasting peace. The achievement of a just and lasting peace that meets all the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people is a strategic Jordanian, Palestinian and Arab choice. Jordan will continue to work with Arab countries and the international community to realize a just and lasting peace. There can be no peace or stability in the region without a just solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. We cannot turn a blind eye to unilateral Israeli measures, such as the threat of annexation of Palestinian lands, the building and expansion of illegal Israeli settlements on occupied Palestinian lands and encroachments on the holy sites in Jerusalem - all aimed at imposing new realities on the ground. Jordan condemns such measures as violations of international law and provocative actions that will push the area towards more conflict and tension. In furtherance of the directives of His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein, custodian of all the Islamic and Christians holy sites in Jerusalem, Jordan will continue to devote all its efforts to protect Jerusalem and its holy sites, preserve their historical and legal status quo and protect their Muslim and Christian identity. We need to safeguard the heritage and peace of Jerusalem, holy city to billions of people around the world. The Hashemite custodianship of Islamic and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem is a duty that Jordan is proud to carry. Jordan will persevere in upholding that responsibility, will continue to strengthen the resolve of Jerusalemites and will counter any attempts to impose new facts on the ground or change the historical and legal status quo of Jerusalem. In conclusion, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan supports every genuine effort aimed at achieving just and comprehensive peace, and we stress the urgency of launching serious and direct negotiations that will resolve all final-status issues within a comprehensive solution, in accordance with the established terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and international law. The Kingdom of Jordan genuinely seeks peace - a true and just peace that preserves the rights of the Palestinian people, guarantees the security of all sides and protects the interests of Jordan, including those related to final-status issues.
