Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): I would like to thank
France for providing us with the opportunity to reflect
on this very important topic, as well as Secretary-
General Guterres for his briefing. We were truly taken
by Ms. Virginia Gamba's briefing.

Hungary aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union, as well as
with that statement delivered by the representative of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children
and Armed Conflict.

Hungary is a State party to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, and is
firmly committed to the protection and promotion of the
rights of children, especially in armed conflicts, where
they are particularly vulnerable. We have endorsed the
Paris Principles and strongly encourage all Member
States to do the same, in addition to endorsing other
relevant international instruments.

We condemn in the strongest terms the abduction,
recruitment, use, abuse, enslavement and trafficking
of children, as well as targeted attacks by non-State
armed groups, including violent extremist and terrorist
groups, on civilian infrastructure, such as schools and
hospitals. Those acts seek to terrorize communities and
deprive them of their very future. Girls are at a higher
risk of sexual violence and abuse, as well as of child,
early and forced marriage. We condemn all perpetrators
and call for holding them accountable.

Compliance with international human rights
and humanitarian law and relevant Security Council
resolutions is key. We should put children first. The
full protection oftheir human rights and respect for the
best interests of children should be taken into account
in counter-terrorism efforts and in peace and ceasefire
agreements, including their treatment as primary
Victims and not as perpetrators when associated
with non-State armed groups. Beyond immediate
humanitarian assistance, long-term assistance is
indispensable, including the reintegration of children,
providing them with a protective environment, ensuring
their access to quality education, and addressing their
specific physical and mental health needs with a view
to creating the basis for transformative and durable
change for society as a whole, leading to sustainable
peace and stability.

In order to ensure the rehabilitation and
reintegration of survivors of sexual violence, we
should promote awareness-raising in communities on
the criminality of recruiting children and fight against
stigmatization, hand in hand with local communities,
civil society, grassroots and faith-based organizations
and moderate religious leaders, with a specific focus
on girls. The presence of gender experts throughout
post-conflict accountability and reintegration is most
valuable in that regard.

Finally, recruitment through social media is an
alarming emerging phenomenon. In order to prevent
and reverse that trend, partnership with the private
sector is indispensable with a View to disseminating
information, providing first-hand examples from
survivors, and creating a positive alternative to
extremism. Hungary stands firm in such efforts.

