Dr. Piot (spoke in French): I wish to thank the
members of the Council and other delegations for their
statements and support for the struggle we are waging.

There are just two points I wish to make. One,
which was raised in a number of statements - first by
Namibia and subsequently by other delegations - is
on access to health care medicine. I wish first to
emphasize that access to health care is now inseparable
from prevention in the struggle against HIV/AIDS,
whereas until recently all the emphasis was placed on
prevention.

At a time when 25 million people in the continent
of Africa and 35 million people worldwide are living
with HIV/AIDS, it would unthinkable not to take care
of those infected. We have had undeniable success in
terms of prevention in poor countries, a fact that was
emphasized on a daily basis during the International
AIDS Conference in Durban.
But very little progress has been achieved in
terms of treating people with HIV/AIDS in developing
countries. The Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), working together with our co-
sponsoring agencies - the World Health Organization,
the United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations
Population Fund and the World Bank - has
undertaken a number of initiatives. Our negotiations
with the pharmaceutical industry are the best known of
them, but we are exploring other avenues, too. It is not
just a matter of the cost of the medicines, but also of
the infrastructure of the health services, training and
the funding of treatment. That is why we must take a
global approach to the problem.

We are also exploring other alternatives, such as
working with the manufacturers of generic
pharmaceutical products. We are researching the
situation of patents on anti-HIV medicine and
disseminating that information to countries. A contact
group has been set up by the Programme Coordinating
Board - the governing body of UNAIDS - to
accompany this process, which, we should be under no
illusions, is very complex and will take a long time.

With regard to the proposal of France for the
convening of an international meeting of interested
parties to try to find a solution to the problem - we
are all a part of the problem - we have agreed with
France to initiate discussions on the specific outcome
expected of such a meeting, where to place it in the
overall context and its relevance to any future special
session of the General Assembly. We would also have
to consider how to provide funding to implement the
conclusions of such a conference, so that it does not
remain a dead letter but produces real results for people
living with HIV/AIDS throughout the world. We would
inevitably have to include other considerations that go
well beyond public health and access to medicines,
such as world trade, tariffs and the protection of
intellectual property.

The second issue raised by France related to the
database that we are in the process of setting up. As I
said in my report, we have already begun our work. For
some countries it has already been set up. I believe
that, working with our partners in the United States
Agency for International Development, the Department
for International Development and the Swedish
International Development Agency, we have already
set up a programme to ensure consistency and to create
a single database.

(spoke in English)

The draft resolution that the Council is
considering is historic: it would be the first recognition
in this body, and by the international community, of a
link between AIDS - an infection - and human
security and development. The link with development
has been made by the Economic and Social Council in
earlier resolutions. I think that we cannot underestimate
how important it is and how much it matters how we
conceptualize AIDS. It really makes a difference.
Whether it is considered merely as a health or medical
problem, or as a development and security problem,
too, dramatically changes the way we tackle it. It
dramatically changes the kind of resources that can be
used to tackle the problem. We have all seen and
learned that this is such a complicated and
overwhelming problem that it is too heavy to put on the
shoulders of one sector or one individual.

I would like to thank the Council for holding this
debate and for considering the draft resolution. This
draft resolution will help us tremendously - not only
UNAIDS and our co-sponsors, but also the community
groups and Governments - in our very difficult work.
But we must also help to implement the draft
resolution, as rightly requested by the representative of
Uganda.

Finally, I would like to thank the Council for its
leadership and, in particular, you, Mr. President; it has
been an honour to be present and to speak at a meeting
chaired by you. I would also like to pay tribute to
Ambassador Holbrooke for his truly entrepreneurial
leadership, which shows that risk-taking should be
considered as something very positive in international
affairs and when it comes to fighting AIDS.

Finally, as I said, for me the Durban Conference
was truly a conference of hope, not because of
scientific or technological breakthroughs - we have
learned that it is not technology that is slowing this
epidemic down - but because of the people,
empowered by their leaders and empowered by
resources. The Council's draft resolution and resolute
engagement provides further hope. It is our role as
leaders to keep alive the hope - hope that is such a
precious commodity when it comes to fighting AIDS;
there is not much more hope besides this leadership. I
thank the Council very much for its leadership.
