Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I am
pleased to address the members of the Council in my
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004),
concerning C6te d'Ivoire.

At the outset, I have the honour to summarize the
main findings contained in the midterm report of the
Group of Experts (S/2014/729), submitted pursuant
to resolution 2153 (2014), and the discussion of the
Group's findings during the Committee's informal
consultations of 10 October.

The Group of Experts made an effort to improve
cooperation with the Ivorian authorities, both through
the Permanent Mission in New York and in Abidjan,
and it noted that communication with the Ivorian
authorities had improved, although, in their view, there
is still room for improvement.

The Group identified the elections of fall 2015
as a decisive moment for both Cote d'Ivoire and the
international community to assess the actual progress
made in the security situation. In that context, the
Coordinator noted that the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process had so far excluded a
considerable number of combatants, and that security-
sector reform continued to be affected by internal
divisions between ex-Forces nouvelles elements and the
regular army, which fought in the post-electoral crisis
of 2011.

The Group expressed concern at the potentially
destabilizing role that some former zone commanders
continue to play or could play in Cote d'Ivoire. In
particular, the Group mentioned Mr. Martin Kouakou
Fofie, in connection with his control over heavy
artillery that had entered the country in violation of
the sanctions regime; and Mr. Issiaka Ouattara, aka
Wattao, concerning his ongoing criminal activities,
which are also related to natural resources.

Concerning natural resources, specifically diamonds,
the Group noted that progress had been made by the
Ivorian authorities, although the majority of the rules
and regulations on the chain of custody of diamonds
remained to be implemented. Illegal gold and diamond
mining, as well as cacao smuggling, continued
throughout the country and also involved foreign
artisanal miners from Burkina Faso, Guinea, Mali and
Togo. The Group also warned that the large presence
of foreign communities in Cote d'Ivoire, including, for
instance, the occupation of the Mt. Peko national park
by 24,000 Burkinabe nationals, could result in swiftly
escalating social unrest.

The Coordinator concluded by informing the
Committee that the Group would continue to focus on
investigations related to elements of the pro-Gbagbo
radical wing operating from Ghana; on links between
the exploitation of natural resources and violations
of the sanctions regime; on the use of revenues from
illegal and parallel taxation systems; on border-control
capacities; and on the presence of large quantities of
weapons and ammunition still unaccounted for in Cote
d'Ivoire.

During the Committee's informal consultations
held on 10 October, delegations commended the Group
for its continuing efforts to monitor and report on the
sanctions regime, and stressed the importance of the
presidential elections of October 2015 as a key point to
determine the actual progress made by Cote d'Ivoire.

Several members of the Committee, while
acknowledging the progress made regarding the security
situation and the growth of the economy, shared the
view that there was still cause for concern, including
with respect to the delay in the implementation of
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes; impunity; armed attacks by unidentified
combatants; activities related to the exploitation of
natural resources, which fuel instability in the country;
and the lack of capacity-building initiatives.

Delegations also invited the Group of Experts to
continue to monitor the developments in the security
situation in Cote d'Ivoire and report accordingly to
the Committee. The Committee agreed to assess the
Group's recommendations and decide upon possible
actions to be taken.

As the Committee is aware, I intend to visit Cote
d'Ivoire from 2 to 7 November. The purpose of that
visit, organized in close cooperation with the United
Nations Operation in cote d'Ivoire, is to highlight the
importance of fully implementing the provisions of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, to collect
firsthand information about the situation in Cote
d'Ivoire, and to establish an ongoing dialogue between
the Ivorian authorities and the Committee. Furthermore,
the visit will serve to assess the challenges that Cote
d'Ivoire faces in implementing the measures imposed by
the Council, which could inform the Security Council
in its future determination of the sanctions regime. It
is my intention to brief both the sanctions Committee
and the Security Council upon my return from Abidjan.

