Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this open debate. I commend
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
for her tireless efforts in executing her mandate and for
her insightful briefing today. I also thank Mr. Herve
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Ms. Yoka Brandt, Deputy Executive
Director of UNICEF; and Mr. Forest Whitaker, Special
Envoy for Peace and Reconciliation of UNESCO, for
their respective briefings and remarks.

I pay special tribute to Ms. Sandra Uwiringiyimana
for sharing her tragic story, which, unfortunately, has
been the story of the Great Lakes region for the past 20
years. Ms. Uwiringiyimana's call for the international
community to go beyond acknowledgment of the
Gatumba massacre and ensure that the perpetrators are
brought to justice deserves our undivided attention. As
she requested, we must take action for the nightmares
to stop. Indeed, the Gatumba massacre she survived
10 years ago and the mass atrocities committed in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo by the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) and
other armed forces and militias on the ground, mainly
against the Rwandaphone community, are consequences
of the proliferation of the same genocidal ideology that
nearly destroyed my country, Rwanda, 20 years ago.

The situation of children in armed conflict has a
particular resonance for Rwandans. In 1994, children
were killed and maimed for being born Tutsi. Others
were recruited into the Interahamwe militias, for which
they committed atrocities. That is not to mention the
children who were victims of bombings, including of
schools, hospitals and churches. Unfortunately, 20 years
later, children continue to bear the brunt of increasing
conflicts, as regularly reported by the Secretary-
General in his reports on children and armed conflict.
Violations and abuses against children have even taken
a barbaric turn, as evidenced by the use of chemical
weapons against children in Syria, the mass rapes of
children and mothers in Minova, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and the abduction and enslavement of
young girls by Boko Haram, the Islamic State, Jabhat
al-Nusra and other terrorist organizations.

Children, like every human being, should have the
right to life, but children should also have the right to
childhood and education. They should not be recruited
to kill or deprived ofjoy and innocence. Rather, they
should be enrolled in schools to be educated, succeed
and contribute to a better world. In that regard, Rwanda
is concerned at the increasing targeting of schools and
hospitals in armed conflicts and the utilization of those
facilities for military purposes. We are also alarmed by
the continued use of child soldiers by armed groups,
including terrorist organizations.
More alarming, however, is the fact that a number of
Government security forces remain on the list contained
in the annexes to the Secretary-General's reports for
violations against children. We therefore reiterate
our unreserved support to the United Nations global
Children, Not Soldiers campaign to end the recruitment
and use of children by Government security forces by
the end of 2016. We endorse, in that respect, the call
by the Secretary-General to all concerned States to
continue with determined and tangible steps to finalize
the development and implementation of related action
plans.

We recognize the primary role of national
Governments in protecting their citizens, including
children. We are convinced that the responsibility to
protect, as enshrined in paragraphs 138 and 139 of
the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1) and as reaffirmed by resolution 2150
(2014), starts with our collective resolve to protect
our children. It is important that the international
community, in particular the United Nations, increase
support to States for providing protection and relief
to children affected by armed conflict. In that regard,
the Rights Up Front initiative, the deployment of high-
ranking child protection advisers in peacekeeping
operations and the inclusion of child rights and
protection in training programmes for peacekeepers are
all important initiatives that will enable us to live up to
our responsibility to protect children.

The United Nations system, through the work of
the Security Council and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, has demonstrated its continued commitment
to advancing the protection of children agenda.
Nevertheless, the plight of innocent children who
remain Victims demands that we reflect on why effective
implementation remains a challenge. We therefore need
to redouble our efforts and find ways to avoid children
paying the heaviest price for the wars that adults choose
to fight.

In that regard, the United Nations system must
be consistent in its protection agenda and ensure that
persistent perpetrators, such as the FDLR, which
is a genocidal movement subject to United Nations
sanctions and listed in the annexes of the Secretary-
General reports on the subject since 2002, are not
allowed to continue recruiting, killing and maiming
civilians, particularly women and children, with
virtual impunity. In the same vein, the United Nations
should ensure the strict implementation of a policy that
prohibits the United Nations from collaborating with
entities listed in those annexes, including the United
Nations mandated missions, until the Secretary-General
certifies the full implementation of their action plan to
end and prevent violations against children.

While we strive to improve accountability for
grave violations committed against children in conflict
situations, attention should also be given to ensuring
that resolute support and cooperation are provided to
States in strengthening the rule of law. Therefore, the
United Nations should build on existing frameworks and
continue to cooperate with Governments and regional
organizations in order to find sustainable solutions
to the protection of children. In the same spirit, it is
also imperative to tackle the structural causes that
lead to conflicts and the recruitment of children by
armed groups, while improving living conditions and
providing alternatives for children, particularly through
education.

To conclude, I wish to acknowledge the participation
in this debate of Mr. Jean Asselborn, Minister for
Foreign and European Affairs of Luxembourg. 1 take
this opportunity to commend his country, through
Ambassador Sylvie Lucas, for its dedication to the cause
of children and armed conflict, including through its
effective leadership of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, established pursuant to resolution
1612 (2005).

