Mr. Pascoe: I appreciate this opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the situation in Libya, as
requested in resolution 1973 (2011). Let me start with a
brief summary of the latest developments in Libya.

It has now been three months since the political
crisis began. Fighting between Government and
opposition forces continues, particularly in the western
part of the country. The NATO-led Operation Unified
Protector has intensified its operations in Libya, with
repeated claims by the Government of Libya of civilian
causalities. Defections from the regime seem to again
be on the rise, including those of eight generals from
the Libyan military who are now in Italy, along with
many of their officers. They have appealed to others in
the military to join them and to stop the atrocities
being committed against their people.

Opposition forces have gained control of Misrata
and reportedly pushed Government troops westward,
but there continues to be fighting on the outskirts of
Misrata and the city is only accessible by sea. The
Government forces have intensified their campaign to
take strategic positions in the western Nafusa
mountains, especially in areas surrounding the city of
Yafran, where more than 54,000 Libyans have fled into
Tunisia.

The battle between the opposition and
Government forces continues on the Libyan-Tunisian
border and has at times spilled over into Tunisia.
Tensions between refugees and local residents along
the border have escalated. Unrest at Choucha Camp in
Tunisia on 23 and 24 May resulted in the deaths of four
camp residents and the injury of 19 others. On 27 May,
two-thirds of the camp was looted or burned. The
humanitarian community and the Tunisian Government
2

are now discussing the security, location and
composition of the camp in Tunisia. Approximately
3,000 refugees, mainly from cote d'Ivoire, Eritrea and
Somalia, live in the camp.

The human rights situation remains deeply
troubling. In her briefing to the Human Rights Council
yesterday, the High Commissioner for Human Rights
condemned the brutality and magnitude of measures
taken by the Government of Libya and described its
actions as being "particularly shocking in their outright
disregard for basic human rights". We have also seen
very serious reports of sexual violence against women,
including gang rapes by the military forces.

Since the start of the conflict, about 893,000
people, mostly migrants, have left Libya and have not
returned. Some 5,000 people remain stranded at border
points in Egypt, Tunisia and Niger. There are also
reports of many Chadian workers stranded at the
border with Chad. Perhaps 50,000 internally displaced
people are living in settlements in the east. Some are
returning to Ajdabiya. To date, around 14,000 people
have arrived by boat in Italy and Malta; at least 1,200
people have died or are missing as a result of the
journey. Hundreds of people who fled to Tunisia and
Egypt in recent weeks have crossed back into Libya,
apparently planning to board ships to Europe.

According to the Transitional National Council
(TNC), 6,000 families in Benghazi district require
assistance. Although there are some medicine
shortages, stocks of food, water and medical items are
sufficient in opposition-controlled areas. However, fuel
and cash shortages continue to affect daily life. In
Tripoli, shortages of fuel, infant formula, food
commodities and drug are being reported. Food
availability in the west is estimated to be sufficient for
a month. The Government of Libya has requested the
intervention of the United Nations to allow shipments
of gasoline to be permitted to enter the country to
ensure the continuation of basic services.

The TNC estimates that it has only 40 per cent of
the funds needed to cover its budget for April and May.
Over 13,700 people have been evacuated from Misrata,
and the situation has eased in the city. On 21 and
22 May, the seventh ship of the International
Organization for Migration to Misrata delivered
additional food supplies and allowed for the
deployment of an inter-agency team to carry out an
initial assessment of humanitarian needs in Misrata.
11-35804
The revised $407-million regional flash appeal
for the Libyan crisis is currently funded at about 46 per
cent, with $185 million committed and over $4 million
in pledges. The revised appeal has a stronger focus on
humanitarian action inside Libya, and targets 1.7
million people in need.

The United Nations has established international
presences in Tripoli, Benghazi and Tobruk. As
members of the Council know, due to the deteriorating
security situation United Nations staff in Tripoli had to
relocate on 2 May, but after discussions with the
Government on security and other arrangements for
humanitarian agencies, a United Nations humanitarian
team, led by the Humanitarian Coordinator, returned to
Tripoli on 29 May and will stay on for 10 days.

Please allow me to outline some of the political
efforts of the Secretary-General, his Special Envoy and
other actors.

The parties in Libya remain far apart on even
beginning negotiations to resolve the conflict. The
Libyan Government has repeatedly called for a
ceasefire, including an end to NATO operations, as a
prerequisite for negotiations. For its part, the TNC
maintains that negotiations on a ceasefire and other
related aspects can start only with the removal from
power of Colonel Al-Qadhafi and members of his
family, and the withdrawal of the Libyan army from
cities forcibly occupied after the outbreak of hostilities.

The Secretary-General and his Special Envoy to
Libya, Mr. Abdel-Elah Al-Khatib, the African Union
(AU) and other stakeholders have been making every
effort to narrow these differences and to begin a
credible negotiating process. The Secretary-General
has been in almost daily discussions with Libyan
authorities and world leaders on the situation in Libya.
In several telephone conversations with the Libyan
Prime Minister, Mr. A1 Baghdadi Ali Al-Mahmoudi, the
latest of which took place on 24 May, the Secretary-
General reiterated the urgent need for a real ceasefire
and serious negotiations on a transition to a
Government that fully meets the aspirations of the
Libyan people. The Prime Minister has stuck to the
stated positions of the Government and called for an
end to the coalition bombing campaign.

The Secretary-General attended the extraordinary
summit of the Assembly of the African Union on
25 May, which was devoted mainly to discussions on
the Libyan crisis. During those discussions, which also
11-35804
included the Special Envoy and me, a number of open
and frank discussions took place with leaders of
African countries and the AU. Since the Security
Council had had similar discussions a few days earlier
with the African Union Peace and Security Council, I
will not go into detail here today.

While there were strongly divided comments by
leaders at the meeting, the final communique stated
that only a political solution to the current conflict
would make it possible to promote sustainable peace in
Libya and fulfil the legitimate aspirations of the Libyan
people. It called for an end to the coalition bombing
campaign. It also called on the African Union High-
Level Committee on Libya to Visit Libya, and the AU
Peace and Security Council to consider the deployment
of AU observers and monitors to Libya, dispatch a
ministerial delegation to New York to interact with the
Security Council, and take practical steps to engage
concerned partners on the AU road map.

At the margins of the summit, the Secretary-
General held a meeting with the Libyan Foreign
Minister, Mr. Abdulati Al-Obeidi, and close
confidantes of Colonel Al-Qadhafi. The Secretary-
General reaffirmed that his Special Envoy is ready to
conduct indirect talks with both sides and emphasized
the need for serious detailed dialogue and a cessation
of hostilities by both sides. He said that Mr. Al-Khatib
would be returning to Tripoli soon for substantive
discussions that could lead to a solution responding to
the will of the Libyan people. The Foreign Minister
and his delegation noted that they were willing to work
with the Special Envoy and asked the United Nations
and the AU to declare a ceasefire that would include a
stop to NATO air strikes, and then to organize
elections. He proposed that an election be organized by
the AU and the United Nations, adding that Colonel
Qaddafi would respect the will of the people in such an
election.

At the Group of Eight (G-8) summit in Deauville,
France, the Secretary-General called for increased
support for humanitarian assistance for the affected
populations in the country and in neighbouring
countries. He met with many leaders, including the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Jean Ping, and the Secretary-General of the League
of Arab States, Mr. Amre Moussa. In their final
declaration, G-8 leaders demanded the immediate
cessation of the use of force against civilians by the
Libyan regime forces, as well as the end of all
3
incitement to hostility and violence against the civilian
population. They stressed the central role of the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy to Libya, Mr. Al-
Khatib, in facilitating an inclusive and lasting political
solution, based on the legitimate demands of the
Libyan people and taking into account the role of
regional organizations, the League of Arab States and
the African Union.

For his part, the Secretary-General's Special
Envoy to Libya, Mr. Al-Khatib, has focused on two key
issues in the past month.

The first has been to ensure that the initiatives of
various Member States and regional organizations are
coordinated and that the Government and the
Transitional National Council are receiving similar
messages from the international community. The
Special Envoy has also been consulting closely with
interested Governments, the African Union, the League
of Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the European Union, including at the
30 May meeting of all five organizations in Cairo.

Secondly, the Special Envoy has been working to
narrow the differences between the two parties so as to
get indirect talks under way. He presented his
proposals to Government officials in Tripoli on 15 May
and to the interim TNC representatives in Doha on
24 May. The proposals revolve around the need to end
hostilities, agree on a transitional arrangement, provide
safe humanitarian access and fully implement Security
Council resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011). The
Special Envoy held extensive discussions with both
parties on a general framework for negotiations and on
their perspectives on how to meet the legitimate
demands of the Libyan people in establishing
constitutional and democratic governance.

Although their positions remain far apart, the
authorities in Tripoli and the representatives of the
TNC reiterated their continued commitment to work
through the Special Envoy. The Special Envoy will
return to Tripoli this week, if possible, and report to the
Council on his efforts at its convenience.

As the Security Council is aware, the Secretary-
General initiated a regional and international
partnership on Libya by co-chairing a meeting with the
African Union, the European Union, the League of
Arab States and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference on 14 April. I chaired a similar meeting on
5 May in Rome. The Secretary-General also held
extensive discussions in Addis Ababa with African
Union members. A meeting was held yesterday in
Cairo, chaired by the outgoing Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States and attended by Special Envoy
Al-Khatib. It focused on coordinating positions to end
the conflict. Again, the discussions were frank and
involved considerable give-and-take on how to tackle
the issues. In all of those meetings, the United Nations
has sought to maintain emphasis on a unified message
that holds the possibility of early success.

On 30 May, President Jacob Zuma of South
Africa visited Tripoli and held discussions with
Colonel Al-Qadhafi. I am sure that the South African
representative will have more authoritative statements,
but according to press reports, President Zuma
emphasized the African Union's road map and the
communique of the African Summit. It seems apparent
from the reports that Colonel Al-Qadhafi held to the
well-known Libyan positions repeated by his Prime
Minister and other Government spokesmen.

Paragraphs 4, 7 and 8 of resolution 1973 (2011)
request Member States and regional organizations or
arrangements concerned to inform the Secretary-
General immediately of the measures they are taking
regarding the protection of civilians, humanitarian
exemptions and compliance with the ban imposed on
flights in Libyan airspace. Since the adoption of this
resolution, the Secretary-General has received more
than 40 communications from more than 20 Member
States and regional organizations and arrangements,
informing him of actions taken with respect to the
implementation of the resolution. The majority of those
communications relate to paragraphs 4 and 8, and the
remainder relate to humanitarian exemptions under
paragraph 7.

In addition to the letters addressed to the
Secretary-General, the Special Envoy has received
more than 20 letters and documents from the
Government of Libya and the Interim Transitional
National Council stating their overall positions and
views. In their letters, the Government of Libya state
mainly that they have continued to comply with
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011), allowing the
passage of relevant ships carrying humanitarian aid to
those in need, and call upon the United Nations to
assist in finding measures to stop bombing of civilians.
Through their letters, the Government have requested
the assistance of the United Nations to use foreign
assets to buy such basic necessities as food supplies
11-35804
and medicines and to allow fuel for basic services.
They also call on the United Nations to assist in ending
the military operations.

Last month, I provided the Council with an
update on the letter of 26 April from NATO's Secretary
General addressed to the Secretary-General conveying
its first monthly report. Since then, we have received
one weekly report, on 6 May, and a second monthly
report, dated 26 May. Both reports have been circulated
to Security Council members.

In accordance with paragraph 24 of resolution
1973 (2011), the Secretary-General has appointed
seven experts to serve on the Panel of Experts
established by that resolution to assist the Committee
established pursuant to paragraph 24 of resolution 1970
(2011) in carrying out its mandate as specified in
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011). The experts
were selected on the basis of their professional merit,
with due consideration for geographical diversity,
gender balance and focus of expertise. They are
expected to meet with the Committee for the first time
on the 6 June.

Let me conclude by making three points.

First, protection of civilians in areas where the
fighting is taking place still remains a fundamental
concern. I reiterate the Secretary-General's appeal for
increased support for humanitarian assistance to
11-35804
affected populations both in Libya and in neighbouring
countries. All parties to the conflict must of course take
measures to spare civilians from the effects of the
hostilities.

Secondly, in the political process, our immediate
goal is to secure a commitment from the parties to
engage in indirect negotiations based on the proposals
presented to them by the Special Envoy. We believe
that this process is crucial in our efforts to find a
lasting solution to the crisis. It also responds to the
legitimate demands of the Libyan people and to
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011).

Finally, we are making progress on contingency
plans for post-conflict peacebuilding. As the Secretary-
General mentioned in Addis Ababa last week, the
Special Adviser, Mr. Ian Martin, has initiated a pre-
assessment process focusing on six areas: political,
security apparatus, rule of law and human rights,
economic recovery, public administration and physical
infrastructure. Of course, the plan will be guided by the
principle that the fate of Libya is to be decided by the
Libyan people and that their representatives must
determine what assistance they would like, in the end,
from the international community.

