Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Allow me to begin,
Mr. President, by expressing our sincere thanks to you
for convening this open debate. My appreciation also
goes to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
briefing.

I wish to associate my statement with the
statements to be delivered later by the representatives
of the Islamic Republic of Iran and Djibouti on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, respectively.
We gather today at a time when trepidation remains
persistent in the Middle East and the weapons are far
from silent, but when there is genuine hope in the
hearts of all men and women who care about Palestine
and about peace that remarkable progress can be made
in 2014.

We are pleased to recall that you, Mr. President,
assured us last week at the meeting ofthe Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People that the Palestinian question remained not only
a priority for the Council but was also its greatest test.
It is the strong belief of Indonesia that the ability of the
Council to pass that test and bring about a permanent
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict will not only
elevate its stature but also set a positive example with
regard to all the other challenges it confronts. The
question is whether the Council has the political will
and courage.

The pursuit of peace is now even more important
following the overwhelming decision of the General
Assembly last year to designate 2014 as the International
Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian People. On that
subject, Indonesia welcomes the continuous efforts of
the United States Secretary of State to convince the
relevant parties to move forward towards a firm and
lasting resolution.

Other issues concerning the Palestinian people that
Indonesia would like to highlight today are social and
humanitarian issues. We note with dismay continued
Israeli practices that contravene its responsibilities
as the occupying Power. Israel remains persistent in
its violation of the human rights of the Palestinian
people. While we welcome Israel's recent freeing
of 104 prisoners, it is deeply perturbing to know
that it still detains hundreds of Palestinian children,
including those below 16 years of age. Indonesia is
also saddened to learn that thousands of Palestinians
are still languishing in Israeli prisons, suffering in poor
conditions and lacking medical facilities.

Indonesia is appalled to learn of Israeli policies
involving the destruction of wells and water
infrastructure during military operations, thereby
denying many Palestinians access to clean water. We
also demand that Israel take the necessary measures to
prevent Israeli settlers from attacking Palestinians and
from desecrating religious sites in the City of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif.

Indonesia remains steadfast in its belief that the
Israeli occupation of Palestine is itself a violation of
international law and international human rights law.
Accordingly, we join other States to demand that Israel
make the best use of the remaining three-month period
of negotiation to rectify its illegal actions and start
respecting the will of the international community.

Indonesia reiterates its support of the road map
of the Quartet and the vision of two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and under the
parameters established in the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the road map of the Quartet, the Arab Peace
Initiative, the three phases of the Madrid road map and
the principle of land for peace. We believe that the
establishment of an independent state of Palestine, on
the basis of the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem
as its capital, is the only way to set things right for the
Palestinian people. To that end, we again call upon
Israel to resist the constant temptation to ignore the
legitimate aspirations of Palestinians concerning the
core issues of settlements, the status of Jerusalem,
refugees, security and permanent borders.

Disappointingly, Israel continues to ignore the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
and the resolution of the General Assembly concerning
its illegal construction of the separation wall in
the West Bank, including in and around occupied
Jerusalem. Israel has no right to separate Palestinians
from Palestinians, and Palestinians from their land.
Their illegal settlement policy remains the biggest
obstruction to peace in the Middle East.

Indonesia's support for the Palestinian people
is unwavering. With that in mind, it gives me great
pleasure to announce that Indonesia will host the
Conference on Cooperation among East Asian
Countries for Palestinian Development later this year.
The Conference, which the Government of Japan
initiated last year, will reinforce various existing
initiatives aimed at bolstering Palestinian development.

I should now like to turn to the issue of Syria. For
more than two years, an extreme humanitarian tragedy
has unfolded in Syria. Death, destruction, displacement
and misery persist despite the strong words that have
been spoken and appeals that have been made at various
Security Council meetings. It is time for members of the
Council to set aside their political differences and work

together earnestly in the cause of peace. The Council
must underline its relevance by using its authority to
enforce peace, partly by ensuring that its decisions are
implemented by the parties concerned.

Indonesia reiterates that the conflict in Syria must
stop immediately. All parties must cease acts of violence
and hostility, uphold international humanitarian law
and ensure unfettered and safe humanitarian access
for those in need. Accordingly, Indonesia welcomes the
convening of the second Geneva Conference on Syria,
which is scheduled to take place within a few days. Our
fervent hope is that all parties to the Syrian conflict
will heed the appeal of the international community
and participate in the Conference in good faith. We
believe that an inclusive political process that reflects
the wishes of all Syrians is the only possible way to
reach peace.

