Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine): In adopting this draft
resolution, the Security Council will dot the i's with
regard to an issue that has been discussed from practically
the moment it arose. The international community is
resolved to eliminate one of the bloodiest conflicts in
Europe since the end of the Second World War.

During the past year, we have very often heard the
question of whether implementation of the Dayton
Agreement was effective enough. Ukraine believes that
the answer should be affirmative.

One cannot but recognize that an effective separation
of the conflicting parties, a continuing ceasefire and peace
now prevail in the region. No Bosnian has died in a
military conflict in 1996. My delegation believes - and
we see that this idea is fully shared by other States -
that the military aspect of the Dayton Agreement, which
has been implemented to a large extent, can be considered
to be a significant success of the international community.

Having fulfilled its mission, the Implementation
Force (IFOR) nevertheless continues to play an essential
role. It will be years before bitterness and revenge will
finally yield to tolerance and reconciliation. We cannot
leave the peoples of Bosnia half way to peace. Having
engaged itself in the peace mission, the international
community should make it successful. At the same time,
we strongly believe that the ultimate responsibility for the

 

establishment of a lasting peace in the region lies on the
shoulders of the peoples living there.

We have to realize that, while the war in Bosnia has
stopped, peace in Bosnia is far from being completely
restored. A number of major causes of the civil war in
Bosnia and Herzegovina have yet to be removed and it is
only the continuing sound international presence, both
military and civilian, that can prevent the resumption of
hostilities even on a minor scale.

For this very reason, our delegation supports the
provisions of part II of the draft resolution which stipulate
the continued presence of a multinational stabilization force
(SFOR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina for a planned period of
18 months.

Such a mission will contribute to the promotion of
confidence- and security-building measures and ensure the
full implementation of the Peace Agreement on subregional
arms control. At the same time, SFOR will give wide-
ranging support to the economic reconstruction and
rehabilitation of civil society in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Realizing its responsibility for the maintenance of
peace and security in Europe, my country is willing to
participate in a new operation in Bosnia in 1997. In spite of
the extremely difficult domestic economic situation, the
Government of Ukraine is making every effort to allocate
the necessary financial resources that will enable it to
continue dispatching the Ukrainian battalion currently
serving with IFOR.

The presence of military force alone, however strong
it may be, will not immediately lead to peace in Bosnia.
Peace-building is a difficult and time-consuming process
that demands patience as well as financial and material
resources. My delegation believes that only economic
reconstruction and development in Bosnia and Herzegovina
can help to create a strong unified State.

In our opinion, in the process of restoring and
reconstructing Bosnia and Herzegovina, top priority should
be given to projects which would help to promote economic
cooperation between the Federation and the Republika
Srpska, as well as within the Federation itself. Such joint
projects should, first of all, provide for the development of
common transport and energy systems and the construction
of settlements for refugees and displaced persons. All ethnic
groups living in Bosnia and Herzegovina should enjoy
equally the advantages of peaceful economic reconstruction,
including international financial assistance. My delegation
supports the provisions of the Action Plan adopted by the
Peace Implementation Council at its recent Conference in
London on 5 December 1996, which insist on the
continued linkage between the provision of reconstruction
assistance and the commitment of the authorities of the
Federation and Republika Srpska to implementing the full
scope of the Peace Agreement.

Ukraine attaches special importance to the
involvement of its industrial potential in the process of
the economic restoration and reconstruction of Bosnia's
destroyed economy. The representatives of our country
have repeatedly stated that such participation will be
considered compensation for the billions of dollars which
Ukraine lost as a result of its strict observance of
economic sanctions imposed by the United Nations
Security Council against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). It should be taken
into account that, in suffering these economic losses,
Ukraine directly contributed to the initiation of the
Dayton process.

With regard to part III of the draft resolution, my
delegation shares the View expressed in paragraph 29. The
successful implementation of the tasks of the International
Police Task Force definitely depends on the quality,
experience and professional skills of its personnel. At
present, 33 Ukrainian policemen are carrying out their
duties in Bosnia and Herzegovina. All of them have taken
special training courses organized by the Ministry of
Internal Affairs of Ukraine and have been acquainted with
the traditions and cultures of the peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We are pleased that their impartial and
unbiased attitude towards the representatives of all ethnic
groups in Bosnia is contributing to the strengthening of
law and order in that country.

The problems of mine clearance present a serious
obstacle to a stable, peaceful life and constitute a direct
threat to the safety of international military and civilian
personnel. That is why we consider it necessary to
intensify efforts to solve these problems. My country is
ready to dispatch its military experts to train Bosnians in
mine-clearance techniques and to participate in the future
programmes carried out by the United Nations Mine
Action Centre. My delegation is satisfied that this issue
has found its reflection in the aforementioned Action
Plan.

The nearly five-year history of the conflict on the
territory of the former Yugoslavia has convincingly
proved that the perception of the Roman historian who

 

once wrote that certain peace is better and safer than
anticipated victory has finally been understood by the
international community, as well as by the parties in
conflict. It makes us more confident in the final success of
our common endeavour.

