Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): The Netherlands
has voted for this resolution with a sense of relief. This
does not stem from a feeling that we are concluding a
military operation we should not have been engaged in.
We sincerely hope that the few delegations which have
maintained that the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) air strikes against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia were a violation of the United Nations Charter
will one day begin to realize that the Charter is not the
only source of international law.

The Charter, to be sure, is much more specific on
respect for sovereignty than on respect for human rights,
but since the day it was drafted the world has witnessed
a gradual shift in that balance, making respect for human
rights more mandatory and respect for sovereignty less
absolute. Today, we regard it as a generally accepted rule
of international law that no sovereign State has the right
to terrorize its own citizens. Only if that shift is a reality
can we explain how on 26 March the Russian-Chinese
draft resolution branding the NATO air strikes a violation
of the Charter could be so decisively rejected by 12 votes
to 3.

This is not a time to be triumphant about that. One
day, when the Kosovo crisis will be a thing of the past,
we hope that the Security Council will devote a debate to
the balance between respect for national sovereignty and
territorial integrity on the one hand and respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms on the other hand, as
well as to the shift to which I referred. This will not be
a pro-Western or anti-third-world debate. The shift from

 

sovereignty to human rights spells uncertainty, and we all
have our difficulties with it. But the Security Council
cannot afford to ignore the phenomenon. Times have
changed, and they will not change back. One simply cannot
imagine a replay in the twenty-first century of the shameful
episode of the 1980s, when the United Nations was
apparently more indignant at a Vietnamese military
intervention in Cambodia, which almost all Cambodians
had experienced as a liberation, than at three years of
Khmer Rouge genocide. As a result of that misconception,
the large majority of delegations, including my own,
allowed the Khmer Rouge to continue to occupy the
Cambodian seat in the General Assembly for more than a
decade.

Today, 20 years later, it seems inconceivable that
respect for national sovereignty and territorial integrity
could once more prompt so many States to pursue such a
mistaken policy.

