Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
Mr. Francois Fall, Special Representative of the
Secretary General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), for
his briefing on the political and security situations in
the Central African region, including the Lake Chad
basin, and the activities of UNOCA during the last
six months. I also want to thank Ms. Reena Ghelani,
Director for Operations and Advocacy of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, for her briefing.

We note that the major political developments
in the region during the period covered by the
Secretary-General's report (S/2018/1065) were
related to the holding of elections and preparations
for the presidential, parliamentary and local elections
scheduled to be held on 23 December in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In that connection, we want
to congratulate Mr. Fall for using his good offices in
helping to prevent election-related violence. We would
also like to recognize the contributions of the regional
actors, international partners, religious organizations
and local community leaders who are helping to resolve
hostilities, in some cases by facilitating the cessation of
military or insurgency operations.

Fights for resources in areas such as illegal mining,
the exploitation of wildlife and forest products, cattle
rustling and transhumance-related clashes are taking
more aggressive forms in some countries in the region.
In that connection, we want to encourage UNOCA
to continue its critical role, particularly in support of
inter-State and intercultural mediation efforts.

We should encourage combined mediation efforts,
law enforcement and political dialogue involving
local communities in order to reduce long-term
socioeconomic tensions. United Nations peacekeeping
missions and other agencies must work to help reduce
and avoid cross-border conflicts. The implementation
of the peace process in the Central African Republic led
by the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation,
particularly efforts aimed at achieving a direct dialogue
between the Government and the main armed groups,
continues to be a priority. Similarly, the progress
made in implementing the 31 December 2016 political
agreement in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
an important step towards ensuring long-term stability
in the region, and UNOCA's support to those efforts is
also instrumental.

As we all agree, despite many efforts, the armed
violence in the eastern and north-eastern regions of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the Central
African Republic, as well as the recent repeated attacks
by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad basin and other
intercommunal conflicts there continue to present
serious obstacles to peace and stability in the region.
The deteriorating humanitarian situations in the Central
African Republic and the Lake Chad basin, chiefly
owing to land degradation and diminishing resources,
are creating chronic food insecurity, malnutrition
and loss of livelihoods. Those are hard facts that
cannot be ignored, and it is important to ensure that
the international community and the Council provide
the necessary support. We should also note the
displacements that are triggering humanitarian crises,
including return movements that are exacerbating the
problem in the Democratic Republic of the Congo's
greater Kasai region and Tanganyika province. We
agree with the Secretary-General's report that the
increased frequency of attacks by armed groups in
the Beni area, which continue to hinder the efforts to
prevent the Ebola virus disease outbreak in North Kivu
province from spreading, has been another challenge
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We believe that the efforts of countries in the Central
African region to stabilize their economic and monetary
situations, as well as the reform activities of the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community aimed
at improving real gross domestic product growth, are
an encouraging sign of the prospects for development.
The support of the international community in that
regard will be vital to ensuring success across the
entire spectrum of socioeconomic development in the
region. Enhancing coordination between the United
Nations, the African Union, the Southern African
Development Community, the Economic Community
of Central African States, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and other international
partners will be essential to facilitating coherent and
effective stability, reinforced by the impetus provided
by economic development.

We support the recent validation of a stabilization,
recovery and resilience strategy for the region by the
African Union and the Lake Chad Basin Commission in
the areas affected by activities of Boko Haram, as well
as the continued commitment of the troop-contributing
countries to the Multinational Joint Task Force in their
fight against terrorism and transboundary crimes. We
also appreciate the decision of the African Union Peace
and Security Council concerning the need to maintain
the African Union's regional cooperation initiative for
the elimination of the Lord's Resistance Army, as the
security vacuum in the area is worsening. In Cameroon,
we encourage the primacy of internal consultations,
inclusive dialogue and silent diplomacy.

In conclusion, we strongly support UNOCA's
continued efforts and the personal commitment of
Special Representative Fall, who is working with all
regional and international actors, particularly with a
View to implementing the African Union's vision of
silencing the guns in Africaby2020. That unquestionably
requires a holistic and coordinated effort.

