Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti, which
includes Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
France, Guatemala, the United States, Uruguay,
Venezuela and my country, Peru.

I would like to join other speakers in regretting the
tragic loss of life and devastation wrought by Hurricane
Matthew and to share in the expressions of solidarity
with the people of Haiti.

The Group of Friends welcomes the presence of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore, and wishes to thank her for
her comprehensive briefing and for the hard work she
is doing.

Strengthening the rule of law and democratic
institutions, establishing a political culture conducive
to democratic stability and improving socioeconomic
conditions are key elements needed to achieve greater
security, stability and prosperity in Haiti. In that regard,
the Group of Friends deeply regrets the damage caused
by Hurricane Matthew. The Group of Friends calls
upon the international community for humanitarian
assistance and is pleased that the United Nations
system and the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) have been assisting in evacuations
of vulnerable communities and other responses to the
emergency needs of the country.

The Group of Friends recognizes the postponement
of the 9 October elections established in the revised
electoral calendar as a result of Hurricane Matthew,
but strongly hopes that the consequences of Hurricane
Matthew will not jeopardize the deadlines of the
revised calendar. Even with the devastation brought
about by Hurricane Matthew, we urge the Government
of Haiti to hold elections as soon as possible. The final
results of the presidential election should be announced
by 30 January 2017, and the installation of the newly
elected President should take place on 7 February 2017,
in accordance with the Haitian Constitution.

The Group of Friends underscores the importance
of the Government of Haiti, the Provisional Electoral
Council, as well as political parties and all political
actors, ensuring that the upcoming rounds of elections
are conducted in a free, fair, inclusive, peaceful,
transparent, credible and democratic manner and
in accordance with the electoral law. The Group of
Friends welcomes the efforts carried out by the Special
Representative to promote the continuation of dialogue
among all the national actors in order to strengthen the
political process.

The Group of Friends recognizes the increased
capacity of the Haitian National Police and
acknowledges the important role of MINUSTAH in
ensuring stability and security in Haiti. In the light
of Haiti's current security challenges, including those
related to the ongoing elections, the Secretary-General
should continue monitoring closely the situation on the
ground. In line with his latest report (S/2016/753), the
Secretary-General should conduct a strategic assessment
mission to Haiti by the end of the new mandate, which
is to say, before April 2017, and preferably after the
inauguration of a newly elected President and, on
that basis, should present his recommendations on the
possible withdrawal of MINUSTAH and the future
presence and role of the United Nations in Haiti in his
next report to the Security Council.

The Group of Friends expresses gratitude to the
personnel of MINUSTAH and to their countries and
pays tribute to those injured or killed in the line of duty.
The Group of Friends commends the wide range of
reconstruction efforts in Haiti and the successful work
done by MINUSTAH's military engineering units.
The Group of Friends reiterates the importance
of the commitment by the Government of Haiti to
strengthening the rule of law and to making further
progress in the judiciary and the security sectors. In
that respect, the Group would like to welcome the
ongoing strengthening, professionalization and reform
of the Haitian National Police, to reiterate that police
capacity-building should remain a most critical task for
MINUSTAH and to note that the Haitian National Police
has continued to implement its 2012-2016 development
plan, and to note as well MINUSTAH's support for the
development of the 2017-2021 strategic plan.

The Group of Friends notes with concern the slow
progress towards consolidating the rule of law and calls
on the Haitian Government to address the deficiencies
in the justice and corrections systems, prolonged
pretrial detention, prison overcrowding, widespread
corruption and the denial of human rights, including
fair trial guarantees.

The Group of Friends notes the continuing work
of the Government of Haiti, MINUSTAH and others
to protect members of vulnerable groups and urges the
utmost attention of all actors to preventing and reducing
violent crime, particularly against women and children,
including rape and other sexual violence crimes, and
supports continued violence-reduction efforts that
promote the well-being of at-risk youth and vulnerable
communities. The Group of Friends continues to
support attention to gender and child-protection issues.

The Group of Friends also expresses concern
about the continuing humanitarian challenges
and underlines the importance and urgency of the
humanitarian response plan appeal launched jointly
by the Government of Haiti and the United Nations
to meet the critical humanitarian needs of 1.3 million
people. The Group of Friends notes with concern that
food insecurity was prevalent even before the current
flooding of farm lands and loss oflivestock.

The ongoing efforts to eliminate the cholera
epidemic remind us of the importance of sustaining
cooperation between the international community
and the Government of Haiti to meet the needs of the
Haitian people. The Group of Friends takes note of the
intention of the Secretary-General to develop a package
that would provide material assistance and support to
those Haitians directly affected by cholera.

The Group of Friends of Haiti reiterates its
commitment to the United Nations zero-tolerance policy
on sexual exploitation and abuse, recalling resolution
2272 (2016), and in this regard expects all United
Nations personnel to adhere to the highest standards
of conduct. The Group urges all actors involved to
assume their responsibilities in order to prevent such
cases, investigate allegations and hold accountable
those responsible.

The Group stresses that there can be no genuine
stability or sustainable development in Haiti without
strengthening democratic institutions and credible
democratic processes. In that context, the Group
emphasizes the importance of promoting the rule of
law through the strengthening of Haitian institutions
and further reaffirms the responsibility ofMINUSTAH
for supporting the Haitian State by promoting improved
governance structures, the extension of State authority
and the promotion and protection of human rights, in
accordance with its mandate.
The Group of Friends reaffirms its solidarity with
and commitment to the people and the Government
of Haiti in their pursuit of stability, reconstruction,
recovery, socioeconomic development and
democratic consolidation.

The Group of Friends of Haiti acknowledges the
important role of MINUSTAH in supporting the efforts
of the Government of Haiti to provide stability and
security in Haiti, and expresses its support for and
recognition to the women and men of MINUSTAH for
their dedication and tireless efforts to support recovery
and stability in Haiti.

