Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We associate ourselves with the words of
welcome that the members of the Security Council have
addressed to you, Sir, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Netherlands, as you preside over this meeting of the
Security Council.

The problem of the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons has been given in recent years a high
priority in various forums ranging from international
organizations to regional conferences.

 

Russia recognizes the relevance of this subject, one
with which we are quite familiar, and not just by hearsay.
We understand the concern at the fact that the broad
proliferation of small arms and light weapons may represent
a threat to regional peace and security. Without a solution
to the problems of the prevention and restriction of the
uncontrolled spread of small arms and light weapons
throughout the world, conflict settlement will be impossible.
Ensuring the security of people and supporting stable
economic development will also be impossible.

At the same time, this problem cannot be resolved in
one fell swoop. What is required is painstaking work, well-
thought-out measures, and coordinated efforts on the part of
various countries and organizations with a View to the long
term.

We are convinced that the United Nations must play
a leading role in this process. The first steps towards
drawing up a global approach to the problem of the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and towards
harmonizing the efforts of States to establish a mechanism
for international cooperation in this area have already been
taken. In 1997 and 1999, United Nations experts prepared
reports containing specific recommendations in this respect.
We hope that the implementation of those recommendations
will help to resolve the problems relating to the prevention
of the spread of small arms and light weapons by regulating
their uncontrolled trafficking. In so doing account must be
taken of the viewpoints of both the recipients and of the
exporters of small arms and light weapons.

We agree with the approach taken by many Members
of the United Nations, whose positions are based on the
provisions of Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations on the legitimate right of States to self-defence,
which entails the legal acquisition of the necessary
weapons.

We are also aware of the position of certain States and
non-governmental organizations in favour of restricting and
reducing legal supplies of small arms and light weapons
and of their international regulation.
In this connection, I should like once again to reaffirm
that attention should be focused not on radical ideas but on
specific measures to rid crisis regions and the world as
whole of illegal flows of small arms and light weapons.
Existing problems should be resolved based on their priority
status, all the more so since actions undertaken so far by
the international community, inter alia by the United
Nations, to combat illegal trafficking in small arms and
light weapons have clearly been insufficient.

An example of this would be the illegal supply of
arms to Kosovo, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
other regions of the Balkans, as well as the continued
possession of small arms and light weapons by the
population of that region. We are particularly concerned
by the recent establishment of the so-called Kosovo
protection corps, which is largely based on the structures
of the Kosovo Liberation Army, and which has available
hundreds of units of weapons. All of this directly
contravenes Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). It
could delay the Kosovo settlement and threaten the lives
of the peaceful inhabitants of the area and of the
peacekeepers. The perpetrators of those violations are
taking on the enormous responsibility of possibly
destabilizing the Balkan region.

On the agenda - and the representative of France
has spoken today on this point - is enhancing the
effectiveness of the embargo regimes imposed by the
Security Council on arms supplies. A "porous" arms
embargo can only exacerbate confrontation among the
parties to the conflict and undermine the authority of the
Security Council and the United Nations.

The effectiveness of the common struggle against
illegal trafficking in small arms and light weapons
throughout the world also depends to a great extent on a
stepping-up of cooperation between the police, customs
and licensing organizations of various countries, which so
far is only just beginning to develop. Elaborating norms
and ensuring supplies of weapons solely to Governments
of sovereign States or their officially authorized agents
could be important steps in the fight against illicit
supplies of weapons.

Russia, as a major producer and exporter of small
arms and light weapons, is carrying out a responsible
policy in the area of the supply of weapons to the
international market; undertaking measures at the national
level to tighten control over the export, production and
supplies of small arms and light weapons; and
intensifying the fight against their illicit proliferation. In
our country, laws and acts have entered into force in
recent years regulating the internal circulation of weapons,
including small arms, and stipulating rules and procedures
for their production, transfer, stockpiling as well as their
export to foreign States. Deliveries abroad of Russian
weapons, including small arms and light weapons, are

 

implemented through licenses and under strict State control.

We support the involvement of the United Nations in
efforts to collect and destroy small arms and light weapons
if the States concerned agree and a request is made to the
Organization for assistance. We are prepared also to take
account of regional initiatives that impose moratoriums or
restrictions on the export, import and production of small
arms and light weapons, as long as those initiatives are
voluntary and non-discriminatory in nature.

Initiatives in this area must be considered and put
forward more publicly, with the involvement not only of
exporters and importers of small arms and light weapons,
but also of neighbouring States. It is hardly possible to
describe as very constructive a practice whereby a group of
countries puts forward large-scale initiatives on small arms
and light weapons, and then automatically suggests that the
remaining countries should join, including the leading
suppliers and recipients, and this without even holding the
necessary consultations. The struggle against the
uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light weapons
requires that the entire international community pool its
efforts.

We know that it could be objected that the dividing
line between the legal and illegal supply of arms is
sometimes unclear and hard to establish because small arms
and light weapons from the legal sector often end up on the
black market. In such cases, we must analyse official
supplies, carry out investigations and ensure that an
exchange of information takes place so that in that area,
too, there are no obstacles to cooperation.

We are not opposed to transparency in principle if it
relates to information about national legislation and
practices with regard to the regulation of trafficking in
small arms, leaks of information or smuggling. However,
proposals for an international registry on the transfer of
small arms and light weapons would be difficult to
implement if only because of the difficulty of verification
or reliable monitoring, particularly given the failure to
resolve the problem of the international recognition of
existing marking systems.

We hope that the forthcoming conference on the
problems of the illicit arms trade in the year 2001 will be
a major landmark in the task of preventing the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons.
