Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I am most grateful to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate on such an essential element
of the effectiveness and success of peacekeeping
operations: a goal we all share under the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative. I would also like to express
my sincere thanks to the Under-Secretary-General for
Peace Operations, the Force Commander of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and Ms. Novosseloff for
their particularly valuable contributions.

I would like to begin by echoing previous speakers
in recalling the vital importance that France attaches
to triangular cooperation among the Security Council,
the Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing
countries. This cooperation, in the form of regular
consultations, is necessary at all stages of the life cycle
of a peacekeeping operation, including as it is drawn
up, drawn down, implemented and renewed.

Because they are present on the ground, often have
extensive experience and practice in peacekeeping
operations and are aware of the difficulties Blue
Helmets face, as the MINUSMA Force Commander
has just reminded us, as well as having broad expertise,
troop- and police-contributing countries have a lot to
contribute in terms of the planning, decision-making
and effective deployment of operations. The information
and lessons that they retain from theatres of operations
are very useful in drawing up but also adjusting
peacekeeping mandates and ensuring that the mandates
are adapted to the realities on the ground.

Nonetheless, in the face of increasing complexity
of conflict dynamics, sustained dialogue among
the Council, troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat is essential for the effective management
of missions. Missions must be made to measure,
effective, credible and able to adapt to environments
that are constantly changing. Triangular cooperation is
therefore in the interests of us all and puts into practice
the values of multilateralism that bring us here today
and govern our actions at the international level.

Secondly, I wish to stress that we already have many
tools at our disposal to ensure the smooth functioning
of triangular cooperation, as Mr. Lacroix has just
reminded us. We have a number of meeting formats
within the Council that allow us to interact with troop-
contributing countries and the Secretariat. The next
meeting of troop-contributing countries will be held
here in a few days. We also have the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations, which provides an
opportunity for all peacekeeping stakeholders to speak,
as well as meetings with troop- and police-contributing
countries that are organized by the Secretariat. From
France's point of view, I think that it is less a matter of
establishing new meeting formats than of working to
revitalize and improve the effectiveness of those we have
today. It is therefore important that everyone be present
and actively participate in those coordination forums,
which are essential to improving the development and
implementation of peacekeeping mandates.

Finally, I would like to recall that France is fully
committed to triangular cooperation and strives to
be exemplary with regard to the mandates for which
it is the penholder, in particular the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali but also the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. We seek to systematically consult troop-
contributing countries throughout the year, not only
at the time of the mandate renewal. We organize field
evaluation visits prior to every mandate renewal. We
also consult the host State, and we work to prioritize
mandates, where possible. In that way, we try to create
a positive dynamic.

In addition to our consultation activities, we are
also fully committed to the training and capacity-
building of troop-contributing countries, in particular
French-speaking countries. In that way, the training
is another key element of triangular cooperation. For
example, France supports six peacekeeping training
centres in Africa, three in Latin America and one in
Asia, which contribute to building the capacity of future
contingents deployed in peacekeeping operations. We
are also strengthening the skills of those contingents
in specialized areas, such as mine clearance, health,
judicial police, logistics and civil protection, thanks
to our network of national schools that work at the
regional level and our network of 320 experts working
as closely as possible with the defence and security
forces of many countries.

Through those various actions, France is committed
to training more than 30,000 African soldiers next year
to enable them to serve in peacekeeping operations
in particular. That is a considerable effort with direct
operational significance.

Finally, because cooperation is based above all
on sharing, we are also involved in the informal
coordination mechanism - the light coordination
mechanism - which enables the Secretariat to be fully
informed of the various training activities carried out
by States for the benefit oftroop-contributing countries.
I would like to conclude by underlining once
again the importance of the active engagement of each
stakeholder in the existing triangular cooperation
mechanisms in order to fully achieve the positive impact
expected for the success of peacekeeping operations,
to which we are committed through the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative.

