Mr. Akahori (Japan): I would like to begin by
congratulating Uruguay on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the second time in its two-
year mandate, which it shares with Japan. We look
forward to working closely with you, Mr. President,
as a member of the same class. I would also like to
express my appreciation to Prosecutor Bensouda for her
briefing and report.

Japan is committed to the fight against impunity and
to supporting the International Criminal Court (ICC),
including the Office of the Prosecutor. Last month,
the President of the ICC, Judge Silvia Fernandez de
Gurmendi, visited Tokyo and met with Prime Minister
Abe and other high-level officials of the Government
of Japan. In their discussions, they talked about the
importance of promoting the universality of the Rome
Statute, especially in the Asia-Pacific region. Prime
Minister Abe reiterated Japan's support for the ICC and
expressed his hope that the ICC will play a greater role,
thereby contributing to the establishment of the rule of
law in the international community.

Japan welcomes the fact that The Gambia and
South Africa have decided to rescind their withdrawals
from the ICC. The ICC is an important organ in the
fight against impunity, and Japan strongly believes that
as many countries as possible should join, including
members of the Council.

Let me now turn to Libya. I would like to emphasize
that Japan continues to support the Presidency Council
and the Government of National Accord as the legitimate
authorities under the Libyan Political Agreement. The
Agreement is the key instrument to move the process
forward, and its framework should be upheld. Recent
dialogues between the key interlocutors in Libya,
such as the one between Prime Minister Al-Sarraj and
General Haftar, in Abu Dhabi, and the one between the
Presidents of the House of Representatives and the High
Council of State, in Rome, are important developments.

The ICC does not have its own enforcement
authorities. Therefore, its success depends heavily on
the cooperation of States. Without their cooperation,
the ICC cannot function effectively and justice cannot
be served. Against this background, we welcome the
fact that the Office of the Prosecutor continues to enjoy
good relations with the Libyan Prosecutor-General.
We strongly hope this relationship will yield positive
results in the near future. We commend the Office of
the Prosecutor for employing innovative methods to
make progress despite the difficult security situation.

Japan notes the recent unsealing of the arrest
warrant for Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled by the
Pre-Trial Chamber. As a State party to the Rome Statute,
Japan stands ready to fulfil its obligations under the
Statute and hopes that this unsealing will facilitate
enforcement by making all States parties aware of
the warrant. Regarding Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, it
is regrettable that he is not yet in the ICC's custody,
despite various efforts by the Office of the Prosecutor.
We encourage the Government of National Accord in
Libya and the international community to cooperate
fully with the ICC, pursuant to resolutions 1970 (2011)
and 2259 (2015).
The escalation of violence and ongoing instability,
especially in the southern region, are troubling and
are making it more difficult for the Prosecutor's
investigation to progress. Japan is also concerned by
the deterioration of the human rights and humanitarian
situation in Libya. Human trafficking through and
from Libya, including the smuggling of migrants,
is particularly alarming. As Mr. Kobler mentioned
in his briefing to the Security Council on 19 April
(see S/PV.7927), human security is at stake, and it is
important that the Council remain fully engaged on
this issue. Adequate measures should be taken to hold
perpetrators accountable. There should be no impunity
on this matter. We are closely following the ongoing
work of the Office of the Prosecutor on a possible
investigation and look forward to further updates.

Let me conclude by reiterating Japan's unflagging
support of the activities of the ICC. My delegation looks
forward to tangible progress on today's agenda.

