Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: I welcome this
opportunity to address the Security Council once again
on the activities undertaken by my Office since my
first report on 29 June 2005. The current reporting
period coincides with the first phase of the
investigation. As the Council is aware, I launched the
investigation on 1 June 2005.

In the first phase, the Office has made good
progress in gathering facts relating to the universe of
crimes alleged to have taken place in Darfur as well as
to the groups and individuals responsible for those
crimes.

In order to carry out the investigation, my Office
has completed its recruitment of a multi-disciplinary
team and has developed the essential infrastructure for
the management and analysis of large quantities of
information and evidence. We are also addressing the
challenge of identifying and training impartial and
effective interpretation and translation services.

In accordance with the policies and strategies of
the Office, in the coming second phase the
investigation will focus on a selected number of
criminal incidents and on those persons bearing the
greatest criminal responsibility for those incidents.

My Office has collated a comprehensive picture
of the crimes allegedly committed in Darfur since 1
July 2002. From that overall picture, we have
identified particularly grave events, involving a large
number of killings, mass rapes and other forms of
extremely serious gender violence, for full
investigation.

We continue to monitor ongoing violence.
Attacks on humanitarian workers and facilities remain
prevalent, including incidents involving the killing of
African Union peacekeepers. The impact of those
crimes on the delivery of humanitarian assistance and
on efforts to secure peace and stability in Darfur has
been highlighted recently in the November report of
the Secretary-General on Darfur. In some instances,
those crimes may fall within the jurisdiction of the
Court. I encourage national and international
organizations suffering such attacks to take steps to
record and preserve information and evidence and to
provide those materials to us.

There continues to be a great deal of speculation
about the list of 51 names prepared by the International
Commission of Inquiry on Darfur. As I have said
before, that list, which remains sealed, represents the
conclusion of the Commission of Inquiry and is in no
way binding upon the Prosecutor. In addition, it should
be emphasized that the activities and objectives of the
sanctions Committee and the Panel of Experts
established by resolution 1591 (2005) are entirely
distinct from the work of my Office.

We will conduct our own independent assessment
of available information in accordance with our
policies and the Rome Statute. At the proper time, we
will present that information to the judges. In the
coming months, upon completion of that first
investigative phase, my Office will identify persons to
be prosecuted, subject to article 53(2) of the Rome
Statute and will present that information to the judges.
I would like to emphasize that no decision has been
taken at this stage as to whom to prosecute.

Witness protection is an issue of paramount
concern to the Court. As I have already indicated, the
current security situation in Darfur remains volatile,
with ongoing violence and attacks. The establishment
of an effective system for the protection of witnesses
and victims is a precondition to the conduct of
investigative activities in Darfur. Given the prevailing
climate of insecurity and the current absence of an
effective system of protection, investigative activities
have so far taken place outside Darfur.

Despite those limitations, significant progress has
been made in the investigations, thanks to the
information and other forms of assistance provided by
States and organizations. We have identified witnesses
in 17 countries. Well over 100 potential witnesses have
been screened, and a number of formal statements have
already been taken. We are currently screening
hundreds of additional potential witnesses, either
directly or with the assistance of States and
organizations. To facilitate that process, my Office has
established a semi-permanent presence in the region,
which provides logistical, security and other support to
the process of witness identification and interview.

The International Criminal Court is
complementary to national criminal jurisdictions. In
accordance with article 53(2)(b) of the Rome Statute,
the legal test is specific to the cases selected for
prosecution, and not the state of the Sudanese justice
system as a whole. Accordingly, my Office continues
to gather and assess information relating to the various
mechanisms established by Sudanese authorities in
relation to crimes allegedly committed in Darfur,
including the special court for Darfur established by
decrees issued on 7 and 11 June 2005.

It has been reported that, in November 2005, a
decree was issued establishing two new special courts,
to sit in Geneina and Nyala. Additional prosecutors and
judges have been appointed to staff those courts. It has
also been reported that the jurisdiction of the special
court has been expanded to consider allegations of
Violations of international humanitarian law. The
Government of the Sudan has renewed its commitment
to allow access to the African Union and other
international monitors. In addition, various other
mechanisms and committees have been established to
look at aspects of the crimes in Darfur, including
centres for the elimination of violence against women
and an attorney's office on crimes against humanity.
The Government of the Sudan has also pointed to
efforts to promote tribal reconciliation and to the
proposed conference on Darfur scheduled to take place
in December 2005 as efforts towards a comprehensive
solution to the conflict.

However, the continuing insecurity in Darfur
does not allow for an effective system for the
protection of victims and witnesses. That has forced
my Office to carry out investigations outside Darfur. It
also represents a serious impediment to the conduct of
effective investigations in Darfur by national judicial
bodies. No one can call a witness in Darfur. Up until
this point, the work of the special court does not
suggest that cases likely to be prosecuted before the
International Criminal Court will be inadmissible
under the terms of article 53(2)(b) of the Statute.
However, my Office will continue to follow closely all
national proceedings.

In addition to the issue of admissibility, I am also
required by the Rome Statute to consider whether a
prosecution is not in the interest of justice. In
considering that factor, I will follow the various
national and international efforts to achieve peace and
security, as well as the views of witnesses and victims
of the crimes.

Resolution 1593 (2005) requires the Government
of the Sudan and all other parties to the conflict in
Darfur to cooperate fully with the Court and the
Prosecutor. The resolution also urges other States and
organizations, in particular the African Union, to
cooperate fully. Since our last report to the Council, the
Court has continued to press for the signing of the
International Criminal Court-African Union
relationship agreement, the text of which was finalized
in May 2005. In addition, I have contacted the African
Mission in Sudan in Khartoum and written to the
Chairperson of the African Union to seek meetings
with the relevant officials to discuss the modalities for
cooperation with regard to Darfur, as well as to request
an opportunity to brief the Peace and Security Council.
The next phase of the investigation will be a decisive
one, the success of which will require the full
cooperation of the African Union. It is hoped that rapid
progress in that relationship will be achieved in that
phase.

The current reporting period has seen further
steps in the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, including the establishment, on
22 September 2005, of the new Government of
National Unity. In the lead-up to that transition the
Office of the Prosecutor did not make formal requests
for assistance to the Sudan, but contacts with Sudanese
authorities were maintained.

As I have set out in this statement, following the
initiation of the investigation, my Office has gathered
information and evidence from outside Darfur. During
this initial fact-finding phase, it is vital that the Office
develop a full understanding of the situation in Darfur
and the context in which the alleged crimes took place.

In that regard, from 17 to 24 November 2005,
representatives of my Office and the Registry of the
ICC visited Khartoum to discuss matters related to the
Lord's Resistance Army and the situation in Darfur. As
part of the fact-finding process, during that visit a
request for assistance was made to the Sudanese
authorities to undertake several interviews that could
provide an insight into the activities of all parties to the
conflict in Darfur, as well as an assessment of national
proceedings undertaken by the special courts and other
relevant judicial bodies.

In response to that request, Sudanese officials
have agreed to organize a visit to the Sudan by the end
of February 2006 by representatives of my Office to
meet with the special courts and other relevant judicial
bodies in order to assess national proceedings in
relation to alleged crimes committed in Darfur. In
addition, officials also agreed that, in preparation for
the other interviews, the Ministry of Defence would
cooperate in establishing and submitting, by March
2006, a comprehensive report on matters to be
identified in advance by us. By the time of submission
of my report to the Council, I was still waiting for
written confirmation of those practical arrangements
by the Government of the Sudan. The Government of
the Sudan has now provided us with that written
confirmation.

We have also had contacts with other parties to
the conflict, including the main rebel groups.
Establishing consistent liaison with the Sudan
Liberation Movement/Army has been hampered by
divisions within the group. However, we continue to
open channels and to offer an opportunity for all
parties involved in the conflict to provide information
and evidence to the Court during the next phase of the
investigation.

The investigation of the situation in Darfur is
taking place within a context of ongoing violence and
multiple efforts to secure peace, as well as a complex
process of political transition. The Office will continue
to be sensitive to those dynamics and will seek to
reinforce the work of the African Union, the United
Nations, the Sudan and other States and organizations.
At the same time, however, the Office is focusing on
its own work and conscious of the fact that
accountability for the most serious crimes alleged to
have been committed in Darfur is an essential
component to effective peace and effective transition.

Having made the first steps towards a cooperative
relationship, during the next phase we will seek the
further assistance and cooperation of the Government
of the Sudan in relation to the process of fact-finding
and evidence-gathering. We will keep the Council
informed of developments and challenges that arise
during the next phase.

