Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf
of Chile, I join my colleagues in the most vigorous
condemnation of the most recent criminal attacks,
including against the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC). Those attacks follow in the wake of
the attack against the office of the United Nations
itself, which took the life of Sergio Vieira de Mello.
This only increases appreciation for the humanitarian
assistance provided by the oil-for-food programme and
the work led by Mr. Benon Sevan, Executive Director
of the Office of the Iraq Programme (OIP).

From now on there is a true challenge, involving
much detail: the many projects taking place and the
necessary coordination between the various actors,
especially in the light of the current security situation
in Iraq. That certainly adds a sense of realism, which
was imparted to us by Mr. Sevan in his statement. But
we must not lose sight of our main objective, making
the transfer from the oil-for-food programme to the
Coalition Provisional Authority a reality in a gradual
and orderly fashion, leading up to next 21 November.
What is most important is that the programme, in its
future phase, continue to meet the needs of the Iraqi
people.

We hope that all the matters highlighted by the
Executive Director in his report to the Council on 29
September as points that had not yet been resolved,
points on which there was no agreement, can be fully
resolved, in order to best conclude, on time, the
transfer process. We note that some of these topics
have actually been settled as was noted in Mr. Sevan's
briefing.

On the other hand, we acknowledge that it has
been necessary to work very hard to manage, organize
and perform the many contracts on products currently
in transit, as well as those approved and funded at the
start of the conflict. This work, according to
information we have received in the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 661 (1990) has not
concluded, and is currently being performed in
coordination with the Coalition Provisional Authority.
We believe that it must be accelerated, so that it is
finished, or, if this is not possible, is as advanced as
possible, before the handover to the Coalition
Provisional Authority. We trust that that will be
achieved.

We are also concerned about the security of goods
under United Nations responsibility in Iraq in
installations or warehouses, goods that have not yet
been distributed and will be transferred at the end of
the programme.

We have a few questions. We understand that in
neighbouring countries there is a large amount of
merchandise acquired by the programme and
warehoused in storage units. This merchandise must
either be transported to Iraq or agreement on its
custody must be reached with the countries concerned.
Who will make those arrangements? Would it be
possible to make them before the United Nations
handover? On the other hand, are there any agreements
or understandings needed to transfer the goods under
the 2.2 per cent account relating to the implementation
and administrative costs of the programme for the
United Nations?

We repeat our acknowledgement of the oil-for-
food programme, which has been so important in
bringing the people of Iraq great humanitarian
assistance and helped better the living conditions of the
Iraqi population, especially women and the weaker
members of society, which is the very reason for the
United Nations presence in Iraq.

