Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting. We always appreciate your country's stand on
the issue of Afghanistan and, of course, the importance
of discussing the Secretary-General's quarterly report,
which seems to have become traditional.

I would like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Turkey, Ambassador Apakan, for
having led the Security Council's mission to
Afghanistan and Mr. Zahir Tanin, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, for his lucid and very
fair comments earlier today. I would like to welcome
Staffan de Mistura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, who certainly brings much
experience and, for many of us, more hope for the
United Nations work in Afghanistan.
It is the fourth decade of conflict and tragedy in
Afghanistan, and I think that the international
community must take a more retrospective look at what
is emerging there and review what it needs to do to
take us towards a better understanding and a better
tomorrow for Afghanistan. Needless to say, Pakistan
has a very vital interest in our neighbour and
developments there as a whole have in fact affected
Pakistan equally in all directions.

The latest report (S/2010/318) provides useful
information on the reintegration and reconciliation
process in Afghanistan. It outlines the complexity of
the security situation and identifies the challenges of
development and governance, as well as preparations
for the forthcoming elections. I need not emphasize
that the people of Afghanistan also greatly look
forward to the vast sea of change that should become
clearer in the next few months.

We believe that a stable Government in
Afghanistan, supported by the international community
and its own people, is in the vital interest of a peaceful
future in the region. We believe that the Consultative
Peace Jirga, which was attended by 1,600 people and
did not get much mention here today, deserves the
international community's recognition and
acknowledgement of the importance of their discourse
and their conclusions, recommendations and
suggestions. We support the Afghan-led intra-Afghan
dialogue as the singular most important symbol of
ownership of the entire process that we are discussing
around the table here today. The communique issued
by the Peace Jirga on formulating a national strategy
for sustainable peace is a very important document that
needs further promotion here in these halls.

To say the least, the forthcoming parliamentary
elections will, I believe, play a very important role in
what will emerge in Afghanistan. I believe that the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) has a critical and key role to play at this
stage in creating the credibility that will make it
acceptable to all of us, which at this stage is so
important to so many around the world.

We know that the Afghan challenge has been
insecurity driven by insurgency and some exploitation
by drug traffickers and criminals, who abound
everywhere in the world but may be slightly more
prominent there. The Secretary-General's report notes
no great improvement in that area, and that is
regrettable. However, stereotyping our disappointments
has also become regrettable. We must be more
understanding. We must try to understand from the
perspective of what works.

Here, I digress - with your kind indulgence,
Mr. President. The situation is much like a burst tyre or
a tube on a bicycle, and we seem to be busy not getting
fresh air into the tube, but in fact trying to repair the
pump that will bring in the fresh air. That always
becomes something that costs much more and creates
less of a focus and impact. Very regrettably, that is
rather what is happening. We must avoid complacency
about what we can achieve and have really achieved. I
feel that any real discernment on that ground will prove
that we have been a little too complacent.

In his previous report, the Secretary-General
noted that we must resolve to implement

"a political reform that addresses the root causes
of the insurgency, including through efforts aimed
at improving governance and an Afghan-led
political process to re-establish peace"
(S/2009/674, para. 25).

I believe that we are yet to start doing something
concrete in that direction.

The present report emphasizes that

"[d]eveloping the security sector requires an
overarching framework that includes a national
threat assessment, which is basis for Afghan
national security policy and concomitant
strategy" (S/2010/318, para. 1 5)

At this particular stage, I would like to say that the
normal answer to this sort of a thing is twofold. First,
let us build the capacity of the Afghan National Army
and police institutions; secondly, let us talk to the
insurgents - that is, the Taliban. I believe that, as far
as the latter is concerned, if any one should talk to the
Taliban, I must stress to this body that the people
sought out must be on a list provided by President
Karzai, who will know better whom to talk with in the
interest of Afghanistan and the international
community. As far as the Afghan National Army is
concerned, I will say here without any doubt in my
mind that, in a society that does not understand central
federal leadership as easily as we do in many other
parts of the world - and I quote now Mr. Brzezinski,
who put it so ably and is supported by Mr. Brent
Srowcroft - "you have to understand that regional
loyalties play an important role".

In my own country and the country of my friend
the Ambassador of India, when regiments were raised
by the British, we very often had regional loyalties. We
had the Sikh army, the frontier forces, the Baluch army
and the Marathas; and I could go on and on. There was
a certain loyalty which came with that. It did not
impede an empire from inspiring loyalty, but it worked.
I think that should be understood here. And it will be
understood if we raise from the absolute base those
loyalties at local levels that can then create a stronger
National Army and protect and be more successful.

I would like to recognize specifically the role of
UNAMA, ably led by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura. With regard to
the resolutions for expanding its presence, they are
fine, I think. We have talked about it before; it has not
happened yet, but we hope to see it happen. One of the
greatest things I would admire Mr. De Mistura for,
because I know that it is within his capability, would
be for him to work with the confidence of President
Karzai, because it is so important at this stage for some
sort of unanimity to emerge.

With regard to the London Conference, I believe
that the implementation of Afghanistan National
Development Strategy is going to be very important.
But again, as I mentioned earlier, we must ensure that
funding reaches to all levels and that it percolates and
permeates down to those levels that can find benefit
and take substantial consolation and comfort in the fact
that the international community cares. UNAMA must
leverage this advantage to further streamline result-
oriented activities, specifically in the areas of security,
development and reconstruction.

I would say that Pakistan is very committed to
strengthening our bilateral relationship with
Afghanistan. We have had two very important
declarations which, again, have not been talked about
here much but would be interesting documentation to
read and draw lessons from. They are the 2009 Joint
Declaration on Future Directions of Bilateral
Cooperation, signed by the two Presidents, and the
2010 the Joint Declaration on Next Steps in
Afghanistan-Pakistan Comprehensive Cooperation. I
believe that we will see further developments with
respect to these documents in the coming weeks and
months.
Our bilateral trade has recorded very steady
growth, and Pakistan has doubled its efforts for
education in Afghanistan, despite our own situation.
We are also engaged in security and intelligence
cooperation with Afghanistan, including through the
Tripartite Commission, which includes the United
States and the International Security Assistance Force.
We are also engaged in a trilateral process with the
Afghan and Turkish Governments.

We are committed to a voluntary, gradual, safe
and dignified return of nearly 3 million Afghan
refugees still in Pakistan. There is a need for more
diligent and sustained efforts at creating necessary
pull-factors in Afghanistan. We would stress the need
to strengthen reintegration programmes for refugees
within Afghanistan's National Development Strategy.
We expect the United Nations and the international
community to assist in this endeavour and to
understand it specifically from this perspective.

At the conclusion of one decade of engagement
with Afghanistan, I repeat a call for introspection and a
genuine appraisal of achievements and failures.
Afghanistan needs the sustained engagement of the
international community, but without interference in its
internal affairs. I would conclude by reiterating that
long-term objectives of peace, stability and
development in Afghanistan can be realized only by
respecting its sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity.

