The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Somalia, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mohamed
(Somalia), took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia, contained in document S/2002/189.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls the statements
of its President of 31 October 2001
(S/PRST/2001/30) and of 11 January 2001
(S/PRST/2001/1) and all other previous decisions
concerning the situation in Somalia. The Council,
having considered the report of the Secretary-
General of 21 February 2002 (S/2002/189) and
having held a public meeting on 11 March 2002,
reaffirms its commitment to a comprehensive and
lasting settlement of the situation in Somalia,
reaffirming its respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and
unity of the country, consistent with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
"The Security Council reiterates its support
to the Arta peace process, which continues to be
the most viable basis for peace and national
reconciliation in Somalia. The Council urges the
Transitional National Government, local
authorities and political and traditional leaders in
Somalia to make every effort to complete,
without preconditions, the peace and
reconciliation process through dialogue and
involvement of all parties in a spirit of mutual
accommodation and tolerance, with the view to
establish an all-inclusive Government in Somalia
based on the sharing and devolution of power
through the democratic process.

"The Security Council strongly supports the
decisions by the 9th Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) Summit and by the
IGAD Foreign Ministers Committee on 14
February 2002 to convene a National
Reconciliation Conference for Somalia in Nairobi
in April 2002, including the Transitional National
Government and all other Somali parties, without
conditionalities. The Council strongly supports
the call upon Kenya, Ethiopia and Djibouti (the frontline States) by the 9th IGAD Summit to
coordinate their efforts for national reconciliation
in Somalia under the supervision of the IGAD
Chairman, and to hold the Reconciliation
Conference under President Moi of Kenya as the
coordinator of the frontline States to continue the
peace process in Somalia and report to the IGAD
Chairman. The Council will follow the further
developments closely and emphasizes that the
constructive and coordinated involvement by all
frontline States is crucial for the restoration of
peace and stability in Somalia. The Council calls
on all States in the region, including non-IGAD
States, to contribute constructively to the peace
efforts for Somalia, including by using their
influence to bring on board Somali groups that
have thus far not joined the peace process. The
Council encourages the Secretary-General,
through his Special Advisor and the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS), to
support actively the IGAD initiative in the
important period ahead.

"The Security Council, underlining that the
future of Somalia depends, first of all, on the
commitment of Somali leaders to end the

suffering of their people by negotiating a peaceful
end to the conflict, strongly urges all parties to
participate constructively and at decision-making
level in the Reconciliation Conference in Nairobi
scheduled for April 2002. The Council expresses
its intention to consider the situation in Somalia
taking into account the outcome of the
Reconciliation Conference upon its conclusion,
including with regard to participation in a
constructive manner by the respective parties or
any lack thereof.

"The Security Council, deeply concerned
about the recent fighting in Mogadishu and in the
Gedo region, calls for an immediate end to all
acts of violence in Somalia. The Council
condemns the leaders of those armed factions
who continue to be obstacles to peace and
stability in Somalia. The Council emphasizes that
the efforts for peace in the country should not be
held hostage to deliberate acts of violence or
other acts aimed at preventing the country from
returning to normality and the setting up and
rehabilitation of its governing structures.

"The Security Council notes with serious
concern the continued flow of weapons and
ammunition supplies to Somalia from other
countries and the reported training of militia and
plans for major offensives in southern and north-
eastern parts of the country. The Council is also
concerned about the illicit trafficking and trade in
small arms in the entire subregion. The Council
insists that no State, in particular those of the
region, should interfere in the internal affairs of
Somalia. Such interference only further
destabilizes Somalia, contributes to a climate of
fear and impacts adversely on individual human
rights, and could jeopardize the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and
unity of the country. The Council insists that the
territory of Somalia should not be used to
undermine stability in the subregion. The Council
emphasizes that the situation in Somalia and the
objective of long-term regional stability can most
effectively be addressed if all States in the region
play a positive role, including in the process of
rebuilding national institutions in Somalia.

"The Security Council calls on all States
and other actors to comply scrupulously with the
arms embargo established by resolution 733

(1992) of 23 January 1992 and to report all
information on any violations to the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) of
24 April 1992. The Council expresses its
determination to put in place concrete
arrangements and/or mechanisms, by 30 April
2002, for the generation of independent
information on violations and for improving the
enforcement of the embargo.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
necessity for further efforts against international
terrorism in accordance with resolution 1373
(2001) of 28 September 2001. The Council notes
the commitment of the Transitional National
Government to combat international terrorism and
welcomes the report submitted in this regard
(S/2001/ 1287). The Council further notes the stated
intentions by local authorities in various parts of the
country to take steps pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001). The Council, insisting that persons and
entities must not be allowed to take advantage of
the situation in Somalia to finance, plan,
facilitate, support or commit terrorist acts from
the country, emphasizes that efforts to combat
terrorism in Somalia are inseparable from the
establishment of peace and governance in the
country. In this spirit, the Council urges the
international community to provide assistance to
Somalia for the further and comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

"The Security Council notes that the
downturn in remittances and freezing of accounts
of individuals following the closing of the offices
of the Al-Barakaat Group reduced household
incomes in Somalia. The Council underlines, as a
matter of urgency, the necessity to develop
mechanisms that facilitate legitimate financial
transfer to and from Somalia while preventing
further financial flows to terrorists and terrorist
groups, taking fully into account the different
concerns involved. The Council is encouraged by
the initiative by the United Nations Development
Programme to establish a monitoring and
regulatory framework for money transfer
companies to facilitate their operations locally
and internationally.

"The Security Council expresses concern
about the humanitarian situation in Somalia,
particularly in the Gedo and Bari regions. The

Council draws attention to the urgent need for
international assistance, inter alia, in covering
food and water shortfalls, thereby also combating
potentially further destabilizing migration and
outbreak of disease. It further underlines that
longer-term interventions are required to
stimulate economic recovery, rebuild household
asset bases and promote sustained productivity.
The Council calls on Member States to respond
urgently and generously to the United Nations
Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal for 2002.

"The Security Council, noting that problems
in livestock exports have severely affected the
humanitarian and economic situation in Somalia,
welcomes the lifting of the export ban by some
States and calls on States that maintain the ban to
take active steps towards the resumption of
livestock imports from Somalia. The Council
appreciates the efforts by the United Nations
Development Programme and the Food and
Agriculture Organization to promote the lifting of
the ban imposed by a number of States.

"The Security Council notes the recent
security assessment of the Inter-Agency Mission
to Somalia. The Council further notes that the
security regime will follow the United Nations
practice of incremental engagement with Somali
communities that are moving towards peace
through constant evaluation of security
conditions. The Council requests the Secretary-
General to keep the security situation under
review, including through regular inter-agency
headquarters assessment missions.

"The Security Council notes with
satisfaction that, in spite of the difficult security
conditions, the United Nations, the Red Cross and
Red Crescent movements and non-governmental
organizations continue to provide humanitarian
and development assistance to all areas of
Somalia. The Council condemns attacks on
humanitarian personnel and calls upon all parties
in Somalia to respect fully the security and safety
of personnel of the United Nations, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and
non-governmental organizations, and to guarantee
their complete freedom of movement and access
throughout Somalia.

"The Security Council values the desire of

the Transitional National Government and various
local authorities in Somalia to cooperate with the
United Nations in creating an enabling
environment for humanitarian and development
assistance, and commends the peace-building
activities currently implemented by United
Nations agencies in the country. The Council
notes that safe access for staff and assets of the
United Nations, the Red Cross and Red Crescent
movements and non-governmental organizations
already exists in a number of areas. It further
notes the trend towards improved security
conditions in a number of areas in the north,
middle and south of Somalia, in accordance with
the Secretary-General's report.

"The Security Council notes the
recommendation by the Secretary-General that
the international community must increase its
programmes of assistance to Somalia in creative
and innovative ways, wherever the security
situation allows, including by making greater
efforts to ensure that the peace dividend aspect of
targeted assistance is fully exploited. The Council
reiterates that a comprehensive post-conflict
peace building mission should be deployed once
security conditions permit.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General, as a matter of urgency and
under the current circumstances, to utilize to the
fullest his Representative, in close cooperation
with the United Nations Resident Coordinator for
Somalia, to coordinate ongoing peace-building
activities and provide for their incremental
expansion, including staff strengthening, in a
coherent manner and in accordance with the
security arrangements. Preparatory activities on
the ground for a comprehensive peace-building
mission should take the following elements into
account, while also considering other proposals
for post-conflict peace building activities:

(a) community-based peace-building;

(b) disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation
and reintegration of militia, including in
particular child soldiers;

(c) assessing and combating illicit trade of
and trafficking in small arms;
(d) training of police with a View to
establishing uniform standards of law enforcement
throughout Somalia;

(e) quick-impact projects aimed at
improving security;

(f) intensification of women's participation
at all levels in peace-building;

(g) intensification of dialogue on
humanitarian and development issues, including
resolution of land claims at the local level;

(h) AIDS education and prevention.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to establish, without further
delay, a Trust Fund for Peace-building in Somalia
to support the preparatory activities on the ground
for a comprehensive peace-building mission and
to supplement the United Nations Consolidated
Inter-Agency Appeal, as envisaged in his report
of 19 December 2000 (S/2000/1211) and as
indicated through the statements of its President
of 11 January 2001 (S/PRST/2001/1) and of 31
October 2001 (S/PRST/2001/30), and invites
donors to come forward and make contributions
at an early stage.

"The Security Council, underlining its
strong resolve to support in a practical manner the
United Nations system in its incremental
approach to peace-building in Somalia in line
with the present statement, endorses a working
mission to the region at the appropriate level
consisting of interested members of the Council
and Secretariat staff. It would welcome the
facilitation and inputs by the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia and the United
Nations Country Team for Somalia in this regard.
The Council expresses its determination to
address, on the basis of the report to be submitted
by the mission and the upcoming report of the
Secretary-General, how it may further support in
a practical and concrete manner the peace efforts
in Somalia on a comprehensive basis.

"The Security Council endorses the
establishment of Somalia Contact Group, to operate
in Nairobi and New York. The Council invites the
Nairobi branch of the Contact Group, inter alia, to
promote the completion of the Arta peace process,
including through the IGAD initiative referred to
above; to support the implementation of the pilot
peace-building programme, as stipulated above; and
to elaborate practical ways and means of facilitating
exchange of information through engaging various
actors in the region, including the community of
non-governmental organizations. The Council
further underlines that the primary purpose of the
New York branch of the Contact Group should be to
support the Secretariat's work on Somalia with the
view to ensuring that the situation in the country
is given due consideration by the United Nations.

"The Security Council welcomes the
appointment of Mr. Winston A. Tubman as the
new Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia upon his assumption of duties in Nairobi
in April 2002. The Council expresses its gratitude
to the departing Representative, Mr. David
Stephen, for his tireless efforts over four years in
support of national reconciliation in Somalia.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to address fully the
requirements of the present statement in his
report due on 30 June 2002.

"The Security Council remains seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2002/8.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.50 pm.

