Mr. Fulci (Italy): First of all let me say that Italy
fully endorses the statement that will be made by the
distinguished Permanent Representative of Luxembourg,

 

Ambassador Jean-Louis Wolzfeld, on behalf of the
European Union and associated countries.

On 11 August, the commander of the multinational
protection force, General Forlani, left Albanian soil,
completing the withdrawal of the contingents of the 11
countries which participated in Operation Alba. A total of
7,215 men were deployed, more than half of them Italian.
They carried out 1,698 missions. Under the force's
protection, 5,168 tons of food and 339 tons of medicine
were distributed.

The multinational protection force - authorized
by Security Council resolutions 1101 (1997) and 1114
(1997) - closely cooperated with the Albanian authorities,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and other major international organizations, including the
United Nations and its related agencies, to find a peaceful
solution to the crisis. The force facilitated the safe and
prompt delivery of humanitarian assistance and helped
create a secure environment for the missions of
international organizations.

Moreover, the multinational protection force provided
the security framework needed for the Albanian elections;
this was made possible through the relentless shuttle
diplomacy of President Vranitzky, the special envoy of the
Danish Chairman-in-Office of the OSCE. This deserves
mention because I think it was a major element in the
success. The process was monitored by the OSCE, and
culminated in the election of a new Parliament and the
formation of a new Government. The elections were a
crucial step on the road to the stability and national
reconciliation of the country; they strengthened
democratization and gave confidence back to Albanians.

In retrospect, this positive outcome stemmed from two
key elements: the determination of a group of countries -
the "coalition of the willing" - to act swiftly to restore a
situation of normalcy in Albania, even at the risk of the
lives of their troops: and the equally swift deliberations of
the Security Council, in the presence of Secretary-General
Kofi Annan - who, representatives may remember, went
twice to Albania to instill urgency and who gave the Italian
authorities invaluable advice on the conduct of the
operation during his visit to Rome.

We cannot forget that when the decision was made to
start the operation, the Government was losing control over
the territory, with the country sliding towards anarchy. The
economic situation had plummeted with the collapse of the
so-called pyramid schemes, which devastated the savings of
thousands of families. A humanitarian emergency was
encroaching by the day. Arms depots were looted, and the
civilian population came to be heavily armed. Common
crime was rampant, and more so after the collapse of the
prison system. There was imminent risk of a spillover of
the crisis to neighbouring countries.

Thanks to the decisiveness and rapidity of the
international community's action, the situation was
contained and has been reversed, and 3.5 million
Albanians are now back on the road towards normality,
internal security and, hopefully, economic and social
rehabilitation. I dare say that if the international
community had acted with the same speed and
determination in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the Great
Lakes region, thousands of lives would probably have
been spared and immense suffering and destruction
prevented.

In our opinion, several factors contributed to the
positive outcome of the Albanian operation. Some of
them were innovative and could prove useful in the
planning and conduct of similar activities in the future.

First was the unity of intent shown by a group of
countries to get involved immediately in a risky but
necessary operation.

Secondly, there was decisive action by the Security
Council, which on 28 March 1997 approved the mandate
for the force in one day, within 12 hours of the Albanian
authorities' request. I believe that that is a record for this
body.

The third factor was the rapid planning and
deployment of the multinational protection force. I am
proud to say that it took the Italian general staff only four
days from the adoption of the resolution to submit the
operational guidelines to other participating countries,
while at the same time an advance mission landed in
Albania. Two weeks later the first contingents of the
multinational protection force were deployed in the field.

Fourthly, there was intense and in-depth political
consultation and coordination among the participating
countries, giving the force the necessary guidance from
the outset. A steering committee was established, and it
met weekly in Rome under the chairmanship of
Ambassador Amedeo de Franchis. It consisted of the
political directors of the 11 troop-contributing countries
and the commander of the force. Representatives of the
United Nations and its related agencies, the Organization

 
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the European
Union, the Council of Europe, the Western European Union
and the International Committee of the Red Cross all
attended as observers. Thus, all the contributing countries
and the international organizations involved could interact
and make common decisions in real time, always based on
consensus - and I underline this point, which I think is
very important. The steering committee also prepared the
11 bi-weekly reports mandated by the Security Council,
thus providing prompt and thorough information concerning
the activities of the force.

Fifthly, definite limits were placed on the time-frame
of the operation from the outset, with a sunset clause that
was fully respected.

The sixth factor was the comprehensive and ongoing
integration of the political, military and humanitarian
aspects of the entire operation.

Last but not least was the total, absolute respect by the
force for its mandate regarding complete neutrality and
impartiality towards the Albanian political forces, and
regarding refraining from any kind of police activities, no
matter how difficult this proved at times.

In short, on this occasion there was strict compliance
with the three golden rules of the updated peacekeeping
doctrine: request and consent of the legitimate Government;
absolute impartiality of the peacekeepers; and no recourse
to weapons by peacekeepers except in self-defence.
Consequently, as our colleague from Guinea-Bissau has
already noted, Albania can be considered another United
Nations success story, like Mozambique, Cambodia,
El Salvador and Haiti.

From this point forward, Albania is entering a second,
no less difficult, phase: it must address long-term national
reconciliation, the rehabilitation of State institutions,
economic reform, and reconstruction. Nobody can deny that
the primary responsibility for Albania's future lies with the
Albanian people and the Albanian authorities. But their
efforts will be to no avail if the international community
falls short in offering badly-needed assistance during this
new phase. We seem to be off to a good start. The major
multilateral and bilateral donors are working together
effectively to help the Albanians stabilize the economy,
creating the conditions for sound, sustainable growth.

But economic growth alone will not bring about
stability and progress: the country's administration and
democratic institutions must also be strengthened, as we
have learned from recent events. Special consideration
should also be given to the most vulnerable segments of
the Albanian population, in particular the children, who
are the future of the country - who are the future of all
our countries - and for whom appropriate assistance
programmes must be urgently adopted.

Italy pledges to continue to extend a helping hand to
support the rehabilitation of its Adriatic neighbour. On the
multilateral level, we will act within the framework of the
international organizations already involved, the
international financial institutions, and the many non-
governmental organizations which have already begun to
help Albania meet its challenges: let us not forget the
non-governmental organizations, which always play such
an important role in such situations. On the bilateral level,
the Italian Government has established an ad hoc
committee, composed of the relevant administrations
involved in assistance to Albania and chaired by
Commissioner Angioni, to coordinate all bilateral
initiatives aimed at the social and economic recovery of
the country, giving priority to public education, the health
and judicial systems, the promotion of trade, and the
fostering of small to medium-size businesses.

To that end, as has been recalled in previous
statements, in May and July we convened two preparatory
conferences in Rome, chaired personally by our Foreign
Minister, Mr. Dini, in which international financial
institutions, the main donors, and all the other
international organizations involved took part. These
conferences will be followed by a ministerial meeting in
Rome this coming fall, and later by a donors' conference
in Brussels. We are confident that, with the support of the
international community, Albania will show the necessary
determination to be fully reintegrated into the European
family, to which it belongs by geography, history and
culture.

I wish to reiterate my country's sincere gratitude to
the 10 other States and Governments that cooperated so
effectively for the positive outcome of this operation, and
express our profound, sincere appreciation to the Council
Presidents, who fully grasped the urgency of the situation
at critical moments: Ambassador Wlosowicz of Poland;
Ambassador Monteiro of Portugal; Ambassador Park of
the Republic of Korea; Ambassador Lavrov of the
Russian Federation; Ambassador Osvald of Sweden; and
of course you, Mr. President.

My thanks also go to all the other members of the
Security Council for their earnest commitment in

 

authorizing and monitoring the operation, particularly
Ambassador Dejammet of France, whose country was one
of the major contributors to the force and whose delegation
played such an essential role in the Council's deliberations
and in keeping the Council informed. And, of course, my
sincere congratulations go to our colleague Ambassador
Kulla of Albania, who, throughout these trying times for his
country, always followed the process here in New York
with calm, expertise and diplomatic skill.

However, our work here would produce few or no
results were it not for the bravery and dedication of the
officers and soldiers who risk their lives daily in the field
of peacekeeping activities. Through them, these officers and
soldiers, the ideals of peace and solidarity of the Charter
become a reality for millions of people throughout the
world. We owe them all a lasting debt of gratitude.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Turkey. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

