Mrs. Albright (United States of America): With
great sadness, the world is once again watching tragedy
unfold in Central Africa. None of us can forget the shock

 

and horror of the strife in Rwanda in 1994, the hundreds of
thousands of innocent people slaughtered in churches and
schoolyards and in their homes. Millions of refugees fled
the violence across the borders into Zaire and Tanzania.
Thousands died in makeshift camps until the international
community was able to bring water, food and medicine.
Now, in the last few weeks, new fighting again has sent
most refugees and displaced persons into flight, danger and
deprivation and blocked humanitarian support from reaching
them. Their plight is urgent.

The international community is, as always, ready to
assist those most in need - the innocent civilians caught
between fighting and fear. Last week, the Security Council
adopted a resolution which laid the basis for a rapid and
effective international response. In the interim, the
Secretary-General's special envoy and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
have been working to calm the situation and aid the
refugees. And a lot of nations have been developing
coordinated plans for a temporary humanitarian force, under
the leadership of Canada, to permit restoration of aid and
repatriation of refugees.

But the complexities of the situation in eastern Zaire,
with multiple armed groups and a fragile political
environment, require prudent preparation. The United States
strongly supports the initiative of the Canadian Government
to lead a multinational force to allow the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the refugees and displaced
persons in the current crisis, with the dual function of
facilitating the voluntary repatriation of refugees to their
home countries. We welcome the offers by nations from
around the world to participate in the multinational force
that the Security Council would be authorizing with this
draft resolution, as well as the many offers of humanitarian
assistance.

The long-term solution is voluntary repatriation of the
refugees. To avert a recurrence of this humanitarian
tragedy, refugees who wish to return to Rwanda must be
able to do so. It appears, as we speak, that perhaps tens of
thousands are finally taking advantage of this opportunity.
We welcome this development and hope it continues. The
Government of Rwanda has taken credible steps and made
further pledges to ensure the security of the refugees and is
working with the international relief agencies to assist them
upon their return. We are consulting with the Governments
of the region on the arrangements necessary for potential
deployment of United States forces.

 

The United States is working closely with the
Canadian and other Governments, the United Nations
agencies and the humanitarian community to determine
precisely the humanitarian requirements and how we
might most usefully participate in these humanitarian
efforts and to facilitate the orderly and successful
repatriation of the refugees. Although considerable
progress has been made, some outstanding questions
concerning the organization and operation of the mission
remain to be worked out. It is a complex effort and
planning for an appropriate operation to follow the
temporary multinational force must also begin right away.

We applaud the effort that the Secretary-General's
Special Envoy, the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
regional leaders, the European Union and other mediators
are making to address the underlying political problems
that must be resolved before the region can achieve true
peace and stability. We urge all the parties in the region
to cease hostilities directed at one another, cooperate with
the mediation efforts, permit the flow of humanitarian
assistance and support the secure repatriation of refugees.
We also urge all parties to cooperate with the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, which is
authorized to deal with those persons responsible for the
1994 genocide.

