Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): On 27 December 2008, the Israelis
launched their destructive aggression, making use a
wide variety of the most lethal weapons against
defenceless people, having previously besieged and
starved them and having deprived them even of water,
medicine and other necessities - acts which met with
astonishing silence from the Security Council. The
Israelis claim to have carried out these actions in
response to the firing of rockets from the Gaza Strip,
which, according to them, was a violation of the truce
agreed upon in June 2008.

Here, we must stop for a moment and consider
the facts. Members know that the Gaza Strip has been
under siege since the middle of 2007. Under Egyptian

auspices, the Israelis and the Palestinians reached a
Gaza truce in June 2008. Both parties undertook to
cease all forms of violence, and, for its part, the Israeli
side committed itself to lifting the blockade, opening
the border crossings and returning to the situation that
had existed prior to June 2007. This agreed lull was
intended to put an end to aggression and fighting for a
period during which the two parties concerned would
observe the ceasefire as a stage on the way towards a
just and final settlement of the Palestinian issue.

But from the very first days of the ceasefire, the
Israelis, through their Prime Minister, have adopted a
highly negative position. They have preferred to
employ force, escalation and aggression at the expense
of lasting peace. Israel has essentially not been a party
to the ceasefire, which it unjustifiably violated more
than 195 times, martyring 25 individuals.

Israel has not lifted the siege or reopened the
crossings. On 4 November 2008 the Israeli army
carried out an incursion into the eastern Gaza Strip
with no provocation from the Palestinian side; during
that incursion six Palestinians were killed. That was a
serious violation of the truce. It is only normal that
there should be a response. The ceasefire must not be
respected by the Palestinians only.

Yet in spite of this, in all that time the
Palestinians did not fire a single shot, even though they
were entitled to do so because they are under
occupation and are entitled to respond to Israeli
aggression.

Since 5 November 2008, in full view of the entire
world, the Israelis have imposed a complete air, land
and sea blockade on Gaza. The United Nations
considers that to be a clear violation of international
law. The blockade even prevents humanitarian
assistance from reaching Gaza: trucks and assistance
provided by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) are unable to enter the Gaza Strip. This
means that the Agency has had to suspend its
distribution of basic goods to those in need. As
everybody knows, that means half of the population of
Gaza. The result is that they have starved those people.
On 18 December 2008 (see S/PV.6049), my
country described the various repercussions of the
blockade and the total paralysis of economic activity.
Bakeries have closed; 80 per cent of households are
living below the poverty line; there are grave water and
sanitation problems - the people of Gaza have water
only once a week. Water treatment plants are no longer
in operation, which means that stagnant water now lies
in the streets of Gaza. There is virtually a complete
lack of medicine. The Council has heard from
numerous United Nations agencies that 150 essential
medicines are not to be found. Many people have died
for lack of medicine and because they are being
prevented from seeking treatment outside Gaza.

The electric power plant that provided more than
half of Gaza's electricity is basically shut down. Banks
are no longer operating and are on the verge of
collapse. The World Bank has drawn attention to this
issue, because the Israelis have prevented Bank funds
from entering the Gaza Strip.

The multifaceted fallout from the blockade is
well known.

All of this has been done in the full view of the
Security Council and in spite of numerous appeals and
warnings from officials of United Nations agencies.
The Council has failed to take action.

The underlying causes and principal reasons for
this situation are the occupation, the denial to
Palestinians of their rights and the immoral and illegal
practices of the Israelis.

The Israeli authorities are occupation authorities;
they have clear obligations under international law, in
particular under the Fourth Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.
Obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention
include provision of security, food and medical
services and the facilitation of emergency services. But
the Israeli authorities have nonetheless violated all of
their obligations and have imposed collective
punishment. They have perpetrated extremely grave
crimes, as everyone knows. All of this has taken place
after the international community's unanimous
declaration on genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes.

In spite of that, the Council has failed to take
action. The fact that the Council has taken no action
has encouraged the Israeli authorities in their actions
since 27 December 2008. Air raids, employing cutting-
edge weaponry, have been stepped up. There we see
the origins of the crimes of genocide and crimes
against humanity.

Through their Minister of Defence and other
officials, the Israeli authorities continue to state that
these crimes are only the beginning, and that Israel will
continue and expand its aggression. Israel will continue
the blockade, which is starving Palestinians. Israel has
rejected humanitarian appeals for a 24-hour lull to
make it possible to deliver humanitarian assistance.

Now there has been a very serious escalation: the
ground attack that began on Saturday, 3 January 2009.
The result, we fear, has been a major surge in deaths
and injuries. There has been destruction, even of
UNRWA schools - even though Karen AbuZayd,
Commissioner-General of UNRWA, has said that the
Palestinian resistance is not using the Agency's
infrastructure, facilities or schools as human shields.

In spite of the Security Council's urgent
consultations on 3 January 2009, no common position
has been adopted, not even a statement to the press.

The Israelis have once again demonstrated that
they are not interested in peace. What they are
interested in is new territory. They are perpetrating
terrorism against the Palestinians and are using every
means available to them. They are starving, arresting
and killing Palestinians on a mass scale. The aim of
what the Israelis are methodically doing is clear. The
means they use are also clear, What the Israelis
continue to do is to perpetrate the greatest violence in
the history of the Israeli occupation. That is Israel's
response to resolution 1850 (2008) of 16 December
2008.

The vacillation of the Council and its hesitation
on taking a decision and adopting a resolution have
permitted the Israeli war machine to continue to
perpetrate the worst of horrors against a defenceless
people and to ignore international law. The Council is
now repeating what it did in 2006, when it gave Israel
the leeway to keep killing Lebanese civilians and to
destroy Lebanon's basic infrastructure in order to
achieve the aims of certain parties.

The fact is that the massacre perpetrated by Israel
in Gaza continues and has claimed the lives of some
600 Palestinians, more than a fourth of them babies,
women and children and 80 per cent of them civilians.
In addition, 2,800 have been wounded, 20 per cent of
whom are in critical condition; mosques, homes,
schools and official buildings have been destroyed. The
deterioration in the humanitarian situation that we are
seeing today is astonishing. A school was targeted
today and dozens were killed; the school was not a
bunker. The Council should ensure that the criminals
responsible do not escape punishment.

My delegation has submitted a draft resolution to
the Council. We have made several changes to take the
concerns of various members into account. We hope
that the Council will adopt the draft resolution. Every
minute that passes means more suffering, destruction,
killing, hatred and desire for vengeance. Any delay
would send the wrong message to the aggressor, who
would continue with its aggression and crimes.

