Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We want to thank you,
Sir, for convening today's meeting on the situation in
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. We also want
to welcome the ministers present here in the Council
today, as well as the briefing by Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo.

In any country, like all the countries represented
around this big table, political parties choose the
provisions by which to conduct elections. Venezuela
is no different, and it held its presidential elections on
20 May 2018 on the basis of its national laws governing
such elections. Those elections also took place in
accordance with the agreement of electoral guarantees
that was signed by all political parties shortly before
the elections. The elections were further overseen
by Venezuela's National Electoral Council, as in any
other country, whether developed or developing. It was
on that basis that South Africa's President, Mr. Cyril
Ramaphosa, congratulated President Maduro following
his inauguration for a second term as President of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

A founding principle of South Africa's
constitutional democracy, which we hold very dear,
is respect for the rule of law. We are therefore deeply
concerned by what is a clear attempt, in Venezuela,
to circumvent the constitutional legal mechanisms of
the country that govern its elections. Any grievances
or disputes should be resolved in a peaceful manner
through the proper mechanisms and processes provided
for in the Constitution of Venezuela and its electoral
laws, without external influence. That is standard
practice everywhere, in every country, and indeed the
best practice in all democracies that subscribe to the
rule of law.

South Africa echoes the statement made by the
Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, in Davos on
24 January, where he urged a de-escalation of tensions
to prevent further violence. We further support the
Secretary-General's call referring to

"the urgent need for all relevant actors to commit to
inclusive and credible political dialogue to address
the protracted crisis in the country, with full respect
for the rule of law and human rights".

South Africa therefore calls on all parties to
participate in a national dialogue process to ensure
unity and reconciliation and for the furtherance of a
political solution to the situation in the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela. We would like to reiterate
that any further action by or grievance of either party
should be resolved through the due legal processes of
the country.

We are also concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Venezuela and the resultant migration that
has taken place. We call on the entire international
community, as well as the relevant United Nations
agencies and bodies, to work with the Venezuelan
Government and its neighbours in order to assist those
in need.

Iwish to stress that South Africa is firmly against any
attempts aimed at undue or unconstitutional changes of
Government in Venezuela. The Security Council should
never be an instrument that validates unconstitutional
changes of any Government - anywhere, at any time.
Instead, the Council should promote avenues that
create environments conducive to inclusive dialogue
and cooperation, which would ease the challenges and
hardships faced by the Venezuelan people.

