Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Before I start, could
I, through the American delegation, pass on a tribute
to Ambassador Haley in connection with her time on
the Council. Her ambition for the Council and her
commitment to delivery and effectiveness have really
helped moved issues and ourselves forward. So I would
ask the United States delegation to please thank her
very much indeed for that, and I will come to what
she said about the peace process a little bit later. I also
thank the Special Coordinator. I completely echo the
Swedish Ambassador in paying tribute to him and his
team in such difficult circumstances.

As others have noted, it is two years since the
Council adopted resolution 2334 (2016), and no steps
have been taken by Israel to cease settlement activity
during this period. In fact, settlement activity has
continued. The Government of Israel has also moved
forward with retroactive legislation of the outpost Havat
Gilad. We are deeply concerned about the Government's
announcement last week to retrospectively legalize
thousands more homes in the West Bank, construct
82 new residential units in the Ofra settlement and
advance the construction of two new industrial zones
in the West Bank.
The United Kingdom's position on settlements
is clear. They are illegal under international law.
Settlements present an obstacle to peace, and they
threaten the physical viability of a two-State solution.
That is why we supported resolution 2334 (2016), and
we urge the Government of Israel to reverse its policy
of settlement expansion.

At the same time, we see continued demolitions
taking place, including in East Jerusalem. We are
concerned by the demolition of 16 small businesses
in the Shuafat refugee camp on 21 November. There
are no valid town plans for the camp, and this forces
Palestinians to resort to building without permits. We
are also closely monitoring developments in Sheikh
J arrah and Silwan, where many hundreds of Palestinians
are at risk of eviction. This risk is exacerbated by recent
Israeli legislative developments and court rulings. We
will continue to support the Palestinian presence in East
Jerusalem, including through legal aid programmes for
those facing demolition or eviction.

We welcome the temporary postponement of
plans to demolish the Bedouin community of Khan
Al-Ahmar, but we remain gravely concerned about the
fate of that community. The United Nations has said
that this demolition could amount to forcible transfer,
in violation of international humanitarian law. As I
have said before in this Chamber, Israel is in no way
obligated to demolish Khan Al-Ahmar. It has the power
to change its mind, and we urge it to do so.

We look to the Israeli Government to provide a
clear, transparent route for Palestinian construction to
end the cycle of illegal building and demolitions.

Turning to some of the other issues that the Special
Coordinator raised, I have no hesitation in joining him
in unreserved condemnation of all terrorist attacks, no
matter against whom they are perpetrated. We share
his concern about the intensity of these attacks, and we
convey our condolences to the families of the victims
on both sides.

In the context of the Hamas resolution in the
General Assembly recently (A/73/L.42), I note that it
would have been adopted by a majority of 30 had there
not been a required two-thirds majority. However, I
think that majority of 30 is very significant and shows
the direction in which the tide is going.

Turning to the humanitarian situation in Gaza,
yesterday the United Kingdom announced an additional
$7 million of emergency funding to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East to provide food to refugees in Gaza.
The immediate priority must be to ease restrictions
on movement and access, reduce tensions and avoid
another conflict. We expect Hamas, the Palestinian
Authority and Israel to do their utmost to prevent
escalation. We continue to support tangible steps
towards intra-Palestinian reconciliation and uniting
the Gaza Strip and the West Bank under the effective
functioning of the Palestinian Authority. I welcome the
efforts of the Special Coordinator in this respect.

I would like to address what Ambassador Haley
said about the peace process. We very much welcome
the confirmation that a United States plan is ready and
we look forward to receiving it and studying it in due
course. We agree that both sides will clearly be asked to
make difficult decisions to achieve peace and we agree
that European and Arab States will have an important
role to play in supporting any peace plan. We look now
to the parties to take steps to build confidence and to
build the right environment so that any peace process
can succeed.

For the United Kingdom, it is very clear that the
well-known parameters are the most viable framework
for a just and lasting peace. First, there must be an
agreement on the borders of the two States, based on
the 4 June 1967 lines, with equivalent land swaps as
may be agreed between the parties. Secondly, security
arrangements for the Palestinians must respect their
sovereignty and show the occupation is over; for the
Israelis, they must protect their security. Thirdly, a
just, fair, agreed and realistic solution to the refugee
question must be put in place. Fourthly, the aspirations
of both parties for Jerusalem need to be fulfilled and a
way must be found through negotiations to resolve the
status of Jerusalem as the future capital of both States.

It follows from this that we continue to believe that a
two-State solution remains the best outcome of a peace
process. The United Kingdom remains committed to
working with both parties, as well as regional and
international partners, in support of this goal.

