Ms. King (Australia): I would like to welcome
to the Security Council His Excellency Mr. Samura
Kamara, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Republic of Sierra Leone. I would
also like to thank Executive Representative Jens Anders
Toyberg-Frandzen for his briefing and his work and for
that of the entire team of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Mission in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL).
I also thank Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski for
his leadership of the Sierra Leone country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
and for his detailed briefing this morning on the
ongoing work of the PBC.

The closure of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone, in five days' time,
will mark an important transition for both Sierra Leone
and for the United Nations system. Sierra Leone has
made extraordinary progress since the end of the civil
war in consolidating peace and democracy. As Sierra
Leone's focus turns now from consolidating peace to
spurring economic development, it is appropriate that
we acknowledge achievements and look at challenges
ahead.

After more than 15 years of successive United
Nations peace operations, Sierra Leone now has
stronger institutions, an entrenched democratic culture
with regular elections and a vigorous civil society.
It is actively fighting corruption and strengthening
accountability. It is a successful model of how post-
conflict countries can address transitional justice in a
way that holds perpetrators of past crimes to account,
while promoting national reconciliation. Australia
commends the people and the Government of Sierra
Leone for that remarkable progress.

UNIPSIL has been central to that success. As the
Secretary-General's final report (S/2014/192) makes
clear, by integrating its political mandate together
with the development and humanitarian mandates of
United Nations agencies, UNIPSIL was instrumental
to United Nations system efforts in Sierra Leone to
deliver as one. It continuously led efforts to promote
political dialogue, manage electoral-related disputes
and strengthen the vital role of civil society. And it
provided crucial support to strengthen the capacity
and independence of key institutions, including the
National Human Rights Commission of Sierra Leone,
the Political Parties Registration Commission and the
Anti-Corruption Commission.

Australia welcomes the withdrawal of UNIPSIL
as a good model for the conclusion of a successful
United Nations peacebuilding mission. Executive
Representative Toyberg-Frandzen's strong leadership
of the mission during this critical time has contributed
to a seamless transition. We would encourage the
Secretariat to draw on the lessons that have been
gleaned from the transition process to consider how
they could and should be applied elsewhere.

None of that, however, is to underestimate
the challenges that lie ahead. The constitutional
review process holds great potential for reducing
political polarization in Sierra Leone and fostering a
culture of political inclusivity. Corruption and youth
unemployment will remain major challenges for
the Government, as will addressing trans-national
threats such as drug trafficking and maritime piracy.
Continuing to strengthen Sierra Leone's institutions,
particularly the security sector and the judiciary, will
be important in tackling those challenges.

We are particularly encouraged by the development
and recent launch of a security sector reform programme,
with support from United Nations Development
Programme and the Peacebuilding Fund, to assist in
strengthening the police and other institutions. While
the Sierra Leone police have come a long way over the
past 12 years, a number of challenges remain, including
accountability, governance, oversight and corruption.

As investment in Sierra Leone's extractive
industries increases, it will also be important to
strengthen transparency and accountability in the
natural resources sector and to establish robust
dispute-resolution mechanisms. Then Sierra Leone can
ensure that all its people benefit from the boom and the
dividends of peace.

The withdrawal of UNIPSIL does not mean that
Sierra Leone is alone in addressing those challenges.
The United Nations country team continues to impress,
with its high level of integration and the seamless
manner in which its agencies took over responsibility
for many of UNIPSIL's residual functions. The PBC
will continue to be engaged in supporting the United
Nations transition process. We fully support the Sierra
Leone configuration's proposed modalities for a lighter
and more responsive approach.

Other countries in West Africa share many
of Sierra Leone's challenges, therefore increased
cooperation with them will be essential for Sierra
Leone to tackle common threats. Australia sees great
potential in a reinvigorated Mano River Union, which is
strengthening subregional security, including through
the establishment of cross-border security units along
the common borders of its members. Similarly, the
efforts of the Economic Community of West African
States to address maritime piracy, which threatens
regional prosperity, would be important for all the
countries of the region. It will also be important for the
United Nations Office for West Africa to continue to
provide good offices and a preventive diplomacy role
following UNIPSIL's departure.

In conclusion, I echo Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen's
comment that Sierra Leone's remarkable progress is
due first and foremost to the determination of its people
to forge a clear path to peace. But UNIPSIL, and the
United Nations more broadly, has been its absolutely
steadfast partner, and the results of that partnership are
now clear for all to see. We wish the people of Sierra
Leone every success for their future.

