Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I welcome you to New York, Sir. We are
pleased to see you once again in the Security Council
President's Chair.

I would also like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Legal Affairs, Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares;
the President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies, Mr. Peter Maurer;
and Ms. Bellal for their briefings.

History has seen various different approaches
to the problems of the law of armed conflict. It is no
secret that war was once thought to be contrary to law
and therefore not subject to any regulation. This was
expressed in the well-known Roman maxim: "In times
of war, the law falls silent". Unfortunately, humankind
required several centuries and two of the most terrible
armed conflicts in its history, which took place in the
twentieth century, to realize the need to humanize wars
and form a set of rules for its conduct so as to ensure,
among other things, that those not directly participating
in armed conflict are kept as safe as possible.

Today we gather to mark the seventieth anniversary
of the Geneva Conventions. These documents form the
foundation of the contemporary law of armed conflict.
Our country made a substantial contribution to the
development of these Conventions, which substantially
expanded the legal regulation of States' conduct in
armed conflicts and, above all, with respect to the
protection of civilians.

I take this opportunity to recall another anniversary
related to international humanitarian law. In November
last year, in Saint Petersburg, the Interparliamentary
Assembly of Member Nations of the Commonwealth
of Independent States and the International Committee
of the Red Cross organized a conference devoted to
the 150th anniversary of the adoption, upon Russia's
initiative, of the 1868 Saint Petersburg Declaration
Renouncing the Use, in Time of War, of Explosive
Projectiles Under 400 Grammes Weight. That document
established the idea not only of banning inhumane
forms of weaponry, but also of excluding civilians
and civilian objects from what are considered to be
legitimate targets of war.

When we speak of the relevance of the Geneva
Conventions, we also need to recall the history that
led to their creation. I believe that it would be no
exaggeration to say that the Geneva Conventions
embody the lessons that humankind learned from the
bitter experience of the Second World War. That war,
which was unprecedented in its scale and brutality, was
an immense tragedy for the peoples ofEurope, Asia and
the entire world. A threat to the fundamental principles
of civilization was prevented through colossal joint
efforts and heavy losses.

As we know, Germany essentially refused to
comply with the norms of international law that
existed at that time. Peaceful cities and civilians were
bombed. Hitler's air and ground forces were guided by
a scorched-earth policy. Mass deportations of civilians
and the alleged collective punishment of civilians for
supporting partisans were widespread. Moreover,
collective punishment, as modern research shows, has
served, among other things, to reduce the total number
of people living in occupied territories, thereby freeing
up resources that were useful to the occupying Power.
Starvation was also widely used as a weapon of war.

The abuse of prisoners of war was particularly
cynical. It took place in spite of the fact that the parties
to the conflict had international obligations that were
applicable at the time. Germany's mass and gross
violations of its international obligations were the
subject of the sentencing at the Nuremberg Tribunal.
At the same time, the judicial protection of war
criminals actively advanced the idea that The Hague
rules for the waging of war, which were based on the
experience of nineteenth-century wars, were outdated.
Moreover, defendants actively referred to the absence
of specific prohibitions with regard to the treatment of
civilians. Although those justifications did not allow
them to evade responsibility, they raised the issue of
strengthening the international legal protection of
victims of armed conflicts. It was in that context that
the Diplomatic Conference was convened, culminating
in the adoption of the 1949 Geneva Conventions.

At the same time, following the adoption of the
Geneva Conventions, it became clear that the evolution
of the means and methods of warfare, the emergence
of new types of conflicts, such as national liberation
wars, and the heightened attention of the international
community to upholding human rights in any situation
dictated the need for the further codification,
confirmation and development of humanitarian law.
That led to the adoption in 1977 of Protocols I and II
Additional to the Geneva Conventions.

Allow me to quote resolution 8 of the 1949
Diplomatic Conference and remind the States that
participated in the drafting of the Geneva Conventions
of the following:

"The Conference wishes to affirm before all
nations: that, its work having been inspired solely
by humanitarian aims, its earnest hope is that, in
the future, Governments may never have to apply
the Geneva Conventions for the Protection of War
Victims; that its strongest desire is that the Powers,
great and small, may always reach a friendly
settlement of their differences through cooperation
and understanding between nations, so that peace
shall reign on earth for ever".

Those words remain relevant today. However, armed
conflicts in various parts of the world remain a reality
and the Security Council is forced time and again to
focus its attention on the institutions of international
humanitarian law.

The nature of wars has changed. Internal armed
conflicts now predominate and their main cause is
usually the undermining ofstatehood, including through
the ousting of legitimate Governments as a result of
outside interference. The authority of international
humanitarian law is now often affected by selective
approaches and double standards. That, in turn, gives
grounds for discussions about the need to uphold that
branch of international law - as a rule, by means of
a declaration or an additional monitoring mechanism.
Furthermore, in such conditions, many, depending on
their political predilections, are tempted to reveal the
violations of some parties while concealing the crimes
of others.

We believe that the norms of international
humanitarian law should not be used for political
manipulation. Regrettably, we have already heard one
example of such manipulation today in the statement
made by our British colleague. As our country was
addressed directly, I would just like to say that our
colleague either has outdated information or is poorly
prepared. There is no armed conflict in the territory
of the Russian Federation, which includes Crimea.
Therefore, referring to international humanitarian law
as it applies to our country is not appropriate. With
regard to remarks made about Syria, that too is not an
appropriate subject for today's meeting. I recall the
many questions we pose to our British and American
colleagues with regard to what is taking place with
regard to the observation of international humanitarian
law beyond the Euphrates. We continue to ask those
questions but receive no response. Perhaps the time has
come to have them.

We call on all States to comply strictly with their
obligations underinternational law-first and foremost,
the existing norms of international humanitarian law
that form the firm legal basis for protecting civilians
from the dangers arising from military operations.

As we have said repeatedly in the Chamber, we are
convinced that implementation problems lie not in the
weakness of international humanitarian law, but in the
disinclination or reluctance to implement its principles
and norms in practice. In addition, along with vital
measures to strengthen and maintain peace and security,
of equal relevance are the means to reduce the intensity
of armed conflicts, limit violence and create conditions
for reconciliation and political settlement. Our country,
in turn, continues to call for the humanization of armed
conflicts and, above all, their prevention.

