Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I wish first of all to
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
and High Commissioner Lamberto Zannier for their
comprehensive briefings.

I would also like to congratulate the people of
Ukraine on the inauguration of President Volodymyr
Zelenskyi on 20 May. We wish the President and the
people of Ukraine every success in navigating all
the challenges faced by Ukraine on the road to peace
and prosperity.

On many previous occasions, Indonesia has stated
its position with regard to respecting the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine, as well as
non-interference in its internal affairs. We have also
reiterated the need for all parties to exercise restraint,
manage the crisis responsibly and uphold international
law. We are of the view that it is crucial for all parties
concerned to fully implement resolution 2202 (2015).
Allow me to highlight the following points.

First,we fullyrespectUkraine'snationalcompetence
over the internal matters of the country, including the
establishment of the status of the Ukrainian language
as the country's national language, as stipulated in its
law adopted on 15 May. As a country that comprises
more than 300 ethnic groups, and with over 700 living
languages spoken, Indonesia fully understands the
unifying power of language, which is precisely the
essence of language: to unite people instead of dividing
them. That has always been our credo, and we hope that
this spirit of inclusion, including respecting the rights
of minorities, is always kept in mind to ensure a united
society and lasting peace in Ukraine. We therefore take
note and welcome the intention of President Zelenskyi
to conduct a thorough analysis of the law to ensure that
the constitutional rights and interests of Ukrainian
citizens of all ethnicities, religions and backgrounds
are fully respected.

Secondly, we cannot overemphasize the importance
of implementing internationally agreed commitments.
It is the responsibility of all sides to make good on their
commitments as set out in the package of measures for
the implementation of the Minsk agreements contained
in resolution 2202 (2015). The full implementation of
those commitments is essential to the peaceful resolution
of the conflict and to avoiding further escalation
thereof. We therefore urge all parties to demonstrate
the necessary political will to ensure the end of the
conflict and bring about peace and stability in Ukraine.
All parties must cease resorting to actions that can be
construed as detrimental to the implementation of the
agreed commitments.

Thirdly, we commend and support the efforts of
all parties, including the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Trilateral
Contact Group, in facilitating and monitoring the
implementation of the Minsk agreements. We urge all
parties to support and ensure the implementation of the
mandate of the OSCE and its effective engagement.

Lastly, allow me to reiterate that a sustainable
solution to the crisis can be attained only through a
genuine dialogue among the parties, supported by the
United Nations and the international community. We
fully support all constructive efforts aimed at peacefully
resolving the conflict in Ukraine, in accordance with
international law and the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.

