Mr. Abdullah (Afghanistan): Mr. President, may I
express our pleasure on seeing you chair this meeting and
congratulate your country for the services it is rendering to
the international community.

And may I at the outset seize the moment to express
my delegation's heartfelt gratitude for your timely calling
of this crucial debate on the ongoing alarming situation in
Afghanistan.

My delegation is very much delighted that the United
Nations, following years of scepticism or illusion, appears
perhaps for the first time now - and only amidst the latest
open upsurge in foreign military involvement in
Afghanistan - to have developed an in-depth perception of
the long-standing bitter reality of Pakistani intervention in
Afghanistan. To this reality, inter alia, the remarks of 30
July 1999 by Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi, head of the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan (UNSMA),
on the presence of thousands of armed Pakistani nationals
fighting alongside the Taliban provides credible testimony.

Likewise, in giving further reference to the preceding
context, I take this opportunity to thank you, Sir, and the
members of the Security Council for the statement made by
the Council condemning the 28 July large-scale military
onslaught by the Pakistani-Taliban troops. The onslaught,
as is widely known, inflicted insurmountable suffering on
the innocent civilian population of the provinces of Parwan
and Kapisa, north of Kabul, including 300,000 internal
refugees, by means of forced displacement, deportation
and separation of women and children from their menfolk
and also, recently, by a scorched-earth policy.

For too long, the world has generously given
Pakistan the benefit of the doubt that it might eventually
aspire to the genuine desire of the international
community to bring peace to Afghanistan by putting an
end to its interventions there and thus coming out not
guilty. Today, the sad irony remains, however, that having
felt the pulse of the world, Pakistan has cynically pushed
to navigate the streamlining of its interventions in
Afghanistan towards the ulterior motive of occupying the
country, with flagrancy and impunity. Perhaps this could
best be spelled out by a Pakistani daily, the Frontier Post,
dated 23 August 1999, just four days old, quoting
renowned Pakistani politicians, which I now wish to read
out:

"According to a joint press statement issued
here on Sunday [22 August] the Northwest Frontier
Pakistan chief of Pakhtunkhwa Milli Awami Party,
Mukhtar Khan Yousafzai, and central vice chairman,
Misal Khan, said that, on the one hand, Pakistan was
sending its delegations to talk with different factions
in Afghanistan to bring peace and stability in
Afghanistan, while, on the other hand, they were
openly supporting Taliban militia They alleged
that in the countenance of Taliban, Pakistan had
even sent its Army personnel to give armed support
to their favourites in Afghanistan."

Over the past three years, on various occasions, the
Islamic State of Afghanistan, has amply painted a picture
of the dangers stemming from Talibanism and the pursuit
by Pakistan of a hegemonic agenda in South and Central
Asia. The picture, fearful as it is, has persuaded much of
the international community to further highlight its details
in numerous joint declarations, statements and
communiques within as well as outside of the region, and
also at the United Nations.

Being unequivocally in concurrence with the
international community regarding the dire need for the
Security Council to address the Pakistani aggression in
Afghanistan and to adopt concrete measures against the
ultra-intransigent, obstinate and rejectionist Taliban, the
Islamic State of Afghanistan once again draws the
attention of the Council to the implications of the
Pakistani-Taliban agenda, which is neither restricted in
time nor confined by geography. Otherwise, one cannot
explain the birth of such a phenomenon on the verge of

 

the next millennium, nor can one rationalize the
participation of extremist elements - from China, Burma,
Bangladesh, Uzbekistan, Algeria, Yemen and Saudi Arabia,
against the will of their Governments, as well as thousands
from Pakistan organized by the Government of Pakistan -
all ready and willing to die in what has abusively been
labelled a jihad, or holy struggle, but is in fact directed
against humanity and civilization.

In this context, I would like to very briefly elaborate
on the legal foundations, evidence and facts regarding the
need for the Security Council to adopt such measures. First,
on the subject of major legal arguments: Article 2,
paragraph 4, of the United Nations Charter requires that all
Member States should refrain from the threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State. The Pakistani intervention in
Afghanistan runs counter to this transparent and
unambiguous disposition of the United Nations Charter, an
intervention the substantiation of which intervention I will
address below.

Secondly, on the occasion of the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations, 24 October 1970, the
General Assembly adopted the Declaration of Principles of
International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Cooperation among States and made it clear that every
State has the duty to refrain from involvement in civil strife
and terrorist acts in another State. The Declaration also
proclaimed that every State has the duty to refrain from
organizing, instigating, assisting or participating in acts of
civil strife or terrorist acts in another State, or condoning
organized activities within its territory directed towards the
commission of such acts. Pakistani involvement and
activities in Afghanistan and South and Central Asia go
against the disposition of this Declaration.

Thirdly, on 14 December 1974, the General Assembly
adopted the Definition of Aggression. Paragraph (g) of
article 3 of the Definition considered as aggression

"The sending by or on behalf of a State of armed
bands, groups, irregulars or mercenaries, which carry
out acts of armed force against another State".

Pakistan has continuously committed such acts against the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Afghanistan.

Fourthly, on 8 December 1998 the General Assembly
adopted resolution 53/ 108, entitled "Measures to eliminate
international terrorism", operative paragraph 5 of which
calls upon States to refrain from financing, encouraging,
providing training for or otherwise supporting terrorist
activities. In an explicit violation of this disposition,
Pakistan serves as a safe haven for extremists coming
from all over the world, some of whom we have in our
custody. The Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) of Pakistan
has organized the recruitment and training of these
terrorists. Thus, it is logical and appropriate to name
Pakistan as a State-sponsored terrorist country.

Fifthly, on 9 December 1998, the General Assembly,
in resolution 53/135, "Use of mercenaries as a means of
violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the
right of peoples to self-determination", expressed the
international community's alarm and concern about the
dangers that the activities of mercenaries pose to peace
and security in developing countries. In open defiance of
this resolution, the Pakistani ISI has been actively
recruiting and training mercenaries from abroad, as well
as internally, to achieve its hegemonic purposes in South
and Central Asia.

For the sake of brevity, I will not elaborate further
on the ample disposition of General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions and other regional and
international decisions with regard to the maintenance of
peace and security in Afghanistan and throughout the
world, decisions which have irresponsibly been violated
by Pakistan as a rogue State.

Allow me to highlight some facts and evidence
about direct Pakistani military involvement in
Afghanistan, as contained in United Nations documents
and based on findings of the security services of the
Islamic State of Afghanistan. With regard to the Pakistani
agenda and evidence of its intervention in Afghanistan,
the underlying Pakistani objective in Afghanistan is its
use for strategic purposes, secured through a subservient
'government' which the Taliban would provide. Pakistan
will eventually extend its influence, or so the military
planners of Pakistan think, to petroleum and gas-rich
Central Asia. The implementation of Pakistan's
hegemonic designs in Afghanistan continues to have the
high price of systematic genocide, ethnic cleansing and
scorched-earth policy in our country. However, Pakistan's
only miscalculation is the strength of Afghan nationalism.
The ISI continuously fails to understand the potential of
Afghan resistance against any hegemony. Today,
ISI-backed clergymen may have invented a new call for
jihad against other Muslims; yet soon they will face total
humiliation.

 

Allow me here to present facts and evidence of
Pakistani intervention in Afghanistan aimed at securing its
agenda. In the first place, the admission of the presence of
Pakistani nationals and terrorist training centres in
Afghanistan was made by the former Special Rapporteur on
the situation of human rights in Afghanistan, Mr. Paik, and
by the former head of the United Nations Special Mission
to Afghanistan (UNSMA), Mr. Norbert Holl.

Secondly, paragraph 17 of the Secretary-General's
report of 17 September 1997 (A/52/358), referring to the
physical existence of foreign fighters in Afghanistan, states
that a number of prisoners captured by the Armed Forces
of the Islamic State of Afghanistan interviewed by UNSMA
admitted that they came from various areas of Pakistan.

Paragraph 18 of the Secretary-General's report of 14
November 1997 (A/52/682) states that
"United Nations employees also reported an encounter
with an unidentified foreign military training unit of
several hundred persons near Kabul."

These assertions authenticate the recent statement by
Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi, the Secretary-General's
Special Envoy to Afghanistan, in which he confirmed the
existence of thousands of Pakistanis fighting in
Afghanistan.

Thirdly, the Pakistani Foreign Secretary, Mr.
Shamshad Ahmad, made an indirect confession on 19
August by saying that

"Pakistan could not be responsible for any students
from religious schools in Pakistan who might have
entered Afghanistan to join the conflict."

Up until 18 August, Pakistan was denying outright the
existence of any armed Pakistanis in Afghanistan. At least
half the truth was admitted.

Fourthly, while we remain appreciative of these
affirmations, it is earnestly anticipated that an investigating
team assigned by the Security Council to acquire detailed
information including interviews with captured Pakistani as
well as, lately, Chinese and Burmese prisoners, will upon
its return report on the vast dimensions of the alarming
situation in Afghanistan.

In fact, evidence obtained by the military authorities
of the Islamic State of Afghanistan on the command and
control of military campaigns, the extensive use of heavy
artillery and superior air power and the use of night
vision equipment to advance in the dark clearly casts
aside all doubts about the discernible direct and large-
scale Pakistani involvement in Afghanistan and overt
military assistance to the Taliban. Among the latest
evidence of Pakistan's direct involvement are intercepted
radio transmissions in the Punjabi language of Pakistani
officers - communications from the combat zone
command centre in the latest offensive in the Shomali
plains. In addition, during the latest military offensive of
28 July, 19 Pakistani military officers died and many
others were injured. A complete list of their names can be
made available to the Secretariat or to any investigative
team for inquiry.

The Islamic State of Afghanistan firmly believes that
the above-mentioned facts represent blatant breaches of
the United Nations Charter and numerous United Nations
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions on terrorism and the use of
mercenaries. The Security Council, we expect, will find
it a duty to discharge its responsibilities for maintaining
international peace and security in accordance with the
Charter. Pakistan's aggression and State-sponsored
terrorism and activities, which pose a threat to the peace
and security of the region and hamper regional
development and cooperation, should be determined,
condemned and dealt with by taking appropriate
measures.

I now turn to the intransigent attitude of the Taliban.
The United Nations has already recognized the bellicose,
obstinate and intransigent attitude of the Taliban. The
report of the Secretary-General of 16 March 1997
(S/1997/240) stated that, judging both from their words
and from their activities on the ground, the Taliban
appeared determined to gain military and political control
of Afghanistan and to establish their own version of an
Islamic State. This war-mongering attitude of the Taliban
continues without the slightest change. Last year, the
Taliban unilaterally abandoned the Ashkabad peace talks
on 14 March. Even when they attended the meeting of the
"six plus two" group in Tashkent on 19 July of this year,
they definitively refrained from any commitment to peace,
a ceasefire or continuation of negotiations. Just nine days
later, aided and accompanied by Pakistani consignments,
they launched the much-prepared and all-out offensive on
the Shomali plains, north of Kabul.

The international community can no longer afford to
be beguiled by the words of the Taliban about the change
in their attitude, behaviour, doctrine or policy. The last

 

four years proved every optimistic person or agency wrong
about Taliban claims of policy change. On a few occasions
many were unwarrantedly entrapped by Taliban rhetoric,
later realizing that Taliban mouthpieces had launched a
propaganda campaign to mislead the world. The Taliban
search for lebensraum explains the latest genocide, ethnic
cleansing and depopulation campaign by means of a
scorched-earth policy in the Shomali plains.

As contained in paragraph 15 of resolution 1214
(1998), of 8 December 1998, the Islamic State of
Afghanistan earnestly expects the Security Council to
consider the imposition of immediate sanctions against both
the Taliban and their Pakistani mentor in accordance with
its responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations.
Per se, can any one imagine what a halt in just the supply
of fuel destined for Pakistani Taliban tanks, planes and
vehicles could amount to in Afghanistan?

While appreciating the role of the United Nations and
the Secretary-General, and the tireless efforts of
Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi and the member States of the
"six plus two" group - who are all in favour of the peace
process in Afghanistan - the Islamic State of Afghanistan,
mindful of the principle of a peaceful solution to the
conflict, earnestly desires a broad-based, fully representative
and multi-ethnic Government in Afghanistan. The Islamic
State of Afghanistan is also keen to maintain good relations
with all its neighbouring countries, without exception, on
the basis of friendly cooperation and mutual respect.

Meanwhile, for Pakistan - as it is directly responsible
for the crisis in our country - it can be stated that its
search for strategic depth in Afghanistan will soon become
a fall into a strategic ditch. It would be wise to stop
throwing stones at others while sitting in a glass house.

