Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (spoke in Arabic): This
is my last briefing to the Council before my assignment
as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen
comes to an end.

I began my assignment in April 2015, when Yemen
was already embroiled in a conflict that has gradually
destroyed its economy, health-care services, housing,
roads and schools - everything that Yemenis need in
order to live and prosper. The parties have maintained
the destructive pattern of zero-sum politics that has
plunged the country into more poverty and destruction.
The decision makers in the conflictperceive concessions
as weakness and dissent as a threat. Regrettably, they
have consistency taken irresponsible and provocative
actions that ignore the daily suffering of Yemenis
generated by this conflict.

The past two months have witnessed a renewed
and large-scale escalation of military confrontation in
Al-Hudaydah, Al-Jawf, Sana'a and Al-Bayda, as well
as areas along the Yemeni-Saudi border. The Houthis
continue to fire ballistic missiles into the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia. Fighting in Taiz governorate has been
particularly bloody and destructive, while Aden and
the neighbouring governorates have been the scenes
of continuous clashes. During the latest outbreak of
violence in the city on 28 January, dozens of people
were killed and hundreds more were injured. I reiterate
my call on all stakeholders in Aden to demonstrate
self-restraint and avoid any inflammatory speech. I
urge them to resolve their differences in a peaceful and
constructive manner through dialogue.

I am also seriously concerned about reports from
several humanitarian organizations on the recruitment
of thousands of child soldiers by all parties to the
conflict, which constitutes a flagrant violation of
children's rights. While the reports indicate that all
warring parties have engaged in such practices, the
systematic recruitment of children by the Houthis
may have negative implications for the future of the
country. Parties must adhere to international law
and international humanitarian law. Any intentional
or direct attack on civilians or civilian objects is a
serious violation of international humanitarian law.
The parties must respect the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution, and ensure the access
of affected populations to humanitarian assistance.

As the conflict has deepened, the economic and
humanitarian crisis has deepened with it, making Yemen
the world's largest man-made humanitarian crisis. John
Ging will brief the Council on that issue. Since 2015,
Yemen's economy has shrunk by almost 40 per cent. In
2017, the value of the Yemeni rial dropped by more than
50 per cent. The decline of the currency and the related
sharp increase in prices have had a negatively affected
the economy and have thereby hampered the delivery
of basic supplies.

These factors have had a direct affect on the private
sector and the payment of salaries of the public-sector
employees. Undoubtedly, the non-payment of salaries
for more than a year constitutes a massive burden
on Yemeni citizens. Indeed, it has become clear that
revenues that should be contributing to salary payments,
maintaining basic services and stimulating the economy
are instead being used to fund the war. Moreover,
informal taxation and other forms of corruption are
flourishing, exacerbating the humanitarian situation.
These factors mean that Yemeni households are losing
their purchase power and access to basic services. Some
22.2 million Yemenis are now in need of some form of
humanitarian assistance, compared to 15.9 million in
March 2015.

In the context of these appalling and vast
humanitarian challenges, I welcome the generous
pledge of $1 billion by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
and the United Arab Emirates to support humanitarian
action and reconstruction in Yemen, as well as their
commitment to raising an additional $500 million from
other donors in the region. I hope that these initiatives
will materialize and that the funds pledged will be
disbursed as soon as possible so as to improve the
current precarious situation.

Yemeni women humanitarianave suffered some
of the worst effects of the conflict. The space for
women to exercise their rights is shrinking every day.
I have heard many Yemeni women saying that they
live in a big prison where their freedom of speech
is restricted. Those who speak up face the constant
threat of persecution and violent attempts to silence
them. However, despite these daily challenges, Yemeni
women are remarkably resilient and their inclusion in
the peace process is critical. The same applies to young
people in Yemen.

I would like to express my gratitude to the World
Bank for its innovative approach in Yemen, which is
unique to a country in conflict. The partnership between
my Office and the World Bank, in collaboration with
the United Nations country team, has contributed not
only to the alleviation of the suffering of some of the
most vulnerable families, but also to the long-term
preservation of Yemen's institutions.

I would also like to express my appreciation to the
group of 18 Ambassadors with accreditation to Yemen
and the States that have hosted talks with the parties,
including Switzerland, Kuwait and Oman. During the
past few weeks, I have visited several countries of
the region, as well as the Gulf Cooperation Council
secretariat. They are fully aware of the importance of
a peaceful solution to this conflict in order to stabilize
the region and fight terrorism.

Over the past three years, and throughout my
continuous meetings with the parties, I have come
to believe that a solid foundation for an agreement
has been laid through the endorsement of the general
framework in Biel in 2015 and the discussions that
took place in Kuwait in 2016. Those who follow the
Yemen file closely will acknowledge that the United
Nations has spared no effort to help the Yemeni parties
reach a peaceful solution. During the course of my
interactions with the parties, we have discussed all
the details of a peace road map with a clear timeline,
taking into account the parties" needs and challenges.
Today, I would like to announce, for the first time, that
we were about to reach agreement on a peace proposal,
developed in consultation with the parties, but they
refused to sign at the last minute. By the end of the
consultations, it had become clear that the Houthis
were not prepared to make concessions on the proposed
security arrangements or even to go into details about
a comprehensive security plan. This has been a major
stumbling block towards reaching a negotiated solution.

We see daily reports of civilians dying of poverty,
hunger or illness, but we should not forget that many
politicians from all sides are profiting from this
conflict, from trading in arms to exploiting public
property for personal purposes. In their speeches, these
politicians may stir up strife to deepen the rift in the
Yemeni society; at other times, they declare pro-peace
positions, while in private they are indifferent to the
suffering of their people. Whoever wants peace offers
solutions, not excuses.

We have a peace road map for Yemen. The practical
suggestions to launch it and build confidence among
the parties have been agreed. The only part missing is
the commitment of parties to making concessions and
giving priority to the national interest. This is what
makes us doubtful of their real intention to end the war.
I wish the new Special Envoy, Mr. Martin Griffiths,
every success in his efforts, which I have no doubt will
benefit from his wide-ranging experience in diplomacy.
I hope that the road map will constitute a cornerstone
for moving forward and activating the peace process.

To conclude, let me offer a promise, convey my
thanks and issue an appeal.

I promise the Yemeni people that I will follow up
on the file with the concerned and share my experience
and knowledge of the Yemeni issue in any possible way
that will contribute to peace. I was in Yemen before
becoming a Special Envoy and I have experienced the
courage and manners of the people of Yemen. I will
follow the progress of the file until Yemen returns to
Yemen, even after the end of my assignment.

My thanks also go out to the members of the
Council and the international community for their
support to the United Nations-led mediation efforts
during the past three years, including the efforts of the
Gulf Cooperation Council.

The call goes to the Yemeni parties, who are
solely responsible for everything that is happening. I
call on them to turn the page on this appalling war in
history of Yemen. The United Nations is facilitating the
path towards peace, and the international community
is creating a favourable environment for it. Only the
Yemeni decision-makers can stop the war and the
bloodshed. I repeat: only they can do that.

The regional scenario is replete with challenges,
political and sectarian disputes and economic pressures.
There is no doubt that the developments in recent months
in Yemen will reshuffle the political cards and change
some internal blocs, especially considering the pressure
and challenges encountered by the General People's
Conference, in addition to the emergence of popular
calls from the south voicing their demands. I call on the
parties to cease hostilities and reactivate negotiations
aimed at a peaceful settlement. I urge them to allow
the culture of coexistence to prevail over the rhetoric
of war, so that Yemen becomes a beacon of light in the
Middle East and a model for peace and security where
men and women, young men and women, from the east
and the west and from the north and south participate
in decision-making.

