The President: As this is the first public meeting
of the Security Council for the month of May, I would
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf
of the Council, to Her Excellency Mrs. Dina Kawar,
Permanent Representative of Jordan, for her service
at the helm of the Security Council for the month of
April, as well as to her entire team. I am sure I speak
for all members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Kawar and her delegation
for the great diplomatic skill and masterful navigation
of the waters of the Security Council that characterized
their stewardship last month, a very busy one indeed.
On a personal note, it is also a great pleasure to be
taking over from a woman ambassador. I believe the
fact that she is the first Arab woman ambassador ever to
preside over the Security Council is highly significant
and symbolic, and a true source of inspiration for all the
girls and women in the Middle East.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Liberia

Twenty-ninth progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2015/275)

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Liberia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Benedict Sannoh, Minister of Justice and Attorney
General of the Republic of Liberia.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Karin
Landgren, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Liberia and Head of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia, to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Olof Skoog, Chair of the Liberia configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative of Sweden, to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/275, which contains the text of the
twenty-ninth progress report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Mission in Liberia.

I now give the floor to Ms. Landgren.


