Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): As this is
the first time that I am speaking during your
presidency, Sir, let me first congratulate you on taking
the initiative to organize this open debate on a conflict
whose persistence and special implications are a matter
of concern to the entire international community.

For that reason, Chile wishes today to add its
voice in this Chamber to those that have expressed
their deep concern at the dangerous and intolerable
situation of violence in Israel, Palestine and the
occupied territories and to warn of its grave potential
consequences for the region.

My country regrets that, despite the parties'
acceptance in earlier negotiations of the principle of
peaceful coexistence, dignity and security, for the past
18 months they have once again been locked
irresponsibly in a spiral of destruction and death that is
having tragic consequences for the civilian populations
of Israel and Palestine.

Chile strongly supports the position enunciated in
the recent statement of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, on the conflict and fully agrees that the main
problems to be resolved are the illegal occupation of
territory, the need to put a rapid end to the acts of
violence and terror and an early solution to the
economic hardships of the Palestinian people. In this
regard, Chile agrees that the political, security and
economic issues are interrelated and should be
addressed in a comprehensive manner.
We urge Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
make every effort to bring about the immediate
cessation of all acts of violence, returning as soon as
possible to negotiations under the peace process which
the international community has proposed to that end,
contained principally in the Mitchell report and the
Tenet plan - initiatives that been followed up by
neither party.

The situation today, however, requires urgent
measures that go beyond the issue of how to implement
the Tenet or Mitchell schemes. There is now a dire
need for the parties to restore the minimum conditions
of mutual respect needed to ensure that the negotiations
are held under equal conditions. To that end, therefore,
we request the Security Council to make every effort to
promote such a rapprochement. The Security Council
must fully assume the responsibilities assigned to it by
the Charter.

Chile reiterates once again the need for a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East
based on resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and on
the principle of land for peace. We also wish to
underscore the critical role of the Palestinian Authority,
which continues to be the legitimate and indispensable
partner for peace and must be fully protected.

My country recognizes the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to an independent, viable and
democratic State, as well as the right of Israel to exist
within secure and internationally recognized borders.
We appeal to the parties to abandon rigid positions that
do nothing to help place dialogue above violence and
to refrain from taking unilateral steps that might affect
the course of the dialogue and/or prejudice the final
outcome of the talks.

Chile values and supports the efforts being made
by the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, to persuade
the parties to end the violence and return to the
negotiating table. It also appreciates the contributions
being made to that end by other international actors
who have proposed new and interesting ideas for
consideration - such as that put forward by the Crown
Prince of Saudi Arabia - and urges them to continue
to assist the parties.

