Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): It is with a heavy
heart that we voted for today's resolution 2202 (2015),
and with a clear understanding of the terrible toll that
this uninvited war has imposed on Ukraine. More than
20,000 people have been internally displaced owing
to the illegal annexation of Crimea; at least 5,665
people have been killed, some 2,000 of them since the
announcement of the ceasefire in September; nearly
14,000 have been wounded and some 1.5 million have
been forced to flee their homes. The Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has
warned that further escalation will prove catastrophic
for the 5.2 million people living in the midst of the
conflict in eastern Ukraine.

Since the announcement of the Minsk ceasefire in
September 2014, the militants have grabbed at least 550
square kilometres of Ukraine's territory, and they keep
on grabbing more. Their advances have been buttressed
by an ongoing influx of Russian arms and sophisticated
weaponry, including that brought in under the pretext of
humanitarian convoys. In the past few weeks leading to
the latest ceasefire, the militant attacks have expanded
in the direction of the cities of Mariupol, Kramatorsk,
Artemivsk, Shchastya and others. Even as the package
of measures for implementing the Minsk agreements
was being drafted, reports were coming in of Russian
tanks rolling on Ukrainian soil and of more casualties,
including among children.

The Ukrainian city of Debaltseve is under siege
even as we speak. Ukraine is holding on, trying to
defend a piece of its own land, away from the ceasefire
lines established in the Minsk agreements. Heavily
armed criminals are continuing their onslaught against
Debaltseve and are threatening to continue their deadly
march up to Kharkiv and further. Yes, the Council
must speak out in support of the ceasefire. But we
know full well that previous ceasefires, whether
declared unilaterally by the Ukrainian Government
or established by the Minsk agreements in September,
have been repeatedly violated. Even the most recent
agreement is already being violated as we speak by
Russian-sponsored militants.

Russian tanks, armoured personnel carriers,
howitzers and Grad and Tornado multiple-launch rocket
systems in the hands of the militants are holding the
eastern part of Ukraine captive. Only the most naive
could imagine that the militants could have waged an
ever-expanding war without external help. Without
Russia's direct support the so-called separatists would
have fizzled out, dwindled into non-existence many
months ago. Peace would have been restored and
thousands of lives would have been saved. Instead,
Russia has chosen to sponsor, arm and protect the
militants. It is a direct party to the hostilities and bears
the primary responsibility for the conflict that is tearing
into Ukraine's flesh.

The package that today's resolution endorses is
undoubtedly flawed, but it is the only thing we have.
For it to work, all the parties involved, including
Russia, must honour their commitments, including
the Minsk agreements of September 2014, in full and
in their entirety. Those agreements cannot be swept
under the carpet. The package of measures agreed
on as of 12 February is not and cannot be interpreted
as a replacement of, or substitute for, the September
2014 accords, only as a set of measures aimed at their
implementation.

We know well what needs to be done. Russian troops
and armaments must be Withdrawn from Ukraine's
territory. A viable mechanism monitored by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) must be established to monitor the ceasefire,
and militants must stop blocking the OSCE's access.
Russia must stop supporting illegal militias operating
in the eastern part of Ukraine. Ukraine must be able to
re-establish control of its international border without
any preconditions. Humanitarian access must be
secured and respect for international human-rights and
humanitarian law must be restored. All hostages and
unlawfully detained persons - including Ukrainian
pilot Nadiya Savchenko, a former peacekeeper and the
only Ukrainian female soldier who has served with
peacekeeping troops in Iraq, now being illegally held in
the Russian Federation - must be released, as per the
package of measures agreed on 12 February in Minsk.

Peace cannot be achieved without accountability.
We have witnessed multiple times elsewhere how
impunity breeds more impunity, eventually provoking
new cycles of violence. The reports of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights have repeatedly pointed to the extent of the
serious crimes and abysmal state of lawlessness in the
militant-held areas. Only this past weekend, photos
were circulating of the self-proclaimed militant
chief Zakharchenko with beaten prisoners of war,
another reminder of the militants' many violations of
international humanitarian law. We want to put on record
our firm conviction thatjustice and accountability must
be part and parcel of the path out of this devastating,
unprovoked war against Ukraine. The perpetrators of
the most serious crimes - and to find them we have
only to look at the reports of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, which describe many
of them - including those responsible for the downing
of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7, must be held to
account. In that regard, we reiterate our call on Ukraine
to complete its accession to the Rome Statute.

After the devastating horrors of the Second World
War, Europe has shown remarkable will and ability
to pursue the path of reconciliation and peace. What
started with Franco-German reconciliation * the
European Coal and Steel Community - became a
unique model of reconciliation and integration that over
time evolved into the European Union of today, a model
for democracy, peace, prosperity and human rights
whose appeal continues to draw European nations
eager to join its ranks. It is reckless and profoundly
dangerous to seek to turn the clock back on that spirit of
reconciliation, solidarity and cooperation, which gave
Europe and the world its longest-ever period of peace.
Russia's continued violations of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Helsinki Final Act and numerous
other agreements to which it is a signatory, as well as its
attempts to redraw internationally recognized borders
by force, threaten that peace.

In Minsk, the Presidents of Russia, Ukraine,
France and Germany recommitted to the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Ukraine - although some of those words somehow
managed to slip out of today's resolution. We expect
that commitment to be respected unconditionally by
all, and by Russia in particular. We ask the United
Nations to continue its active engagement in seeking
a durable solution to this conflict through its good
offices, mediation, monitoring of human rights and
provision of humanitarian assistance.

