Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We wish to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Bintou Keita for her useful briefing.
I express our appreciation to her for her commitment to
carrying out her heavy responsibilities since she took
over her Office.

The past couple of weeks have witnessed intensive
engagement on South Sudan within the framework
of the high-level revitalization process, and there is
indeed positive momentum in that regard. The Council
of Ministers of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the IGAD Special Envoy
have been actively involved in shuttle diplomacy to
engage the parties on some of the most important and
outstanding issues related to security and governance.
IGAD has made efforts to facilitate those discussions
by presenting a bridging proposal.

In that connection, issues were left for the principals
to meet face-to-face and iron out their differences.
The Addis Ababa meeting between President Salva
Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar, under the auspices of
my Prime Minister as the Chair of IGAD, provided
such an opportunity after two years. Even though no
breakthrough was achieved, the fact that the two met
to discuss issues face to face was a step in the right
direction. We believe that the Assistant Secretary-
General is right in recognizing the importance of
that development.

All of us saw the outcome of the thirty-second
IGAD Extraordinary Summit, held last week, which
basically laid out the steps that need to be taken over
the coming days to move the peace process forward.
In that context, we very much welcome the outcome
of the second face-to-face meeting between President
Kiir and Mr. Machar in Khartoum, under the auspices
of President Omer Al-Bashir and in the presence
of President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of
Uganda, on the basis of the decision adopted by the
IGAD Summit.

We commend the two leaders for signing the
declaration of principles and hope that will facilitate
the resolution of some of the outstanding issues and
pave the way for the finalization of the IGAD bridging
proposal. In that regard, we welcome the statement
issued by the Secretary-General yesterday (SG/ SM/l9ll4). We hope the Security Council will send
the right signal to the parties, encouraging them to stay
the course and reach an agreement to end the suffering
of the South Sudanese people. That message was also
reinforced today by the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat.

The coming days will be very critical. The two
leaders are expected to meet again in Nairobi, with
the facilitation of President Uhuru Kenyatta. We hope
the Nairobi meeting will build on the momentum
generated in Addis Ababa and Khartoum to facilitate
the successful conclusion of the peace process.

In order to take advantage of the African Union
(AU) Summit in Nouakchott, important meetings by
IGAD and AU are going to take place on the margins.
We hope those meetings will give the peace process
a final push. It is against that backdrop that we are
meeting today. The Council should put its weight
behind those efforts.

We know there has been a lot of frustration over
the South Sudanese peace process because of so many
twists and turns. We all know that there are issues that
need further clarification, and we are not there yet in
terms of achieving a final settlement. Nevertheless,
we cannot afford to lose hope for peace. We can only
encourage what little gain has been made and seize the
momentum that has been generated recently to push the
parties to make the necessary compromise and conclude
the peace process. As the Secretary-General indicated
in yesterday's statement, it is critical for IGAD, the
African Union and the United Nations to work together
at this critical juncture in the peace process.

Nevertheless, we remain concerned by the overall
security situation. That was adequately covered by the
Assistant Secretary-General. That is why we welcome
the declaration of a permanent ceasefire by the parties
in Khartoum, which will enter into force within 72
hours. What matters now, of course, is that the parties
honour that commitment and implement the ceasefire.
IGAD has strongly condemned the repeated violations
of the cessation ofhostilities agreement and has decided
that the Sudan and Kenya should further investigate
the reports of violations and submit to the next IGAD
Summit the appropriate targeted punitive measures to
be taken.

We also note that the humanitarian situation remains
dire. It is Vital that all parties ensure safe and unimpeded
humanitarian access to allow humanitarian actors on
the ground to reach those in need of urgent assistance.

The role of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) continues to be very important. We
are grateful to the civilian and military personnel of
the Mission for their dedication and commitment in
carrying out their mandate. We also commend the
efforts made in ensuring adequate conditions for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to those in need.

We support the statement issued by the Council
yesterday (SC/13399) and join the Assistant Secretary-
General in strongly condemning the attack on
the UNMISS convoy, which claimed the life of a
Bangladeshi peacekeeper. That is unacceptable and
we hope the Government will undertake the necessary
investigation to hold those who committed that crime
to account.

Finally, with regard to the Regional Protection
Force , the Ethiopian infantry battalion is now being
fully deployed and the arrival of the troops and the
equipment will be complete before the end of this month.

