Mr. Lobo de Mesquita (Portugal): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting. I will start
by welcoming Foreign Minister Zacarias da Costa of
Timor-Leste and expressing our appreciation for his
most valuable contribution to today's discussion.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his most recent report on the situation in Timor-
Leste (S/2008/501). My thanks go also to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Atul
Khare, for his excellent presentation. I take this
opportunity to convey to Mr. Khare my Government's
deep appreciation for the work he is doing in Timor-
Leste. Portugal also commends all the staff of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) for their dedication and accomplishments.

Portugal agrees with the Secretary-General's
balanced, pragmatic and thorough analysis of the
overall situation in the country. We are pleased to
emphasize the many achievements of the people of
Timor-Leste. We reiterate the paramount importance of
the continued presence and commitment of the

international community, in particular of UNMIT, to
help consolidate political stability and foster national
reconciliation and socio-economic development in the
country. As on past occasions, we underline the fact
that the common efforts of the international community
can be successful only if they are consistent with the
sovereign will of the Timorese people.

Portugal commends the role played by the State
institutions, Government, political parties and the
whole of society during and in the aftermath of the
terrible events of February 2008. The fact that the
country has not been drawn back into a major crisis is
an encouraging sign of growing institutional maturity
and the people's trust in the functioning of State
mechanisms. In particular, the firm action by the
Government in tackling the issues of the Falintil-
Forcas de Defesa de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL) petitioners
and internally displaced persons is noteworthy.

In that context, we encourage the Government of
Timor-Leste to integrate measures, such as financial
compensation packages for internally displaced
persons and the petitioners, into a sustainable, long-
term economic strategy aimed at reducing poverty;
creating employment and generating income,
especially among the youth; and developing social
protection mechanisms. Initiatives to ensure lasting
reconciliation should also complement those financial
settlements.

In addition to ensuring peace and security,
UNMIT is playing a paramount role in supporting the
authorities of Timor-Leste in their efforts to surmount
key challenges, such as the review and reform of the
security sector, comprehensive institutional
enhancement across the public sector, and the
strengthening of justice.

Moreover, with regard to the holistic reform of
the security sector, the cooperation between F-FDTL
and the National Police of Timor-Leste (PNTL) is a
core element of peace and stability in the country that
needs to be duly promoted. In that context, Portugal
supports the gradual transfer of policing
responsibilities from UNMIT to PNTL on the basis of
the latter's operational capabilities rather than of
artificial deadlines. It is therefore important to ensure
the necessary capacity and training of PNTL, notably
through UNMIT and bilateral assistance.

Since 1999, Portugal has committed €442 million
in official development assistance to Timor-Leste and

08-4651]
concentrated its cooperation in crucial areas, such as
justice and education. Our cooperation extends to many
other areas in response to requests from the national
authorities of Timor-Leste, and it is oriented towards
helping to promote a culture of democratic governance
and reinforcing the rule of law and supporting
sustainable economic and social development, while
ensuring a coordinated approach to cooperation efforts.

Besides that important bilateral contribution to
cooperation with Timor-Leste, my country is fully
committed to supporting UNMIT in its mandate
implementation efforts. Portugal contributes to UNMIT
with police officers and a Formed Police Unit
operating in Dili and its surroundings, as well as with
civilian staff, for a total of approximately 200
individuals. As the largest bilateral donor to Timor-
Leste and a police contributor to UNMIT, my country
is proud to be able to assist the people of Timor-Leste
in their efforts to consolidate democracy and
development in the country.
08-46511
Before concluding, I wish to stress the important
support and solidarity extended to Timor-Leste by the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries in the
areas of political and diplomatic action and
cooperation.

Finally, I cannot end my remarks without
associating myself with the tribute paid to the memory
of Sergio Vieira de Mello, a great friend of Timor-
Leste and a symbol of the highest values and principles
of the United Nations. Having had the privilege of
meeting him in Timor-Leste, I know that he is as
deeply missed there as he is here today.

