Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Sir, on your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I see in you a very experienced
diplomat, an expert who will bring the Council's work
to a successful conclusion, thanks to your wisdom and
your balance in decision-making.

I also wish to thank Ambassador Verbeke,
Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), Ambassador Arias, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), and Ambassador Burian, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). I thank the three of them for their very useful
reports to the Council. I thank also the Executive
Director of the Counter- Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED), Mr. Ruperez, whose efforts, and
those of his colleagues, we highly appreciate as they
assumed their functions.

Since the Council began to consider international
terrorism in 1999, when resolution 1267 (1999) was
adopted, and on through resolutions 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004), my country has always cooperated with
this Council and with the international community in
combating international terrorism in all its forms,
especially State terrorism. Syria's cooperation has
always been strong within international efforts, in
order to eradicate this scourge. I recall on this occasion
that Syria was a member of the Counter- Terrorism
Committee (CTC) for two years.

Syria has suffered from terrorism itself, in
particular from Israeli State terrorism. I wish to
emphasize here today that terrorism spread through the
region only after the appearance of Israeli State
terrorism. Israeli State terrorism, which has targeted
the infrastructure, helpless civilians and stability of the
Middle East as a whole, has been going on for several
decades. Since the establishment of the Security
Council its files have grown to include hundreds of
items having to do with Israeli terrorist operations
against Palestinians, Syrians, Lebanese, Egyptians and
Jordanians. Israeli State terrorism has even reached
Tunisia and Iraq, in a way never seen by the
international community and in a way not in keeping
with the objectives of the Charter.

May I remind the Council, by way of example, of
the actions perpetrated by the Israeli Irgun and the
Stern Gang - the killing Count Bernadotte, the United
Nations mediator in Palestine, in 1948. There have
been repeated Israeli aggression against the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) in Qana in
1996 and in 2006. Let us recall as well aggression
carried out for years now against Egyptian, Jordanian,
Syrian, Lebanese and Palestinian school children, not
forgetting the UNRWA schools in occupied Palestinian
territory, which were targeted by shellings and air
attacks.

Was Count Bernadotte a terrorist? The UNIFIL
troops, the Arab school children - are those people
terrorists? The address of international terrorism is
well known to many of us. The address is the
aggressive policy of Israel, the policy of occupation,
provocation and hostility that refuses to extend its hand
to those among the Arab peoples who advocate peace,
and that refuses to heed the call of the international
community to develop peace on the basis of the Arab
peace initiative and on the basis of the principle of land
for peace.

The ongoing Israeli occupation of Arab territories
in Palestine, the Golan and southern Lebanon is the
worst and most dangerous form of terrorism, especially
as this terrorism is also accompanied by obvious Israeli
actions declared and documented by the United
Nations as violations of the relevant Security Council
resolutions countering terrorism. Certain Israeli
politicians make their statements openly; they incite
hostility and aggression against neighbouring countries
so that people in those countries will be killed, as
though we lived in the Middle Ages, in a pre-consensus
international age.

Regarding the references and sources of
international law, counter- terrorism requires of Israel
first of all that it join in collective international action
and that it not act outside that collective framework. It
requires that Israel cooperate with the counter-
terrorism bodies of the Security Council. That must be
done without selectivity, without prejudice or unilateral
positions. Israel must also stop setting a bad example at
the United Nations by its acts of State terrorism and the
ongoing forcible occupation of land that does not
belong to it.

Israel's continuing policy of State terrorism only
serves to underscore that our request made last year for
an international conference to define terrorism is still
very relevant. That request relates to the need to ensure
that we do not confuse legitimate struggles for
independence and autonomy with State terrorism.

In conclusion, I would like to remind you,
Mr. President, that international terrorism did not begin
on 11 September 2001. International terrorism goes
back much further in time, as it targeted many
countries before its criminal act of 11 September
against the United States and its people. For decades
we have suffered various forms of Israeli terrorism. We
can participate in the international efforts aimed at
eradicating international terrorism in all its forms.

