Mr. Nambiar (India): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council at this critical
juncture in the Council's management of issues relating
to international peace and security. I would also like to
take this opportunity to warmly felicitate the
representative of Cameroon for his exemplary
stewardship of the Security Council during an
unusually active period of time last month.

India attaches great importance to its relations
with Timor-Leste. We have sought to contribute to the
country's development by providing expertise and
training in areas of our competence, and where we see
complementarities in their application. To that end, we
have offered 50 scholarships to East Timor in technical
and economic areas, as well as separate scholarships
for study in Indian universities in the areas of
agriculture and in the information technology sector,
involving the upgrading of skills. India made a
statement on this subject during the last meeting of the
Security Council on the issue of Timor-Leste, last
August. I shall therefore confine my statement on this
occasion to a few brief remarks pertaining to the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2002/1223) on the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET).

I wish to take this opportunity to formally place
on the record of the Council our felicitation to Timor-
Leste on its entry into the United Nations as the
Organization's l9lst Member State. We are happy to
see Ambassador Guterres with us at the table.

The Secretary-General's report informs us of the
country's accession to other international bodies, such
as the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank,
and of its establishment of diplomatic relations with a
number of countries. India welcomes those
developments. We welcome in particular the growing
relations between Timor-Leste and Indonesia,
underscored by the exchange of State visits between
the two countries and the more recent creation of the
Joint Border Committee.

The Secretary-General has referred to the fact
that the leaders of T imor-Leste have sought, since their
independence, to promote a broad-based democracy
and to heed concerns or complaints expressed by their
citizens. India welcomes the embrace of democracy by
Timor-Leste and its steady process of institutionalizing
the protection of human rights in the country. Our own
commitment to democracy since independence, and the
fundamental right to freedom of speech and expression
enjoyed by all our citizens, leads us to recognize the
enormous value and utility of such an exercise for a
nation and a people. We wholeheartedly agree with the
characterization made by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General with regard to the leadership of
Timor-Leste, specifically as regards President Xanana
Gusmao, Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri and Senior
Minister and Foreign Minister Jose Ramos-Horta, as
significant assets of that nation at its current historical
stage.

UNMISET has to play the role of enabler and
facilitator of the larger political, social and economic
goals of Timor-Leste. This is a major responsibility and
requires the support of the international community.
The Secretary-General has referred to unpaid
assessments to UNMISET's special account for the
period since the inception of the Mission, which
amount to $213.6 million. We believe that continued
and timely support for UNMISET's budget will greatly
enhance its ability to assist Timor-Leste towards self-
sufficiency as a nation. There is also need to address
the significant shortfall in resources hindering the
pressing need to fill posts required to develop capacity
in Timor-Leste's public administration.

At the same time, we note that East Timor has
been endowed with enormous potential for revenue
from its hydrocarbon deposits, commercially
exploitable coastline, agricultural base and tourism
attributes. These must be exploited in an efficient and
environmentally friendly manner, so as to empower the
nascent State with the resources required for self-
sufficiency and economic independence in the shortest
possible period of time.

We note with satisfaction that, during the first
three months of the fiscal year 2002-2003, the
Government of Timor-Leste successfully collected 23
per cent of its budgeted revenue despite the economic
contraction following the withdrawal of a significant
international presence. However, the lack of
sustainable assets, resulting in unemployment in the
range of 90 per cent, and the dependence on
international aid continue to beset the nation. These
issues need to be addressed.

The Secretary-General has drawn attention to the
functioning of the country's justice system. We believe
that the concurrent development of the judicial,
legislative and executive branches is important for the
balanced development of a nation. In addition, the
constraints faced owing to the lack of adequate
development of the judicial system will also hinder
efforts to bring to justice those responsible for serious
crimes committed in 1999.

We take this opportunity to express our
condolences to the families of the two UNMISET
peacekeepers who died in last month's bombing in
Bali, and to express our solidarity with the members of
UNMISET on the loss of their comrades. We note that
in his statement the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General alluded to the new shadow of
terrorism that has fallen over the region. As a country
familiar with the consequences of terrorist acts
perpetrated without regard for national boundaries or
norms of human decency, we agree that enhanced
vigilance and improved capacities need to be put in
place in Timor-Leste.
Before concluding my statement, I would like to
join others who have spoken before me in paying
tribute to the dedicated role played by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, who is my
predecessor as representative of India, and his team in
ensuring UNMISET's contribution and utility to
Timor-Leste.

