Mr. Draskovic (Serbia and Montenegro): Allow
me at the outset to express my appreciation to you, Mr.
President, and to the members of the Council for
giving me the opportunity to address the Council on
this very important issue concerning my country and
the province of Kosovo and Metohij a.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his in-depth report on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
Although the facts presented in the report are far from
encouraging, my delegation welcomes its objectivity
and constructive conclusions. Let me also thank
Special Representative Harri Holkeri for his
comprehensive briefing.

I have come here to call on the Council to ensure
greater and more resolute respect for the United
Nations Charter and strict compliance with Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) on Kosovo and
Metohija and its implementation.

Kosovo and Metohija is an open wound for Serbs
and Albanians as well as for the entire international
community. In the wake of mass violence against Serbs
and the barbaric destruction of their centuries-old
churches and cultural sites, on 17 and 18 March of this
year, the Council adopted a presidential statement that
did not adequately respond to the tragedy suffered by
the Serbian people in that province.

From 10 June 1999, when the United Nations and
international civilian and military forces took over the
control and administration of Kosovo and Metohija,
until 17 March this year more than 200,000 Serbs were
expelled, while 40,000 Serbian houses were burned
down or destroyed, along with 115 churches and
monasteries and hundreds of Christian cemeteries.
During that period, approximately 2,500 Serbs,
including dozens of children, were murdered or
kidnapped.

International administrators and the Provisional
Institutions in the province did not react resolutely
enough. And so, on 17 March, tens of thousands of
ethnic Albanians, driven by local media and radicals,
started killing Serbs and destroying monuments of the
centuries-old Serbian and Christian tradition in the
province.

It is undeniable that the regime of Slobodan
Milosevic was responsible for many crimes against
Kosovo Albanians, tens of thousands of whom were
expelled during the NATO bombing campaign. But that
same regime was equally brutal and brought harm to
Serbs as well, who in the majority resisted and opposed
that regime. Hundreds of thousands of Serbs fought for
more than ten years against the Milosevic dictatorship,
terror, wars and atrocities. I am saying this to remind
the Council, with pride, of the democratic values
displayed by Serbs during those years of isolation.

The Head of UNMIK and Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Harri Holkeri, recently
promulgated the "Standards for Kosovo" document as
the only way to build a democratic, multi-ethnic and
multicultural Kosovo and Metohija.

The cornerstone of those standards must be to
eliminate the consequences of the ethnic cleansing of
Serbs and to provide for their full security, their right
to life and other human, civil and ethnic rights. In other
words, it is urgent to rebuild the approximately 40,000
destroyed and burned Serbian houses and to begin
immediately the reconstruction and restoration of
churches, monasteries and other sites of cultural
heritage, under the full supervision of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO). All those efforts should be
internationally funded, since the international
community has been responsible for Kosovo and
Metohija since 10 June 1999.

At the same time, the perpetrators of all murders,
kidnappings and acts of vandalism against those
religious and cultural sites should be tracked down,
apprehended and brought to justice. In particular, the
international military and police forces should be duty-
bound to vigilantly guard the churches and
monasteries, which belong to the cultural heritage of
the entire world. In short, I call on the international
community to assist and help the Serbs and other non-
Albanians in the same way the ethnic Albanian
population was assisted after 10 June 1999.

The Government of Serbia and the Council of
Ministers of Serbia and Montenegro are in favour of
the decentralization of power in Kosovo and Metohija
through the establishment of the highest level of local
self-rule in Serb-populated municipalities, towns,
villages and the so-called Serbian enclaves. The
Government of Serbia, in its plan approved by the
parliament, referred to those units of local self-
government as regions. We could even accept some
other term, because what is important is the substance.
That kind of autonomy paves the way for a multi-
ethnic and multicultural Kosovo and Metohija, leading
to reconciliation between Serbs and Albanians and to
their common European future.

Today, we should not think in terms of final
status, since all of the rights of Serbs are being
tragically violated in Kosovo and Metohija, and that
ghetto of human suffering cannot constitute the basis
for any final status of Kosovo and Metohija. The
Government of Serbia and the State Union of Serbia
and Montenegro are in favour of equal rights for all
their citizens, full respect for the United Nations
Charter and the implementation of all European
standards in Kosovo and Metohija.

We call for the start of a sincere dialogue at all
levels between ethnic Albanians and Serbs - either a
direct dialogue or through the good offices of the
international community. No agreement can be reached
without negotiations. Nor can hostilities be brought to

an end by continuing hostilities. The only way forward
is through dialogue and reconciliation.

I thank you, Mr. President, and I thank the
Secretary-General and Council members for their kind
attention and sincere concern for the peoples of my
country.

