I thank Under-Secretaries-General Ms. DiCarlo, Mr. Khare and Mr. Lacroix for their briefings. I will focus on three aspects: the political context, the humanitarian and human rights situation and the prospects for Darfur. First of all, Belgium would like to welcome the progress made by the Sudan in its democratic transition. The signing of the Juba agreements on 3 October was an important step. Belgium nevertheless calls on the parties to continue their commitment through constructive dialogue and to rapidly implement the agreements reached. We call on the groups that remained absent to return to the negotiating table. That is essential to ensure a lasting peace. The informal talks with Abdelaziz Al-Hilu's group are a step in the right direction. Belgium welcomes the fact that the Juba agreement endorses the importance of justice, accountability and reconciliation for the transition. We welcome the commitment of the parties to transitional justice mechanisms, such as the truth and reconciliation commission and the special court for crimes committed in Darfur. We have noted the intention of the Sudanese authorities to cooperate with the International Criminal Court, whose work we support. Land ownership and use are another crucial issue covered by the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan. These issues are closely linked to the challenge of the return of internally displaced persons and peacebuilding. Support for reconciliation is one of the strategic priorities of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan. We are encouraged by the preparations for the start of operations of this new mission. As an integrated mission, we hope that it can apply a comprehensive approach in its support for political transition. The European Union (EU) will also provide its political support to the Sudan in a dialogue in the coming weeks. The European Union continues to deliver on the commitments it made at the Sudan Partnership Conference last June, reaffirming the Sudan as a long-term priority partner. Last week's announcement of an additional humanitarian aid package for Ethiopian refugees fleeing the conflict in Tigray, bringing the total amount of EU humanitarian aid to the Sudan to €65.5 million in 2020, is testimony to that. The humanitarian situation in the Sudan remains of great concern. Displacement caused by tensions between communities is compounded by the impact of severe flooding, the coronavirus pandemic and other infectious diseases. The 45,000 Ethiopian refugees must also be taken into account. Belgium welcomes the work of the humanitarian aid workers who have provided assistance to 8 million people in 2020. Nevertheless, we are appalled by the ongoing serious violations against children in the Sudan, in particular murders and sexual assaults. Moreover, it is unacceptable that groups that signed the peace agreement continue to recruit children. We also call on the Sudanese authorities to stop using schools and hospitals for their military operations. In that regard, we recall the Safe Schools Declaration, which the Sudan endorsed in December 2015. These concerns are in line with the priority we accord to the protection of civilians. This month, the Security Council is due to take a decision on how the mission in Darfur should implement its withdrawal. We note the persistence of intercommunal conflicts and armed conflicts involving the Sudan Liberation Army- Abdul Wahid faction, a non-signatory to the peace agreement. We hear the concern of the population at the prospect of the departure of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), while the military and police components of the mission are still carrying out regular patrols. We welcome the commitment of the authorities to taking responsibility for the protection of civilians, including through the deployment of a joint force, and the support of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan for the implementation of the national plan for the protection of civilians. However, these important commitments will take time to materialize on the ground. Belgium therefore calls for caution when discussing the possible closure of UNAMID. The challenge is twofold: to ensure a smooth transfer regarding the protection of civilians from UNAMID to the Sudanese authorities and to avoid losing the gains of so many years of a presence in Darfur.
