Mr. Martinsen (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): The draft resolution on which we shall be
voting sets in train a decisive phase in the peace process
begun in Dayton, in which the entire international
community has placed its hopes for the achievement of a
lasting peace in the Balkans.

As is clearly set forth in one of the preambular
paragraphs of the draft resolution, the conflict in the
former Yugoslavia remains a threat to international peace
and security. This explains the concern of one and all and
the fact that, probably, the principal role for the United
Nations, through action taken by the Security Council,
will be to keep the implementation of the Peace
Agreement under permanent review. In this sense, we
take the view that it would be excessively naive to
imagine that the signing of a Peace Agreement, of itself,
means that peace has been achieved once and for all.
There are a number of factors and variables impossible to
predict, and these will have to be treated with the greatest
care to avoid jeopardizing what was achieved in Dayton.

With this draft resolution, we also begin work of the
greatest importance to the United Nations in such
sensitive areas as the protection of human rights,
humanitarian assistance, civil policing and the removal of
mines. We applaud the fact that the parties opted for the
proposal that these functions be undertaken by the United
Nations. In our View, history will judge and experience
will show that this was their best option.

However, we are stuck by the fact that the

supervision of electoral processes - an area where the
United Nations has outstanding and unparalleled
experience and aptitude - has been assigned to the

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Therefore, we support the Secretary-General's offer to that
Organization that the invaluable experience of the United
Nations in this field might be put to use in Bosnia to
ensure that its political institutions are placed swiftly on
a secure basis.

 

We consider it of great importance that the parties
have entered into the agreements on the status of the peace
forces that are to operate in Bosnian territory. Our basic
assumption is that the outrages suffered recently by
personnel of the United Nations Protection Force will pass
into history as just a dubious distinction of the parties to
this conflict.

In our View, it is indispensable that the Force to be
deployed in Croatia in due course have a status agreement
enabling it to play effectively the role required of it.

Once again in history, geographic and political
frontiers are being drawn in this part of the Balkan region.
This may mean that, as on countless occasions in the past,
the migratory movements which have caused so much pain
and suffering for the entire civilian population of Bosnia
will recommence. This prospect is a source of great concern
to us, and we take the View that the Security Council, as
well as the bodies and entities that will deal with problems
of this kind, will have to be aware of the instability factor
which, of course, arises from the possibility that new
migratory flows will be triggered as a result of the Dayton
accords.

I take this opportunity to emphasize the importance
that my delegation attaches to the work of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. It is our view that only
if those responsible for the atrocities which, until recently,
convulsed the entire region are made to face the
consequences of their actions, and if justice is done, will
the peace be lasting.

In conclusion, we should like to highlight, for the
record, that when discord dominated the work of the
Security Council the international community was
powerless to handle the difficult Balkan crisis. When, in
contrast, the major Powers achieved consensus in their
decisions, hopes for peace began to appear. God willing,
this essential spirit of joint endeavour will be maintained
until the obstacles that we have still to overcome together
are indeed behind us.

