Mr. Ferrarin (Italy): Today, the Security Council is
responding to a cry for help from a region where for far too
long human dignity has been trampled on, human rights
violated and the most basic rights of every human being -
the right to life, food and shelter - have been denied; a
region where men, women, the elderly and children are
dying of starvation, thirst and disease; a region where all
hell has broken loose and a multitude of suffering people
are awaiting a signal, an action that could lend them some
measure of security and comfort and break the chain of
blind violence.

Today, the Security Council is finally answering the
message to "Save our Souls" - SOS - coming out of
eastern Zaire, a signal that is unfortunately growing fainter
with each passing day, and refusing to remain silent before
the unfolding tragedy. We are deciding whether to deploy
a humanitarian force, a force that above all else must be a
true force of peace. The objective we all have in mind is to
bring relief and humanitarian aid to endangered populations
in the region.

Italy is particularly pleased with the decision that the
Security Council is preparing to adopt. Since the start of the
Security Council's deliberations on this question we have
been arguing for the early deployment of a multinational
force and have been making an active contribution at every
stage of the discussion. We have initiated diplomatic action
with the countries most directly involved, urging them to
choose the road of dialogue. We have said over and over
again that the international community could not remain

 

silent and passively allow a real-life inferno to unfold
before our eyes. We are acting, and acting effectively, to
confront the humanitarian emergency in all its difficult
aspects. Let me add that Italian aeroplanes are ready to
fly to the airports in the region to transport the relief
supplies so urgently needed.

We also agree on the need to implement as soon as
possible a credible plan to allow for the voluntary - and
I stress the word "voluntary" - repatriation of millions
of refugees. For that to happen, however, we must have
a strong and sincere commitment from their countries of
origin. We cannot and must not oblige refugees to return
to a place where they may not find the necessary
conditions to lead a normal life. But we hope that reason
will prevail over other considerations and that a lasting
solution to this enormous problem can be rapidly found.

In this connection, we are encouraged by the first
reports that we are receiving of a number of refugees
heading home. We strongly hope that that trend will
continue.

Our action today must mark the beginning of a new
phase of cooperation in finding a way out of the
instability that has affected the Great Lakes region in
recent years. Let us face it: it will be a difficult and
demanding task. Nevertheless, we remain convinced that
dialogue should be the main element of this effort. We
therefore reiterate our strong conviction that an
international conference on peace, security and - above
all - development in the Great Lakes region must be
convened urgently to find answers, once and for all, to
the many unsolved issues, and first and foremost, the
refugee question.

It is with heartfelt conviction that Italy will vote in
favour of the draft resolution to deploy a humanitarian
assistance force in eastern Zaire. It is of the utmost
priority that the suffering of the civilian population and
refugees be alleviated. Too much time has already been
wasted.

We are satisfied that the operation we are setting up
today will have strict humanitarian purposes and exclude
more ambitious tasks, such as interposition between the
parties to the conflict. The operation's time-frame will be
limited and defined to allow for full implementation of its
humanitarian objectives.

The force will have to operate with the consent of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the

 

Governments involved. It will be balanced in composition
in order to represent the international community as a
whole. No country should be predominant. It should reflect
the commitment of the international community as a whole,
and in particular of a wide range of European and African
countries and of the United States. Here, let me express the
sincere appreciation of my Government to the Government
of Canada, which has agreed to take the lead and ensure the
command of this operation.

Italy will participate in this force as an important
contributor of troops. We hope that our commitment, which
follows the many others undertaken by Italy whenever a
humanitarian need has arisen, will help the people in the
region. This is our sincere and primary concern.

