Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to start
by thanking Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
briefing and for his tireless efforts. The United Nations
and its agencies deserve to be commended for the work
that they are doing on the ground every day in a very
challenging environment. We stand fully behind their
efforts and their continued close consultations with the
parties. I thank Mr. Hagai El-Ad for being here today
and for sharing his honest assessment and valuable
perspectives, and more importantly for the integrity
and bravery of B'Tselem and many other civil-society
organizations in both Israel and Palestine. We commend
him for his conscience and encourage him to speak up
as an Israeli citizen. Personal insults have no place in
this Chamber.

We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union
later today.

Sweden has a long-standing engagement on the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and a steadfast friendship
with the peoples of both Israel and Palestine. As a
member of the Security Council, we have consistently
based our position on international law, including
international human rights and international
humanitarian law. While the proliferation of new and
re-emerging crises in the Middle East requires our
attention, we must maintain our active commitment to
resolving the Israel-Palestine conflict. The situation
is increasingly urgent as new generations grow up
in a reality marred by conflict. The shared vision of
the international community remains unchanged. It
consists of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side
by side in peace and security, with Jerusalem as the
future capital of those two States and the home of three
world religions. We must now return to a meaningful
and inclusive peace process, ending the occupation and
resolving all final status issues. If we are to achieve a
just and sustainable peace, it is critical to ensure that
any future peace plan is based on international law,
the relevant United Nations resolutions and previous
agreements. Final status issues can be taken off the
table only when they have been resolved through
negotiations between the parties.

The continued rapid deterioration of the situation
on the ground is destroying hopes for peace. A two-
State solution is regrettably becoming more distant
by the day. Israelis and Palestinians alike have an
urgent responsibility to reverse those trends. We are
deeply concerned about the continuing rapid settlement
expansion in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, and that includes the decision by the Israeli
authorities to advance plans for new settlement units
in the city of Hebron. We are also deeply concerned
about the demolition of homes, including the imminent
threat of demolition of Khan Al-Ahmar and the forcible
displacement of its inhabitants, a majority of whom are
children. The village is located in Area E-l, a location
of strategic interest for preserving the contiguity
of a Palestinian State. Settlements are illegal under
international law, and the evictions and demolitions
of homes that enable the policy to continue seriously
threaten the prospects for peace. We strongly condemn
all acts of violence against civilians, including acts of
terrorism. The use of disproportionate, lethal violence
in recent days and weeks is a tragedy. The crimes
must be investigated and those responsible must be
held accountable.

The peace process cannot merely be about ending
the occupation and the conflict. It must also be about
building peaceful and inclusive societies. A vibrant
civil society, particularly with the meaningful inclusion
of women and young people, is critical to sustainable
peace. The shrinking space for civil society and the
possibilities for promoting human rights are a source
of great concern on both sides. On the Palestinian
side, laws are used to curtail freedom of expression,
and on the Israeli side, representatives of civil-society
organizations are delegitimized, creating obstacles for
them in carrying out their important work. We call on
both the Palestinian and Israeli leaderships to support,
respect and allow members of civil society to operate
and express their views freely.

In the so-called post-Oslo generation, few on
either side have any hope that peace is still possible.
We must show these young people that there is an
alternative to conflict, violence and a constantly
deteriorating situation. And the voices of young Israelis
and Palestinians must be heard, in line with resolution
2419 (2018). Both Israel and Palestine have been vocal
advocates for the full implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda and the meaningful inclusion
and engagement of women in the peace process. We
remain committed to supporting such efforts in every
way we can.

Mr. Mladenov has rightly put the Council on
high alert today. Gaza is on the verge of collapse. The
situation remains untenable and increasingly desperate.
Millions of people are caught between Hamas and other
militant groups on the one hand, and the Israeli policy
of closure on the other. The people of Gaza must not pay
the price for that long-standing crisis. We continue to
witness tragic events leading to regrettable loss of life.
All the parties must exercise maximum restraint, avoid
confrontation and take immediate steps to de-escalate.
We must also step up efforts to avoid a humanitarian
disaster. There is an urgent need for humanitarian
interventions with a quick, direct and immediate impact
on the daily lives of the people in need. All actors have
a responsibility in that regard.

There is an urgent need to lift the restrictions, secure
full and sustained access and movement to and from
Gaza and ensure unimpeded access for all humanitarian
actors, while maintaining respect for the legitimate
security concerns of Israel, Palestine and Egypt. The
efforts to achieve the full return of the Palestinian
Authority to Gaza must be redoubled. We support the
Egyptian-led efforts to achieve reconciliation and call
on all Palestinian factions to revitalize genuine attempts
to that end. Only reconciliation will lead to a unified
Palestinian leadership and a reunification of Gaza and
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.

The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) was
established by the General Assembly and mandated
to provide assistance and protection to Palestinian
refugees across the region until a negotiated, lasting
and just solution to that issue was reached. UNRWA
not only delivers critical services and education but
plays a crucial role in ensuring stability in a region
seriously affected by conflict, terrorism and turmoil.
During the high-level week of the General Assembly,
Sweden, together with Jordan, Turkey, Japan, Germany
and the European Union, hosted a ministerial meeting
to mobilize political and financial support to UNRWA.
Together we managed to mobilize $122 million,
significantly reducing UNRWA's deficit and enabling
the Agency's schools to remain open throughout 2018.
Having now overcome the most immediate crisis, we
must shift our focus to the coming year. Much work
remains to be done to secure funding for 2019. We must
maintain the recent positive momentum and end the
Agency's perpetual crisis mode by finding solutions for
more predictable and sustainable funding. UNRWA is
not part of the problem, it is part of the solution.

In conclusion, we cannot allow the viability of
a two-State solution to move beyond our reach. We
must act, or we risk moving rapidly not only towards
perpetual occupation but towards a one-State reality.
That should not be in anyone's interest. The Council,
and every one of its members, has a responsibility. Our
faith in a negotiated, just and fair two-State solution led
us to recognize the State of Palestine in 2014. It is not
too late to resolve this conflict. We must do everything
in our power to make sure that the hope of two States is
kept alive and that the vision of ajust and lasting peace
in the Middle East is realized. We owe it to every young
Israeli and Palestinian. They deserve no less from us.

