Mr. Duncan (United Kingdom): There are probably
only a few moments in history when a country's rate of
inflation has had to be measured in millions ofper cent.
But in the case of Venezuela, this is such a moment.
Beneath that stark statistic rests a scene of total
economic collapse and, with it, a comprehensive picture
of human misery and degradation from which only the
corrupt Venezuelan elite are able to escape. People are
starving, children are malnourished, essential items are
absent from the bare shelves of bankrupt stores and,
from that wretchedness, millions have fled to seek
refuge in neighbouring countries, where they have been
rescued by an outpouring of human generosity.

That inexcusable and wholly avoidable wasteland
is entirely the creation of one man and his cronies.
The ranting socialism of Nicolas Maduro Moros has
destroyed an entire country and, despite his self-
congratulatory moral posturing, his enduring legacy
will be to have made the poor not just poorer, but also
destitute. It is our concern for the plight of Venezuela
and the country's people that motivates us here today,
not the sentiments of anything that can possibly be
described as "colonial". How, indeed, can any self-
respecting Government possibly justify supporting the
poisonous regime of the nation-destroying Mr. Maduro?

But, in addition to holding the opinion we do
because of our concern for the people of Venezuela,
the United Nations and we, the Security Council, are
also here to resolve the world's worst sins. To do so,
we must all uphold the rule of law, which we firmly
believe should govern the affairs of all. That rule of
law has collapsed in Venezuela. Worse, it has been
continuously eroded, undermined and eradicated by the
dictatorial abuses of Nicolas Maduro.

Hand in hand with the economic devastation
caused by that man has come the parallel removal of
liberty, justice and freedom. We have seen the theft
from the Venezuelan people of its democracy. Maduro
has attempted to delegitimize the National Assembly,
he has created the artificial and illegitimate Constituent
Assembly, and he has ruthlessly put an end to free and
fair elections by stuffing ballot boxes and corrupting
democratic decision. The political opposition has
been suppressed and intimidated, its leaders have
fled or been imprisoned, and we will never forget that
opposition activist Fernando Alban Salazar, mentioned
just now by Secretary Pompeo, was detained and
then found dead beneath the windows of the National
Intelligence Service facility. The world can now see
that the presidency of Nicolas Maduro no longer rests
on democratic foundations. The presidency of Nicolas
Maduro is not legitimate.

We, the United Kingdom, unreservedly praise
and support the extraordinary courage of Juan Guaido
in his stand against Maduro's fraud, corruption and
undemocratic status. We applaud Juan Guaido's
decision to assert the legitimate authority of the
National Assembly. It is therefore right that we should
now respond robustly to the courageous steps taken by
the Venezuelan people and the political opposition by
bringing this critical issue here to the Security Council.
Council members must recognize their responsibility
to ensure that the United Nations uses its leadership to
help achieve positive change in Venezuela. Our efforts
must now focus on finding a way out of the crisis that
has devastated the country.

Let me make our position clear. The United
Kingdom stands with the European Union in
demanding urgent, free and fair elections at the earliest
opportunity and in calling for a legitimate Government
to be established. We stand with the Organization of
American States and the Lima Group, whose members
last September referred the Venezuelan Government
to the International Criminal Court (ICC) for crimes
against humanity. Citing over 8,000 extrajudicial
executions, 12,000 arbitrary arrests and the detention
of 13,000 political prisoners, they made history by
making it the first ever case in which an entire State
has been referred to the ICC.

We stand shoulder to shoulder with the United States
in saying that the National Assembly and its President,
Juan Guaido, are best placed to lead Venezuela to
the restoration of its democracy, its economy and its
freedom. Therefore, we believe that Juan Guaido is
the right man to take Venezuela forward and we will
recognize him as constitutional interim President if
new elections are not announced within eight days.

Today, we should all stand together against the
tyranny of Nicolas Maduro and in support of legitimate
democratic forces in Venezuela. Venezuela can and
must recover from the depths of its current despair. To
do so, it needs an end to tyranny, an end to corruption
and an urgent return to freedom, democracy and the
rule of law. The Security Council must make its view
clear and we must urgently help to pave the way to a
brighter future for the Venezuela that Maduro has so
culpably ruined.

