Mr. Apakan: I am pleased to have the opportunity
to speak to the Council about the current situation in
Ukraine.

The Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine has
operated throughout Ukraine since April and has
implemented tasks such as monitoring human rights
and basic freedoms, establishing facts and reporting
thereon. Its mandate has also included dialogue and
consultation, especially at the regional level. The
Mission has been designed as a civilian observer
mission with a political mandate that has been approved
by 57 participating States. The Special Monitoring
Mission adapted right from the start to a quickly
changing environment.
We welcome the Minsk documents and the efforts
to implement a ceasefire. In recent days, however,
the level of violence in eastern Ukraine and the risk
of further escalation remain high. We have observed
ongoing fighting in many locations in the Luhansk and
Donetsk regions. Artillery and mortar shelling often hit
residential areas, causing casualties among the civilian
population. Our monitors have on three separate
occasions observed convoys of unmarked trucks, heavy
weapons and tanks in areas controlled by armed groups.

The ability of the Special Monitoring Mission to
monitor the implementation of the Minsk documents,
including ceasefire monitoring, poses considerable
security and operational challenges to the Mission.
It has necessitated an expansion of the Mission to
the maximum of 500 monitors, in accordance with
our mandate. The Mission currently consists of 266
international Mission members from 42 participating
States. Of those, 170 are deployed in the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions.

We have been communicating with all those
involved in the process related to the Minsk protocol
and memorandum, including the trilateral contact
group, Ukrainian authorities, representatives of the
general staffs of Ukraine and Russia engaged in the
Mariupol Joint Centre for Control and Coordination
(JCCC) and representatives of certain areas of Donetsk
and Luhansk. I have been in regular contact with my
colleague, Ambassador Heidi Tagliavini. A security
zone and a contact line would be established by the
Minsk memorandum to serve as a reference point for
the withdrawal of military personnel and equipment.
This has not yet been accomplished. JCCC is a bilateral
Ukrainian/Russian initiative and entirely separate from
the Special Monitoring Mission, but the Mission will
continue to do what it can to help.

However, strong political will is needed to make
this structure work. Part of implementing the Minsk
documents is also to secure the Ukrainian-Russian
State border. The Special Monitoring Mission has
been at the border whenever access and the security
situation has allowed it, and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) stands
ready to expand its border monitoring. The stretch of
the border beyond the control of the Ukrainian forces
is around 400 kilometres long. In order to increase its
monitoring capability, the Special Monitoring Mission
has deployed civilian unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs).
Since the UAVs started flying, on 28 October, they have
encountered jamming devices and, on one occasion,
were shot at.
I would now like to emphasize the heavy toll that
the conflict is taking on the civilian population. There
are more than 430,000 internally displaced persons
inside Ukraine, including those from Crimea. That
deepens the humanitarian crisis, particularly as winter
approaches.

President Porochenko's peace plan and the Minsk
documents provide a framework and a road map for
the normalization of the situation and for a stable
and pluralistic Ukraine. The parliamentary elections
of 26 October brought about a new and positive
atmosphere. The Special Monitoring Mission will
continue to facilitate the dialogue on the ground in order
to reduce tensions and promote the normalization of the
situation. That dialogue will foster the empowerment of
civil society and women.

The security environment remains a significant
constraint. The Special Monitoring Mission conducts
constant coordination with all its monitors and
observers in order to ensure proper security for them.
The Special Monitoring Mission's access and freedom of
movement remain obstructed, particularly in areas such
as Horlivka and south of Debaltsevo and in some other
border regions. The Minsk protocol and memorandum
do not introduce limitations on the Mission's activities,
geographically or otherwise. I must stress that the
foundation of all Special Monitoring Mission activities
remains the consensus decision of all participating
States on the OSCE Permanent Council.

The Special Monitoring Mission will continue to
monitor the situation in all of Ukraine, including in the
two eastern regions. In eastern Ukraine, the Special
Monitoring Mission will monitoring not only the

security zone but also the entire regions of Luhansk and
Donetsk up to and at the State border between Ukraine
and the Russian Federation.

While the Special Monitoring Mission continues
to facilitate initiatives put forward to reduce tensions
and foster peace, a sustainable ceasefire can be reached
only by all involved. The Special Monitoring Mission
will continue to cooperate with the United Nations,
including the Department of Political Affairs, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the United Nations Development Programme
and UN-Women.

Once again, we need de-escalation and maximum
restraint. The Special Monitoring Mission will continue
its impartial monitoring and independent objective
reporting. We ask all concerned to urgently commit
to the full implementation of the Minsk documents,
designed to bring peace and stability to Ukraine.

