Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): My delegation appreciates
the briefings by Ms. Ellen Loj and Mr. Adama Dieng and
by Ambassador Fode' Seck as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015)
concerning South Sudan. Based on those briefings,
Malaysia is deeply concerned about the protracted
conflict and the deteriorating political, security and
humanitarian situations in South Sudan. The briefers
described in detail the exacerbations of the crisis, the
renewed violence and the heightening of tensions along
ethnic lines, the potential risk for genocide and the dire
humanitarian situations.

Despite the Council's numerous efforts to urge the
parties to the conflict to find a political solution, South
Sudan continues, unfortunately, to slide into chaos. As
States bear the primary responsibility to protect their
populations, we urge the Transitional Government of
South Sudan to do its utmost to protect its people and
to urgently prioritize the welfare, safety and security of
all of the people of South Sudan, regardless of ethnicity
and political affiliations. National leaders must rise
above the parochial politics of divisions and ethnicity
and promote unity for all South Sudanese.

As previous speakers have rightly advocated, an
inclusive political process and national reconciliation
provide the only legitimate path towards restoring peace
and stability in South Sudan. Any call to arms would
only lead to further protracted conflict at the price
of more deaths and destruction. Despite the political
impasse and the stalled implementation of the peace
agreement, the leadership and solidarity shown by
regional partners, particularly the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, led former President Mogae
of Botswana, to mediate a dialogue and reinvigorate
the peace process, continue to provide some glimmers
of hope. It is imperative that the Security Council
continue to support those mediation efforts and sustain
engagement with regional partners, including the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, as well
as the European Union, for a comprehensive approach
to addressing the current situations in South Sudan.

Malaysia has always maintained its firm
commitment and support for United Nations
peacekeeping operations as a tool for the maintenance
of international peace and security. In that context, we
reiterate our full support for the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) and commend the men and
women of the Mission, who have continued to operate
under enormous pressure in challenging circumstances.
UNMISS must implement its mandate effectively.
That is extremely crucial, particularly in the current
situation in South Sudan. It is also imperative that both
the South Sudanese authorities and the armed forces
step up their efforts to enhance cooperation in order
to ensure the swift implementation of resolution 2304
(2016), including finalizing the outstanding matters
on the establishment and deployment of the original
protection force.

At the same time, it is also crucial for the parties
to engage in further discussions aimed at resolving
any misunderstandings, and address their differences.
For example, UNMISS views the request for the
participation of Joint Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism liaison personnel in UNMISS convoys as
obstructions to UNMISS operations, whereas the South
Sudanese authorities View the proposal as a positive
mechanism aimed at facilitating the movement and
access of UNMISS into difficult areas.

Clearly more should and could be done to enhance
the trust and confidence levels between UNMISS and
the South Sudanese authorities. Within UNMISS, we
hope that the task force established by the Secretariat
will be able to swiftly implement the recommendations
of the Independent Special Investigation with a view to
restoring the credibility of the Mission.

We thank Ambassador Fode Seck for his excellent
stewardship of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) on South Sudan. Malaysia
will continue to work closely with and support the
Committee, as we View the its work as an integral aspect
in supporting the peace process and our collective
objective of restoring lasting peace and stability in
South Sudan.

To conclude, as Ms.Loj approaches the end of her
tenure as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of UNMISS at the end of this month,
allow me to take this opportunity to express our heartfelt
appreciation for her relentless efforts and dedication in
carrying out her duties over the past two years. We wish
her all the best in her future endeavours.

