Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): The recent developments
towards a negotiated solution of the conflict in Kosovo are
encouraging. In this regard, Kenya would like to welcome
the agreement signed in Belgrade on 16 October this year
by the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and the Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) providing for the OSCE to establish a verification
mission in Kosovo. We particularly welcome the
undertaking of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
comply with resolutions 1160 (1998) and 1199 (1998).

This notwithstanding, my delegation would like to
emphasize, as we have on previous occasions, that the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia bears
the primary responsibility for the well-being and security of
all its citizens.

It is unfortunate that civilians became the target of
conflict in Kosovo. As a result, the destruction that the
conflict has left behind has had a great effect on the
civilians. This is reflected in the estimated cumulative
displacement of over 200,000 persons at the height of the
conflict. In addition, about 50,000 persons have been forced
from their homes into the woods and mountains. Against
this background, it is very unfortunate that the authorities
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia have always
minimized the extent of the conflict.

We would like to commend all the humanitarian
organizations that have strived to provide assistance to the
people of Kosovo under very difficult circumstances. In
this regard, we welcome paragraph 13 of the draft
resolution, which, inter alia, urges Member States and
others concerned to provide adequate resources for
humanitarian assistance in the region.

The draft resolution before us today takes a
comprehensive approach to the question of Kosovo and
addresses the obligations of both parties in the resolution
of the conflict. It provides a good basis for a durable
solution to the crisis. My delegation will therefore vote in
favour of the draft resolution.

