The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Lebanon, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Boutros
Assaker (Lebanon) took a seat at the Council
table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 5/2006/375, which contains the text of a
letter dated 10 June 2006 from the Secretary-General to
the President of the Security Council, transmitting the
2
fourth report of the International Independent
Investigation Commission.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2006/278, which contains the text of a
letter dated 5 May 2006 from the Charge d'affaires a.i.
of the Permanent Mission of Lebanon addressed to the
Secretary-General. Members also have before them
document S/2006/392, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, Denmark, France,
Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1686 (2006).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.10 am.
06-38889

