Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation is profoundly outraged
at the use by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) of military force against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. In recent weeks, when we were constantly
hearing threats - detrimental to the negotiating
process - that there would be missile strikes against
Serbian positions in Kosovo and other parts of Serbia, the
Russian Government strongly proclaimed its categorical
rejection of the use of force in contravention of decisions
of the Security Council and issued repeated warnings
about the long-term harmful consequences of this action
not only for the prospects of a settlement of the Kosovo
situation and for safeguarding security in the Balkans, but
also for the stability of the entire modern multi-polar
system of international relations.

Those who are involved in this unilateral use of
force against the sovereign Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia - carried out in violation of the Charter of
the United Nations and without the authorization of the
Security Council - must realize the heavy responsibility
they bear for subverting the Charter and other norms of
international law and for attempting to establish in the
world, de facto, the primacy of force and unilateral diktat.

The members of NATO are not entitled to decide the
fate of other sovereign and independent States. They must
not forget that they are not only members of their
alliance, but also Members of the United Nations, and
that it is their obligation to be guided by the United
Nations Charter, in particular its Article 103, which
clearly establishes the absolute priority for Members of
the Organization of Charter obligations over any other
international obligations.

Attempts to justify the NATO strikes with arguments
about preventing a humanitarian catastrophe in Kosovo
are completely untenable. Not only are these attempts in
no way based on the Charter or other generally
recognized rules of international law, but the unilateral
use of force will lead precisely to a situation with truly

 

devastating humanitarian consequences. Moreover, by the
terms of the definition of aggression adopted by the
General Assembly in 1974,
"No consideration of whatever nature, whether
political, economic, military or otherwise, may serve
as a justification for aggression". (General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX), annex, article 5, para. 1)

We certainly do not seek to defend Violations of
international humanitarian law by any party. But it is
possible to combat Violations of the law only with clean
hands and only on the solid basis of the law. Otherwise
lawlessness would spawn lawlessness. It would be
unthinkable for a national court in a civilized democratic
country to uphold illegal methods to combat crime.
Attempts to apply a different standard to international law
and to disregard its basic norms and principles create a
dangerous precedent that could cause acute destabilization
and chaos on the regional and global level. If we do not put
an end to this very dangerous trend, the virus of illegal
unilateral approaches could spread not merely to other
geographical regions but to spheres of international relations
other than questions of peace and security.

The fact that NATO has opted to use force in Kosovo
raises very serious questions about the sincerity of the
repeated assurances that that alliance was not claiming the
role of the world's policeman and was prepared to
cooperate in the interests of common European security. In
the light of this turn of events, we shall draw the
appropriate conclusions in our relations and contacts with
that organization.

NATO's decision to use military force is particularly
unacceptable from any point of View because the potential
of political and diplomatic methods to yield a settlement in
Kosovo has certainly not been exhausted. The enormous
quantity of complicated work done by the international
community has now been dealt a very powerful, a very
grave and probably an irrevocable blow.

The Russian Federation vehemently demands the
immediate cessation of this illegal military action against
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We reserve the right to
raise in the Security Council the question of the adoption
by the Council, under the United Nations Charter, of
appropriate measures with respect to this situation, which
has arisen as a result of NATO's illegal actions and which
poses a clear threat to international peace and security.

Today, the President of the Russian Federation,
Boris N. Yeltsin, issued the following statement:

"Russia is profoundly outraged by NATO's
military action against sovereign Yugoslavia, which

is nothing less than an act of open aggression.

"Only the Security Council can decide on what
measures, including the use of force, should be taken
to maintain or restore international peace and
security. The Security Council did not take such
decisions with regard to Yugoslavia. Not only the
Charter of the United Nations has been violated; the
Founding Act on Mutual Relations, Cooperation and
Security Between NATO and The Russian
Federation has been violated as well. A dangerous
precedent has been created regarding the policy of
diktat and force, and the whole of the international
rule of law has been threatened.

"We are basically talking about an attempt by
NATO to enter the twenty-first century in the
uniform of the world's policeman. Russia will never
agree to that.

"The Security Council must discuss the
situation that has emerged and demand the
immediate cessation of NATO's use of force.

"For its part, the leadership of the Russian
Federation will review its relationship with NATO
as an organization, which has shown disrespect for
the fundamental basis of the system of international
relations.

"As President and Supreme Commander, I have
already given the following instructions: to cut short
the visit to the United States of the Chairman of the
Government of the Russian Federation, Yevgeny
Primakov; to demand an urgent convening of a
meeting of the Security Council of the United
Nations and to seek an immediate cessation of
NATO's military action; to recall to Moscow the
chief military representative of the Russian
Federation to NATO; to suspend our participation in
the Partnership for Peace programme and to end the
carrying out of the programme on Russia-NATO
partnership; and to postpone talks for the opening of
a NATO liaison mission in Moscow.

"1 have already appealed to the President of the
United States, Bill Clinton, and to the leaders of

 

other NATO member countries to put an immediate
end to this military adventure, which threatens the
lives of peaceful people and could lead to an
explosion of the situation in the Balkans.

"A settlement of the situation in Kosovo, as the
settlement of other similar problems, is only possible
through negotiations. The quicker they are resumed,
the greater the possibility for the international
community to find a political settlement to the
situation. Russia is prepared to interact with other
members of the Contact Group in order to reach that
goal.

"Those who decided upon military adventure
bear the full responsibility to their peoples and to the
world community for the dire consequences of this for
international stability.

"If the military conflict increases, then Russia
reserves the right to take adequate measures, including
military measures, to ensure its own and common
European security."

