Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Special Representative Honore for her briefing.
As the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) draws to a close after 13 years in Haiti,
I would like to join others in thanking her for her
dedicated service. I also want to pay tribute to all who
have been involved with the Mission and its work - the
civilian staff, troops and police who have served in it
and in particular the 186 men and women who have
died in MINUSTAH's service.

When we compare Haiti today to the Haiti of
2004, MINUSTAH's legacy is clear. There is less
violence, the security environment is more stable, the
Haitian National Police is more effective and a more
democratic political culture has emerged, accompanied
by transitions of power. Of course, we cannot be
complacent. The gains made must be protected. The
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) represents a transitional stage for
future United Nations support for Haiti. The Haiti of
today still needs help to ensure that its police will soon
be able stand alone, that justice institutions will soon
function effectively and that human rights are afforded
the protection and priority they require.

While we note that a status of forces agreement has
not yet been signed and urge the Government to do so
as soon as possible, we are nevertheless pleased that the
transition to MINUJUSTH is on track. We must ensure
that the Mission has access to the most appropriate
personnel and equipment and that this is underpinned
by high-quality training, skilled, robust leadership
and clear accountability for underperformance
and misconduct. If the United Nations is to maximize
the impact of its support to Haiti, MINUJUSTH must
work closely with the United Nations country team,
which has a critical role to play in sustaining peace. For
example, through its support for the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the United Nations country
team will be able to bring a long-term developmental
focus to the major challenges that Haiti faces today.
Joint planning, analysis and capacity-mapping exercises
will be needed from day one so that responsibilities are
handed over sequentially well ahead of MINUJUSTH's
closure. Indeed, Haiti does not need an indefinite
peacekeeping operation. The planned exit strategy to
guide a two-year transition from MINUJUSTH to the
United Nations country team and also, critically, Haiti's
own national institutions marks an opportunity for the
United Nations to set precedents for peacekeeping
missions around the world.

We regret that the good work of MINUSTAH was
tainted by the spectre of cholera and sexual exploitation
and abuse. Here, too, there are lessons to be learned.
The new approach to cholera has helped to put Haiti on
a path towards eradication, but this came too long after
the damage had been done. As for sexual exploitation
at the hands of peacekeepers, Haiti's tragic experience
demonstrates why we cannot tolerate any backsliding
on the commitments made through resolution 2272
(2016).

There is much that the United Nations can do better.
But the single most important guarantor of the progress
achieved in Haiti lies with its own leadership. The gap
left by MINUSTAH is not primarily for MINUJUSTH
to plug but for Haiti's Government, politicians and
institutions to begin to fill. For example, security
cannot be achieved unless the Government protects
the independence of Haiti's police and gives them the
resources they need rather than diverting money towards
the creation of new armed forces. Justice cannot be
delivered until parliamentarians pass legislation critical
to empowering the judiciary. Human rights cannot be
protected without proper institutionalization within the
State, and pronouncements of progress will continue to
ring hollow until we see more women empowered as
political leaders and fewer becoming victims of sexual
and gender-based violence.

In conclusion, today we are all witnessing Haiti
turn a corner. Days of violence and instability have
begun to fade. The ultimate thanks go to the people of
Haiti. Without question, they have displayed remarkable
resilience. But the courageous efforts of MINUSTAH
have also played their part. We salute their successes
and look forward to continued assistance by the United
Nations to the Haitian people.

