Mr. Fedotov: Thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the impact
that transnational organized crime and trafficking can
have on global peace, security and development.

As members are aware, the Council has focused
on these issues for some time now, recognizing the
increasing threats to peace and security posed by drugs
and crime, including in presidential statements calling
for the mainstreaming of responses to these global
challenges into the broader United Nations security and
development agenda, as well as increased regional and
international cooperation as part of a shared
responsibility for confronting them. We in the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) take
those messages from the Security Council as guidance,
and we translate that guidance into our policies and
operational activities.

I am happy to report to the Council today that a
United Nations system task force on transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking, established by
the Secretary-General and co-chaired by UNODC and
the Department for Political Affairs, has started its
work. Yesterday, at a special meeting of principals, we
took decisions aimed at fostering more meaningful
coordination within the United Nations system, as well
as at strengthening our capacity to respond to illicit
trafficking and organized crime. We look forward to
keeping the Council informed of the task force's
activities in the future.
Also yesterday, as the Council is aware, the
World Drug Report 2011 was launched at United
Nations Headquarters in New York for the first time.
That was yet another step towards mainstreaming
issues of drugs and crime into the overall United
Nations agenda.

Illicit drugs continue to undermine stability,
security and health in many parts of the world today.
Millions throughout the globe are suffering and dying
from the illicit use of drugs. Meanwhile, drug
trafficking is fuelling a global criminal enterprise
worth hundreds of billions of dollars. For example,
opiates alone can generate up to $68 billion in illicit
benefits annually, and cocaine $85 billion. That
seriously impacts on development and security. We are
witnessing more and more acts of violence, conflicts
and terrorist activities fuelled by drug lords.

Confronting the global drug problem is a shared
responsibility. Our response at the national, regional
and international levels must be comprehensive,
balanced and targeted. Supply-reduction measures must
go hand in hand with efforts to reduce demand. Neither
will be effective without the other. The drug
conventions provide a firm universal legal framework
for such a balanced approach that is centred on health
and grounded in respect for human rights.

Many crisis situations under consideration by the
Security Council - such as recent events in the
Middle East, the Somalia piracy phenomenon and
Afghanistan, and I could name a few more - starkly
demonstrate the ability of transnational organized
crime and its proceeds to destabilize transitions,
disrupt political processes and obstruct development.
Those cases also show how just one fragile State beset
by drugs and crime can hold hostage the stability and
progress of an entire region.

We need to take practical and pragmatic
responses to those problems. From the perspective of
UNODC, we see at least four potential areas of
response at this stage. First, with regard to
strengthened international collaboration, the United
Nations can facilitate the process, but it takes
concerted political will on the part of Member States to
have a real impact on suppressing an organized
criminal market. We need to be better coordinated.
Indeed, coordination has to begin with the United
Nations system; but it cannot end there. Undoubtedly,
11-38700
the Security Council can play here a leading role in
that regard.

Secondly, strengthening regional capacity can
create a bulwark around a fragile State and enable its
neighbours to play a proactive part in the response. For
example, UNODC has now completed drafting a new
regional programme for Afghanistan and neighbouring
countries. It will be the first such programme to
address this issue, whereas before we had separate
programmes for Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iran and
Central Asia. We are now discussing the draft regional
programme with our Member State partners. The idea
is to address the issue in a more comprehensive,
targeted, meaningful and results-oriented way. I hope
that we will be able to sign the programme and begin
implementing it by the end of the year.

The same applies with regard to West Africa -
an area of concern for the Security Council - where
last year UNODC and the Economic Community of
West African States adopted a new regional
programme. We intend to help countries in the region
to overcome the problems that are generated by illicit
drug trafficking and organized crime. I hope that this
regional programme will also help to curb the flow of
illicit drugs going to Europe from Latin America
through West Africa.

With regard to the Middle East and North Africa
region, as the Council is aware, the Secretary-General
plans to come up with a comprehensive United Nations
contingency strategy for better addressing problems in
the region. UNODC is also prepared to contribute to
that on the basis of our comprehensive programmatic
approach. We could address such issues as corruption,
which has been one of the triggers that provokes unrest
in many States of the region, as well as the rule of law,
police reform and prison reform. We also need to think
about preventing an explosion in crime and drug
trafficking in this region. And we must be prepared to
face the threat of terrorism. UNODC can provide a
network of field offices and advice based on our
experience as guardian of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
the Convention against Corruption.

Thirdly, with regard to reinforcing the rule of law
and criminal justice systems, consistent and proactive
investments in the criminal justice institutions of weak
States will help to uphold the rule of law in those
countries. This reduces susceptibility to organized
11-38700
crime, dampens the impact of negative phenomena
associated with corruption, increased violence and the
financing of terrorism and enhances the potential for
national institutions to play an effective role in the
response.

F ourthly, with regard to adopting a
comprehensive and cross-disciplinary strategy, we may
have a chance to deliver if we address the challenges
posed by organized crime and illicit trafficking in a
coordinated and holistic way. UNODC has developed
such an integrated approach in its field missions and
other programme activities.

Just one example: we are proud of the fact that
we have been able to help the Government of
Kyrgyzstan to restart its drug-control agency. It was
done, the agreement was signed, and the agency began
to function. But we immediately took another step and
launched a programme that helps the Government of
Kyrgyzstan address challenges related to corruption;
the lack of the rule of law; the need to improve
legislation; police reform; and prison reform. Thus we
are addressing not only the drug issue but all related
areas that are fuelling and benefiting from illicit drug
trafficking.

The same applies to Somalia and the issue of
piracy. UNODC continues to help the countries in the
region to prosecute and jail pirates, and we take pride
in the fact that as many as 800 pirates have been jailed
as a result of our efforts to help Kenya, Seychelles,
Mauritius and other countries of the region.

However, efforts cannot stop there, because, after
all, pirates cannot exist without financial support and
without money laundering. We recently organized a
conference in Nairobi which started the process of
addressing the flow of money and the criminal
proceeds from piracy which help organize acts of
piracy. It appears that now some pirates do not
even get any part of the bounty resulting from acts of
piracy but are getting, as it were, fixed salaries. Also,
they are expendable. Even if many pirates are jailed,
others will pop up because of the situation in Somalia.

We therefore need to address this issue in a
parallel manner. Only then can we expect to obtain
results. The West Africa Coast Initiative is an
important initiative that is aimed at preventing West
Africa from becoming a real hub for the supply of
cocaine from Central America to Europe, and we are
prepared to help the countries in the region to address
this issue. But at the same time, we cannot address the
issue of drug control without addressing the issues of
corruption, the rule of law, criminal justice, and also
drug treatment and prevention. Indeed, many drug
cartels in Central America are paying their clients in
West Africa not in cash but in kind, and now West
Africa has started to become another market for the
consumption of cocaine, which had never happened
before.

UNODC, on the basis of its experience and
guided by Member States, is prepared to take part in
the implementation of such comprehensive initiatives
as the Paris Pact on drugs from Afghanistan, or the
French initiative on cocaine routes to Europe, adopted
by the Group of Eight.

To conclude, I should like to commend your
initiative, Mr. President, in having convened this
highly relevant debate. I welcome the leadership of
Gabon in bringing to the fore the growing threat of
transnational organized crime. I hope that the Council
will continue to be actively seized of this important
matter.

