Mr. Kethergany (Malaysia): I have the honour to
deliver the following statement on behalf of
Mr. Hussein Haniff, the Permanent Representative of
Malaysia to the United Nations.

Let me first of all welcome the presence of
Mr. Jawed Ludin, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Afghanistan, Mr. Herve Ladsous, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, and Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan.

My delegation extends its appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his latest report on the situation
in Afghanistan (S/2011/772*). My delegation also
extends our appreciation to Mr. Staffan de Mistura and
members of the United Nations Assistant Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for the dedication and
resilience they have shown in carrying out their duties
under challenging conditions in the country. Let me
also join others in congratulating Mr. J an Kubis on his
appointment to replace Special Representative de
Mistura next year.

Ten years ago, the Security Council determined
that the situation in Afghanistan constituted a threat to
international peace and security. Acting under Chapter
VII of the United Nations Charter, the Council
authorized the creation of the International
Stabilization Assistance Force (ISAF) to assist the
Afghan Interim Administration, headed by the recently
appointed Chairman Hamid Karzai. That turning point
in the history of Afghanistan was marked by resolution
1386 (2001), adopted on 20 December 2001.

Ten years later, we are pleased to see that
President Karzai is leading the country out of the
morass of the unfortunate conflict there. We are now
witnessing another turning point in Afghan history,
with the transfer of security responsibilities from ISAF
to the Afghan National Security Forces. However,
much more needs to be done to improve the security
situation in Afghanistan.

Malaysia joins the Security Council and the
international community in condemning the horrific
attacks in Kabul and Mazar-e-Sharif that took place on
6 December. My delegation remains concerned about
the continued targeted assassinations of high-ranking
Government officials, members of the security forces
and influential local political and religious leaders. We
also express our condolences to the survivors of those
who perished in the attack by insurgents on the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees facility in Kandahar on 31 October. Our
thoughts go to the victims and families of those
affected by all those tragic incidents.

Of no less importance, however, is the increasing
number of civilians killed in Afghanistan; that is an
issue about which my delegation is particularly
concerned. Last month, the Council heard
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, express the concern

that the increase in civilian casualties was occurring
"in a climate characterized by a lack of accountability
for serious violations of international law" (see S/PV.6650).

While the deliberate targeting of civilians by
anti-Government elements should rightfully be
condemned, it is even more disturbing to note that
pro-Government and NATO-led ISAF forces may be
responsible for a significant percentage of civilian
casualties. Malaysia therefore calls upon all parties to
respect both the letter and spirit of international
humanitarian law, in order to win the hearts and minds
of the Afghan people.

Winning the battle for hearts and minds is
something that Malaysia has persistently advocated,
given our experience in dealing with armed
insurgencies during the formative years of our own
nationhood. Indeed, it was in that same spirit that we
accepted the invitation by the Afghan Government to
join the ISAF, and, in July 2010, 40 members of the
Malaysian Armed Forces medical contingent were
deployed to the Bamyan province. Their mandate is to
provide medical, dental and health-care services to the
Afghan civilian population. They have since been
recognized by their ISAF partners and the local
populace as providers of innovative solutions, sensitive
to the local social and religious context.

I cannot stress enough the value that Malaysia
places on winning the hearts and minds of the Afghan
people. Accordingly, and out of respect for the
country's democracy and Constitution, non-violence
and the rights of all Afghan people, my delegation
supports the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
reconciliation and reintegration process, which is a
political process that deserves the focused attention
and support of the international community. We should
now be concentrating on non-military options in order
to complement and subsequently seal the gains that
Afghanistan has achieved to date. My delegation
believes that the way forward is to open a clear line of
communication with those leaders who disagree with
the Government but who have renounced violence and
accepted the Afghan Constitution.

Malaysia strongly believes that human capacity-
building represents an important building block in
nation-building and, in the case of Afghanistan, in
rebuilding the country. Human capacity-building is
also the most practical way forward for Afghanistan to
achieve greater and more sustainable growth and
development. To that end, Malaysia will continue to
provide technical assistance to Afghanistan through our
various technical training and capacity-building
programmes.

As of October 2011, a total of 399 Afghans have
benefited from the many Malaysian Technical
Cooperation Programme courses offered in such areas
as diplomacy, public administration, the judiciary,
banking, engineering and customs administration. The
Malaysian Defence Cooperation Programme has
provided training for several Afghan military officers
in tactics and the Arabic language. Malaysia also
facilitates joint capacity-building initiatives through
our Third Country Training Programme, such as the
Malaysia-Australia Education Project for Afghanistan,
which provides trainer training for Afghan lecturers
and teachers in Kuala Lumpur.

Malaysia's commitment to supporting the
international community's efforts to assist Afghanistan
was further underlined by the participation of our
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Anifah Aman, at the
recent International Conference on Afghanistan in
Bonn. In that regard, my delegation reiterates its
commitment to Afghanistan in the areas of governance,
security, the peace process, economic and social
development and regional cooperation, as agreed at the
Bonn Conference.

In conclusion, the International Conference on
Afghanistan had the theme, "From Transition to the
Transformation Decade of 2015-2024". Malaysia looks
forward to continuing to play a meaningful role in
Afghanistan's development, not just for the 10 years of
the transformation decade, but for many more decades
to come.

