Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank President Meron, President Joensen, Prosecutor
Jallow and Prosecutor Brammertz for their briefings.

France would like to express its appreciation to the
entire staff of the Tribunals for the work they have done
to bring the work of the Tribunals to completion. We
have the sense that everything is being done to abide
by the timetables so that the individual trials and for
appeals in the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) can be conducted
in satisfactory conditions. We also unreservedly support
the extension of the mandates for the Prosecutors and
Judges.

I would also like to take this opportunity to recall
once again the contribution made by the two Tribunals
in the fight against impunity. I would also like to note
the road that lies ahead as we seek to ensure that the
work ofjustice can continue and will not be undermined.

In 2013, we commemorated the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 827 (1993), which established
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. In 20 years, the region has found a human
face again. Dialogue continues under the aegis of the
European Union, particularly between Belgrade and
Pristina. The International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, which has worked to protect rights,
fight against impunity and uphold the right to memory,
has played a major full role in those processes. Today it
seems normal to see individuals like Mr. KaradZic' and
Mr. HadZic' beingjudged in court. No one thought years
ago that they would have to answer for their crimes.

The work that remains to be done is primarily tasks
that fall within the political and judicial responsibility
of the countries of the former Yugoslavia. Political
rhetoric, criticizing this or that judicial ruling, has no
place in the rule of law, where the judiciary and its
independence must always be respected. The trials
of intermediary criminals will require strengthened
efforts, both domestically and in the area of regional
cooperation. The right of Victims to respect is also
essential.
With regard to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, in resolution 2150 (2014) the Council
has commemorated the twentieth anniversary of the
genocide. We welcome the fact that the resolution
recognizes the contribution of the ICTR. The Tribunal
has put justice at the centre of its concerns in the
region. The ICTR continues its work, and efforts at
the international level have continued, even in the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo. We are pleased to see
that international criminal justice has been supported
at the political level within the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. That agreement is aimed
at bolstering cooperation among the States of the
region and at putting an end to decades of instability
and mistrust that have led to great tension. We cannot
be complacent, however. The civilian population in the
Great Lakes region remains victimized by repeated
waves of violence. Sexual violence continues on a large
scale, and the Tribunals have tried to eliminate such
actions. We must therefore remain vigilant.

The work ofjustice is the work of all of us. I should
like to confirm that the trials are continuing in the
two cases that have been sent to French jurisdictions,
namely, those of Mr. Bucyibaruta and Mr. Munyeshyaka.
The French authorities are proceeding very carefully
in those cases. As the Council is aware, other cases
against individuals accused of genocide are also
before the courts. At the same time, France confirms
its willingness to continue to support the ICTR and
the Residual Mechanism, seeking responses to the
challenge that they face and that we have been reminded
of today: the relocation of those who have been
acquitted or have served their sentences and the search
for the nine fugitives sought by the ICTR - Felicien
Kabuga, Augustin Bizimana and Protais Mpiranya,
among others.

On the second point, France draws attention to the
obligation of all States to cooperate with the Tribunal
and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. The three fugitives must be brought
before the Residual Mechanism when they have been
apprehended. We must ensure that the Mechanism has
the appropriate resources to complete its mission.

The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda have been fundamental for the United Nations
in this era, which Mr. Ban Ki-moon has called the era of
accountability. The work of the Tribunals is coming to

an end, but another permanent tribunal with universal
jurisdiction exists, endowed with a statute that reflects
the main judicial traditions, namely the International
Criminal Court. I commend the unflagging support
of the Secretary-General for the Court. We very much
hope that such support will continue to be shown
throughout the Secretariat in all departments and that
each representative of the Secretary-General on the
ground will provide an echo of that support.

France deeply regrets that some States have failed
to avail themselves of the unique opportunity that
we have with the International Criminal Court in
pursuing all alleged authors of revolting crimes, and
have been trying to reverse the course of history. Their
presence today has given criminals and their protectors
immunity. That is unfortunately the signal sent by
two States represented at this table in exercising their
veto on draft resolution S/2014/348, which referred the
situation in Syria to the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court.

In conclusion, I thank the Ambassador of Chile,
Chair of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, his entire team, and the representatives of
the International Criminal Tribunals and of the Office
of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat for their efforts to
implement the transition provided for by resolution 1966
(2010). The programme outlined to us by Mr. Barros
Melet is ambitious, and we are ready to support it.

