Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Special
Representative Arnault for his briefing on the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia (S/2018/723). We
are pleased that the Vice-President of Colombia, His
Excellency Mr. Oscar Naranjo, is here with us today.

The first and second rounds of the presidential
elections, held on 27 May and 17 June, as well as the
congressional election held in March, sent a positive
message for all who closely follow the implementation
of Colombia's Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, not only
because they were conducted in an entirely peaceful
and inclusive manner but because they have symbolic
significance in opening a new chapter in the country's
political history following the end of five decades of
conflict. We congratulate both the Government of
Colombia and the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Comun (FARC) for their commitment and such
major achievements. We also congratulate the outgoing
President, Mr. Juan Manuel Santos Calderon, on the
courage and commitment he has shown in steering the
peace process.

While Colombians have continued to show patience
and perseverance in the face of the challenges presented
by the implementation process, they still face serious
problems in making the terms of the Peace Agreement
a reality, and the Council should continue to provide
all of the necessary support to the Colombian parties
in their efforts to handle those challenges and speedily
implement the full Agreement.

As the Secretary-General's report noted, we are
very much encouraged by the intention expressed
by President-elect Ivan Duque to turn the page on
polarization and build a consensus on the envisaged
goals of the Peace Agreement. While we are encouraged
by his intention to keep the fundamental parts of the
Agreement, we would also like to underscore the
fact that great caution will be needed when making
any improvements to it in order to avoid unintended
consequences that could affect the implementation
process. We recognize the Constitutional Court's major
achievements in reviewing peace-related legislation,
including the legislative acts that created congressional
seats for the FARC, a land fund and other measures for
improving access to land and modifying the National
Protection Unit to include former combatants in the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-
Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) as close protection
officers. Such measures can strengthen hope and faith
in implementing the Peace Agreement.

We are also conscious of the sensitive issues that
still require careful handling. The increasing violence
in the conflict zones, the delays in the socioeconomic
reintegration of FARC-EP combatants into civilian
life, the issue of access to land ownership, the absence
or inadequate presence of State institutions in places
left by FARC-EP combatants, the continued killings
of community leaders, former FARC members and
their relatives, as well as other issues highlighted in
the report of the Secretary-General, could potentially
complicate the tasks ahead in consolidating peace
in the country. In that regard, the national pact
against violence and killings signed by the outgoing
and incoming Presidents, key State institutions and
political parties will be instrumental in dealing with
the increasing patterns of violence, especially in the
rural parts of Colombia.

With regard to the negotiation between the
Colombian Government and the National Liberation
Army, we are encouraged by the report that the two
parties have continued their sixth round of negotiations
in order to achieve an improved ceasefire agreement.
We urge the parties to engage constructively in good-
faith discussions towards reaching a new ceasefire
agreement, as well as a permanent peace agreement.

We commend Special Representative Arnault and
the United Nations personnel in Colombia for all their
efforts in support of the Peace Agreement. We also
reiterate our appreciation to the countries of the region
and other international partners that continue to closely
support and accompany the implementation of the Peace
Agreement. Lastly, we take this opportunity to reaffirm
our continued support to the full implementation of the
Colombian Peace Agreement and to stand in solidarity
with the people and the Government of Colombia
as they open a new chapter and march towards
sustainable peace.

