Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote d'Ivoire thanks Mr. Jeffrey Feltman and
Mr. Mark Lowcock for their respective briefings on
recent developments in the situation in Syria following
the adoption by the Security Council of resolution 2401
(2018), on the humanitarian situation in Syria. My
delegation commends the Secretary-General for his
unstinting efforts as part of the political dialogue among
the Syrian parties with the aim of arriving at a lasting
solution to the protracted crisis ravaging that country.
In that regard, my country welcomes the holding of
intra-Syrian peace talks on 25 and 26 January in Vienna
in the framework of the Geneva process, followed by the
talks held in Sochi on 29 and 30 January. My delegation
cherishes the hope that the proposals stemming from the
Sochi talks, including the establishment ofa committee
tasked with drawing up a new constitution, will receive
consistent attention from the international community,
as part of the concerted quest to find a lasting solution
to the crisis in Syria.

The situation on the ground is deeply alarming.
Military operations that include the use of
non-conventional weapons are leading to mass
displacements of people, the loss of human lives,
injuries and the destruction of public infrastructure,
including hospitals and schools. The grave humanitarian
crisis spawned by the fighting led to the adoption by
the Security Council this past Saturday, 24 February,
of resolution 2401 (2018), with a view to the cessation
without delay ofhostilities for a 30-day period to enable
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in
need as well as medical evacuations.

My delegation notes with regret that the adoption
of the resolution did not contribute to restoring calm
on the ground. The ceasefire proposed was short-
lived, despite the numerous appeals for a cessation
of hostilities. Even the very minimum one called for
by the Russian Federation, an ally of the Damascus
Government, on Monday 26 February did not lead
to a positive response. Air raids and rocket launches
continue on the ground, thereby obstructing the work
of humanitarian personnel.

We deplore the ongoing loss of life among
humanitarian workers - 22 United Nations personnel
and 66 staff members or volunteers of the International
Red Cross - and we deplore also the material
damage that has been wrought, which includes the
destruction of 25 vehicles and 44 facilities, according
to the information we have received. Nonetheless,
Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the fact that United Nations
humanitarian agencies and their partners have managed
to assist people in need by conducting 1,567 deliveries.

My country reaffirms that a resolution of the
crisis in Syria must be part of an inclusive dialogue
and political process, as set out in the road map under
resolution 2254 (2015). In that regard, my country
calls for full compliance with the 30-day ceasefire,
in accordance with resolution 2401 (2018), which
will not only allow humanitarian actors to respond
to critical emergencies but also create the conditions
for a return to the negotiating table by all parties to
the Syrian crisis. To that end, Cote d'Ivoire urges the
members of the Security Council to unite and surmount
their differences in order to send a message of hope
and solidarity of the international community to the
Syrian people.

