Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): Allow
me to express my appreciation to Secretary-General
Guterres, Mr. Daccord and Ms. Edwar for their
thoughtful briefings earlier today.

The Secretary-General rightly pointed out that the
most effective way to protect civilians is to prevent and
end conflicts. The failure of the Security Council to
respond decisively in some key conflict areas of the
world has exacted a profound human toll. Therefore,
the United Arab Emirates calls today for re-energized
unity of purpose within the Security Council and
renewed action for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

In my own region, with the conflict in Syria now
entering its eighth year, we are experiencing at first
hand the challenge of multiple armed conflicts, which
have severe implications for civilian communities. In
many instances, those conflicts have been worsened
and prolonged by the Security Council's failure to act.

For too long, the Syrian people have been denied
humanitarian assistance, in large part because of the
inaction by the Security Council to adopt any resolution
on Syria since 2011 and the failure to implement the
resolutions that have been adopted. If that were not
already intolerable, the Syrian population has also had
to endure the horrors of chemical-weapons attacks.
The United Arab Emirates calls for the unobstructed
delivery of aid to those in need and for accountability
for all chemical attacks against civilians, which are in
clear violation of international humanitarian law.

If we apply the Secretary-General's
prevention-focused view to Palestine, we can conclude
that simply ignoring the root causes of conflict will
inevitably lead to further bloodshed. The situation
in Palestine and Israel's disregard for civilian life
and international law endures as the longest-running
tragedy of our region. Israel's actions at the Gaza fence
over the past month have included attacks on doctors
and paramedics, in clear violation of the protections
for medical personnel assisting wounded civilians
guaranteed under the Fourth Geneva Convention and
customary international law. Israel's actions cannot be
condoned or ignored by the international community;
they cannot become the new norm. We call on Israel
to abide by its responsibilities as the occupying
Power to extend basic human rights and protections
to Palestinians.

When the United Arab Emirates calls for
accountability in Syria or Palestine, it is not only a
question of seeking justice; it is also vital in order to
prevent such violence in future. Unfortunately, casting
doubt on precise facts and figures has proved to be an
effective tool for Governments seeking to stymie any
attempt to hold them accountable for their actions.
The only way to counter that is to create agreed-upon
mechanisms to collect data that is beyond dispute, so
that the international community can react appropriately
and responsibly to major developments.

In that regard, we commend the recent Security
Council visit to Myanmar, organized by Kuwait, Peru
and the United Kingdom. The visit is an excellent
example of the Council taking steps to fulfil its
mandate. Nonetheless, we remain gravely concerned
by the plight of the Rohingya Muslim minority in
Myanmar. We hope to see the Security Council follow
through on the outcomes of the visit.

With regard to Yemen, as a member of the Arab
coalition supporting legitimacy in that country, we are
taking our own responsibility very seriously when it
comes to international humanitarian law and protection
for civilians. As I outlined previously, there are grave
consequences when the Security Council fails to act.
But there can be equally damaging consequences when
the Security Council fails to follow through on its own
resolutions. The failure of the Council to enforce its
resolutions pertinent to Yemen is part of the cause of
the protracted nature of that conflict.

Nonetheless, we look forward to continuing to
cooperate with the United Nations to resolve the conflict
perpetrated by the Houthis and their Iranian backers.
We have worked closely with the United Nations to
ensure that our military doctrines and practices are in
line with international best practices and have worked
diligently to rectify problems as they have arisen. We
will also continue to work closely with the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs on ensuring the delivery of much-needed
humanitarian aid to affected areas. We look forward to
working with the Secretary-General's Special Envoy
for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, in his efforts to create
a road map for sustainable peace.

However, the Houthis in Yemen are a clear example
of the problems that non- State actors pose more generally
in our region and around the world. More often than
not, it is the civilian populations of the States that those
groups have infiltrated that suffer the consequences.
That moral hazard is magnified when those groups
receive State support. Iran's decision to arm various
non-State actors with weapons, including ballistic
missiles, in order to avoid sovereign accountability
for its actions has pushed the entire region towards a
profoundly dangerous precipice.

We would therefore call on the Security Council
to take creative and bold steps towards countering the
threat posed by non-State actors to better address the
nature of the challenges we are most likely to face in
the twenty-first century. Critically, that must include
taking resolute action against the State financiers
and supporters of those groups. Such States can no
longer be absolved of responsibility when they provide
support to non-State actors that then proceed to violate
international law. If anything, we believe that States
such as Iran that continue to act in this manner must
be held to even greater account because of their blatant
attempts to violate international law and their continued
violations of Security Council resolutions.

In conclusion, there is much more to be done with
respect to the protection and welfare of civilians in
conflict, especially for the most vulnerable. In addition
to the recommendations made by Mr. Daccord and
the Secretary-General, the United Arab Emirates
emphasizes the importance ofmandatory policies within
security and aid agencies to mainstream gender, age and
disability in identifying unique needs and responses,
as well as establishing accountability mechanisms for
those policies, to implement them across all pillars of
the United Nations and to publicly report those scores.
We call on the Security Council to mirror those efforts
and implement corresponding policies.

We also call on the Security Council and fellow
Member States to join us in our commitment to protect
civilians and uphold international law by focusing on
prevention and address the root causes of conflict,
while recognizing that the world's regional conflicts
will require regional solutions and reinvigorating the
Security Council to ensure that it both takes action in
response to conflicts and follows through on its existing
resolutions in order for the Security Council to uphold
its mandate to maintain peace and security.

