Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): It is
a great pleasure to work with the delegation of France
in cosponsoring this resolution which has achieved 15
votes in the Council. I think it is a very important
signal behind the hard work the Office of the Iraq
Programme does in implementing the humanitarian
programme and the oil for food programme in Iraq that
we have voted unanimously to adopt this resolution.

I listened carefully to the previous three
statements and fully understand that for them, as
indeed I think for every delegation around this table,
this text is not the ideal. This is the whole point about
what we have achieved during the course of today's
negotiations. Nobody is completely satisfied, but
compromises are necessary in work on a subject as
complex as Iraq. The United Kingdom is very grateful
to Council colleagues for nevertheless sending the
signal that we are unanimous behind this resolution,
and it is a very important signal as we all seek to
implement resolution 1284.

It goes without saying that the Secretary-General
will be guided by the resolution, and cannot be guided
by national statements after the adoption of the
resolution, in setting the task for the experts that we
have asked them to perform. We can all list special
things we want included in any analysis. But here, I am
sure, we will be guided by the resolution and that is
what we have together adopted formally today.

In one of the previous statements mention was
made of activity in the no-fly zones, and let me just
respond to that. At no time in the past, now or in the
future has or will the United Kingdom bomb the
civilian infrastructure of Iraq. The action that we take
in the no-fly zones is, following Security Council
resolution 688 (1991), to protect the civilian population
of Iraq from repression by the Iraqi Government. The
military action that we take is purely in response to
attacks on our aircraft in the no-fly zones which are
patrolling without intent to bomb anybody or anything.
There is an easy explanation for the increase in the use
of ordinance over the past 18 months, and that is that
the Iraqi ground forces and air force have attacked our
coalition aircraft more than 650 times in that period
and we have been responding to defend ourselves. That
uses up ordinance. That is the sole explanation for the
figures which were quoted by the representative of the
Russian Federation.

I think we can be satisfied with today's work and
grateful for your leadership of that and I hope we can
now look forward and move forward.

