Mr. Swe (Myanmar): In congratulating you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council, I
would also like to thank you for convening a public
meeting on children and armed conflict. The situation
of children in armed conflict is heart-wrenching. As the
Secretary-General's report pointed out, war displaces
families and communities, and children are at risk of
exploitation and forcible recruitment. This underscores
the fact that peace and stability are important, not only
for the development of the country concerned but also
for the welfare of its population, particularly women
and children, which are the most vulnerable groups in
conflict situations.

As reflected in the Secretary-General's report,
impressive gains have been made in codifying
international norms and standards for the protection
and well-being of children. We share the opinion that
there is a need to promote and disseminate these norms
and standards and to raise awareness about them on the
ground.

We take satisfaction from the fact that, in
preparing the list, the Secretary-General was guided by
resolution 1379 (2001). We note, however, that the
report departed from its mandate when it made
reference, under situations of concern not included in
the list, to a number of countries, including Myanmar.
We particularly regret that in addition to the armed
insurgent groups in Myanmar, the national armed
forces were also referred to - this despite the fact that
there is no credible evidence of the use and recruitment
of children by the Myanmar Armed Forces.

In that regard, I share the view expressed this
morning by one Council member about the need for
verification and checking the validity of information
before it is presented to the Security Council. Nor
should the issue of protection of children be
politicized. The allegation made regarding my country
is the result of interviewing 20 or so insurgents inside a
neighbouring country. Additionally, the situation in
Myanmar is not, by any stretch of the imagination, a
threat to international peace and security.

The Myanmar armed forces is an all-volunteer
army. Those entering military service do so of their
own free will. Under the Myanmar Defence Services
Act of 1974 and War Office Council Instruction 13/73,
a person cannot enlist in the armed forces until he has
attained the age of 18. There is neither a draft system
nor forced conscription by the Government of
Myanmar.

The Special Rapporteur of the Commission on
Human Rights, who had visited Myanmar four times,
expressed concern in his report over:

"abuses of civilians and refugees on the part of
armed opposition groups, notably the Karenni
National Liberation Army, which has been
accused of forced conscription of male villagers,
including under-age youths". (A/57/290, para. 19)

It is a practice of armed insurgent groups in
Myanmar to recruit and abuse child soldiers. That was
brought to the wide attention of the international
community in 2000, when some members of a splinter
insurgent group, styling themselves as God's Army,
took over a hospital in Ratchaburi, in Thailand, taking
700 people hostage. The self-styled God's Army is an
insurgent group led by two 10-year-old twins, Johnny
and Luther Htoo.

We share the view of many delegations that the
best way of protecting children in armed conflict lies in
conflict prevention and resolution. Myanmar regained
its independence in January 1948. In a matter of
months, it had to face the challenge of insurgencies by
various armed groups. Until recently, there were 18
armed insurgent groups in the country, as well as a
narco-trafficking armed group.

For over 40 years, Myanmar had to suffer the
scourge of insurgency. The ethnic insurgencies which
had existed in Myanmar since its independence were
contained and rolled back only in recent years through
the painstaking efforts of the Government. As a result,
17 armed ethnic insurgent groups have participated in
the exchange of arms for peace programme. They are
now actively engaged in development activities in their
respective regions, together with the Government.
Apart from a splinter armed group of narco-traffickers,
only one ethnic insurgent group, the Kayin National
Union (KNU), remains to return to the fold, and the
Government continues to extend an olive branch to this

group.

For the first time in nearly half a century, the
armed conflict that plagued Myanmar has ceased in all
parts of the country with the exception of a few border
areas. The Special Rapporteur on human rights, in
commending the achievement of the ceasefire
agreements by the Government with 17 armed ethnic
groups, stated in his report: "After decades of fear,
insecurity and widespread violence the first dividend
of the ceasefire agreements is peace and the second is
some development" (ibid., para. 12).

The Government is promoting a culture of peace.
We are fully aware that, in any conflict situation,
children are among the most vulnerable groups. We
share the determination to give the fullest attention to
the question of protection of children in armed conflict.

The Secretary-General's report has pointed out
that education has also been a casualty of war. In
Myanmar, since civil insurgency has effectively been
overcome in nearly all parts of the country, the
Government has been able to concentrate its efforts on
development of the areas where fighting raged for over
four decades. In 1992, the Government set up a
separate ministry for that purpose and was able to bring
development to those areas. It has built hospitals, roads
and bridges in these border areas. From 1988-1989 to
1998-1999, in a span of 10 years, it built more than 350
schools in the former insurgent-held areas. The
Government has now been able to provide child
immunization for all children nationwide. We are able
to conduct extensive immunization programmes in the
remote areas.

It is a time-honoured tradition in Myanmar to
place special emphasis on the overall development of
children and to ensure their protection, upbringing and
development. In bringing about peace and stability, we
endeavour to provide the children with a peaceful and
developed world so that they will have a secure and
enabling environment to develop their individual
capabilities.

