Ms. Viotti: It is a pleasure for me to be here today
on behalf of the Secretary-General. I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on convening this meeting.

As terrorist organizations proliferate and seek
innovative ways to plan and execute physical and
cyberattacks across the globe, the threat they pose is
becoming increasingly complex. Critical infrastructure
is especially vulnerable, including energy facilities
and networks; air, land and maritime transportation;
banking and financial services; water supply; food
distribution, public health and other services that are the
backbone of modern societies. Infrastructure networks
and systems that previously functioned independently
have become interlinked through advances in
communication and information technology. An attack
on one sector can affect others, leading to disruptions
and widespread Chaos.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate has recognized the gravity of the dangers
of Da'esh and other groups determined to carry out
such attacks. Moreover, since many such facilities and
networks operate across borders, any terrorist attack
against them would almost certainly have regional
and global implications. The transnational nature of
terrorism requires the coordinated response on the part
of all States and actors of the international community.
However, we needto admit that international counter-
terrorism cooperation has been limited, especially in
the area of critical infrastructure. Strategically, this
means that the international community needs to unite
and be more creative, proactive and effective, including
through the development of strong public-private
partnerships. Three key steps need to be taken.

First, vulnerabilities in critical infrastructure need
to be mapped at all levels and in all sectors. Secondly,
international, regional and national actors should
cooperate on prevention and, in case an attack does
take place, on the mitigation of its effects, including
through information-sharing. Thirdly, it is crucial
to build States' capacities, including to assess risks,
take preparedness measures, strengthen emergency
management capacity and ensure that responses
are fully in keeping with human rights norms and
standards. The United Nations stands ready to assist
Member States in these and other areas.

The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force has set up the Inter-agency Working Group on
the Protection of Critical Infrastructure including
Internet, Vulnerable Targets and Tourism Security.
Various projects to assist Member States are under way,
encompassing many areas, United Nations entities and
partners. But of course, the primary responsibility lies
with Member States.

This debate comes at a crucial time. As our world
becomes increasingly interconnected through travel,
commerce and communications and in cyberspace, we
become more vulnerable to attacks by technologically
savvy terrorists seeking new ways to spread fear. It is
encouraging that the Security Council has heightened
its attention to this critical threat.

