First of all, I would like to thank the German presidency of the Security Council for organizing this timely debate on security challenges related to the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. This debate could generate more focused attention and serve as a call for common action to help the most vulnerable countries and populations. It is clear that the transboundary nature of the COVID-19 pandemic has strongly reminded us of the interconnectedness of the world community. This is the reason that we need to reinforce the common understanding that only together will we be able to overcome the negative consequences of this unparalleled global health crisis. In that context, we consider the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and protection for the most vulnerable groups to be very important. We believe that no one should be left behind in the response to the COVID-19 pandemic. At the same time, we should recognize that combating the COVID-19 pandemic will require concerted international cooperation. We all must try to do more and stay committed to working together and sharing experiences, best practices and information in a transparent and timely manner in order to decisively and effectively control the spread of the pandemic. This should be done while helping to meet the needs of vulnerable countries and populations, safeguarding people's well-being and security and maintaining socioeconomic stability. This pandemic is unprecedented in many ways, but some issues related to it are very familiar to us. We remember very well the negative effects of past epidemics, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome, Ebola, et cetera, on the stability and security of the affected countries. Nowadays, we are witnessing again that the countries most vulnerable to disease outbreak are those in the midst of or recovering from conflict, where health systems have deteriorated and a lack of security can hinder prevention measures. At the launch of the Global Humanitarian Response Plan for COVID-19, on 25 March, the Secretary-General rightly pointed out that the pandemic threatened to divert international attention and resources from resolving ongoing conflicts and supporting peace processes. Unfortunately, the spread of the coronavirus pandemic has already forced United Nations peacekeeping missions to reassess their activities in order to avoid the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. Peacekeeping missions have had to adapt their operations to minimize the risk of spreading the coronavirus both to the people they are tasked to protect and to the peacekeepers themselves. They have been forced to take unavoidable steps to cope with the new situation. However, the full extent of the impact of COVID-19 on the mission setting is yet to be ascertained. But, undoubtedly, the pandemic has the potential to reverse hard-won gains towards achieving sustainable peace and reforming security institutions. Going forward, it will be important to continue to emphasize the importance of further investing beyond political commitment. It seems that some of these new unprecedented measures are specific to the COVID-19 pandemic and will change over time in response to the development of the situation. On the other hand, we have to acknowledge that some others are likely to be more lasting. In that regard, we will need to discuss how to adjust the current structure and operating procedures of United Nations peacekeeping missions to the complexities of the post-COVID-19 era. We will need further substantial debates on how to achieve that objective, especially how to ensure long-term, reliable and predictable resources for United Nations peacekeeping operations, as well as how best practices and lessons learned in confronting COVID-19 during these challenging times can be systematically incorporated into the work of United Nations peace operations. The best news for all of us is that, despite the shift of attention, we managed to keep our key security tasks and United Nations missions up and running. We did it collectively, not individually. Not everything is, or can be, multilateral, but it is our conviction that multilateral solutions are the best ones in a world where global power competition comes with new faces and more cunning tentacles. I would like to highlight that the security sector is a key component in the Government response to the COVID-19 public health crisis in many regions. Armed forces and police services play a critical protection role. They are often involved in sensitizing the public about these extraordinary measures, as well as enforcing social distancing measures. They also support the health services in terms of logistics and transportation. Armed forces medical personnel have reinforced the civilian health services. The trust of the people in the Government and the security sector, and that alone, is essential to stopping the transmission of the virus. Even at the time of a global pandemic, it is of paramount importance to support women's participation in peacebuilding and their full and effective participation in all peace efforts. The need for urgent crisis responses often push gender considerations to the side, but maintaining a focus on the women and peace and security agenda is very important. We also need to uphold human rights standards and make further efforts to better integrate human rights considerations into the work of United Nations peacekeeping missions, while ensuring that they deliver on their security commitments. At the same time, individual countries must prevent the deterioration of human rights situations related to emergency measures. The COVID-19 pandemic presents new challenges for our societies, but fighting the coronavirus should not mean abandoning human rights.
