Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): First of all,
Mr. President, I would like to congratulate you and to
wish you every success in the coming month. I also
hail your wise initiative to bring this very important
topic to the Council Chamber. I also wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno and Ambassador
Dahinden for their presence here today. I fully agree
with them that international mine action must remain
one of the priorities on the international agenda
because of the terrible humanitarian and socio-
economic impact of mines and because they hamper
the stabilization and development of countries in post-
conflict situations.

Had there been any doubt about that, our recent
trip to Afghanistan eloquently showed the vital
importance of demining in peace-building and national
reconstruction. International action against this scourge
can be completely effective only if it combines a
balance of elements including the demining operations
themselves, the destruction of stockpiles, victim
assistance, mine risk education and active international
advocacy for the total prohibition of mines. Beyond all
that, it is vital to maintain an appropriate level of
international funding, in particular in areas such as
victim assistance. Increased responsibility on the part
of local authorities for mine action should also be
promoted.

Spain is firmly convinced that the terrible effects
of mines for the affected societies should be fought
through firm political and financial commitment and
that mine action is an essential part of peace-building.

In terms of its financial commitments, Spain
allocated approximately 1.5 million euros to its mine-
action programme for 2002: 45 per cent for victim
assistance, and 55 per cent for training programmes for
humanitarian mine clearance. Indeed, it was Angola
that was one of the main beneficiaries of that
programme. In addition, my country has mine-
clearance units in Kosovo, Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Afghanistan. To that bilateral assistance should be
added Spain's contributions within the framework of
the European Union - which has committed 240
million euros towards mine action for the period 2002
to 2009 - as well as contributions within the context
of the United Nations system, to which Spain has been
a regular contributor.

In terms of its political commitment, Spain
continues to promote the universalization and full
implementation of the Ottawa Convention on the
Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and
Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their
Destruction. Within the framework of the Convention
on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons which may be deemed to be
Excessively Injurious or to have Indiscriminate Effects,
my country will continue to support the adoption of
binding international instruments governing
unexploded ordnance and mines other than anti-
personnel mines.

Inasmuch as mine action is an essential
component of peace-building and confidence-building
measures in conflict and post-conflict situations, the
United Nations is called upon to play a major role,
providing a global approach to mainstream that action
into peacekeeping operations, humanitarian activities
and development strategies. In that connection, Spain
is grateful for and fully supports the continuation of the
important work of the Mine Action Service of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in its role as
coordinator of all anti-mine activities of the United
Nations system and provider of technical support for
those activities in the mandates, planning and
implementation of peacekeeping operations.

On another issue, we feel it would be equally
relevant for the Secretary-General, in addition to his
annual mine action report to the General Assembly, to
incorporate this item in his reports on general
peacekeeping operations activities.

I do not wish to conclude without mentioning the
gratitude of my delegation for the important
contribution to the coordination of international mine
action made by institutions such as the Geneva
International Centre for Humanitarian Demining,
which is represented here today.

