Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): Thank you, Mr. President,
for allowing Ukraine to contribute to this important
and timely debate. Let me also thank Under-Secretary-
General Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-General Alain
Le Roy and Assistant Secretary-General Ivan
Simonovic' for their insightful briefings.

Ukraine aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.

Ukraine is alarmed by the fact that civilians
continue to account for the majority of casualties in
conflicts, as well as a high number of displaced
persons. We are deeply concerned by the frequency and
gravity of attacks against civilians, especially women
and children, and by issues of safety for humanitarian
personnel and of timely humanitarian access to those in
need, particularly vulnerable groups. My country
attaches great importance to such issues, especially in
its capacity as an active participant in peacekeeping
operations and as a member of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Executive Board of UN-Women.

We welcome the increased understanding of the
primacy of the protection of civilians in situations of
armed conflict and the ever-growing attention to this
issue within the United Nations. Ukraine commends
the work of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, as well
as that of Member States, particularly concerning the
implementation of resolutions relating to women and
peace and security. My delegation fully supports a
comprehensive approach to addressing the issue of the
protection of civilians. This will entail, in particular,
taking further action to address core challenges,
namely, to strengthen compliance with international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
including by non-State armed groups; to improve the
mechanisms for the protection of civilians through
United Nations peace operations; and to improve
humanitarian access and strengthen accountability for
violations.

In this context, we support the systematic use of
practical tools such as the updated version of the 2002
aide-memoire (S/PRST/2010/25, annex). We believe
that it is still possible to improve coherence and
mainstreaming in this area, including through
promoting stronger interaction between all relevant
actors and through monitoring and oversight,
particularly by developing indicators for civilian
protection.

Accountability for violations of international
law - including the deliberate targeting of civilians,
their use as human shields, indiscriminate or
disproportionate attacks and delays or denials of
humanitarian access - is also an issue that must be
tackled. The questions of how to translate thematic
principles into actual protection of civilians on the
ground, and how to improve prevention, including with
early warning and assessment, in the context of the
responsibility to protect, should, we believe, be a focus
of all our efforts.

Ukraine's commitment to the efforts of the
United Nations in the area of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict stems from the principles I have
mentioned. Among recent concrete manifestations of
that unwavering commitment we can single out the
humanitarian mission carried out by Ukraine in April
using its landing ship Konstantin Olshansky to
evacuate civilians from Libya. As a result of this
initiative by the President of Ukraine, a total of 193
citizens of 20 nationalities, including 78 women and 35
children, were put on board the large landing ship
Konstantin Olshansky and transported out of harm's
way. I should stress that this mission was undertaken in
full compliance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions - namely, resolutions 1970 (2011) and
1973 (2011) - and with due notification of the
Secretary-General from the outset.

It is the same unshakable commitment and sense
of responsibility for the protection of civilians under
threat of imminent violence that lies behind Ukraine's
decision to be an active participant in the provision of
temporary reinforcements to the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire. We are proud of the
contribution that the Ukrainian aviation unit made to
the United Nations efforts to save civilians in Abidjan,
thanks to which thousands of innocent lives, mainly of
women and children, were spared the imminent danger
posed by deadly heavy weaponry. As in the first case I
mentioned, Ukraine acted strictly in accordance with
international law, and in particular with the
unanimously adopted resolution 1975 (2011).

Finally, let me assure you, Mr. President, that my
country will spare no efforts to continue to contribute
to our common goal of protecting civilians around the
world.

