Ms. Luj (Denmark): I should like to join others
in welcoming back to the Council the representative of
the Government of South Africa, Deputy Foreign
Minister Pahad, and to express my gratitude for the
encouraging and forward-looking briefing that we have
been given today. Likewise, let me express our
appreciation for the statement made by the
representative of Nigeria.

It is clear that for the children, women and men
of Cote d'Ivoire, bright white smoke was ascending
from Pretoria on 6 April. There, under the effective
mediation of South African President Thabo Mbeki, all
the Ivorian parties apparently mobilized the much-
needed political will and courage to give peace a
chance in Cote d'Ivoire. We sincerely hope that this
commitment by the parties will be sustained, and
Denmark fully supports the Pretoria Agreement as a
means to that end. We welcome the steps already taken
by the Ivorian parties, including the revival of the
Government of National Reconciliation, the pullback
of weapons from the zone of confidence and the agreed
time frame for disarmament.

Still, real and substantive challenges remain
ahead. The details of the disarmament process have yet
to be hammered out, and the legal foundation for the
holding of free and fair elections has not yet been fully
established. We urge the Ivorian parties to implement
the peace agreements without delay, including the
decision taken by the mediator on the issue of
eligibility to run for the presidency. The schedule is
compressed. No more time can be wasted before the
election.

For the international community, there is now a
peace to keep. The Pretoria Agreement calls for greater
involvement by the United Nations in various aspects
of the peace process. Denmark fully supports such
increased involvement and will work to ensure the
necessary resources to that end, in the belief that our
nascent optimism about the peace process will be
sustained. We support an appropriate strengthening of
the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(UNOCI) and an extension of its presence. At the same
time, it is imperative that the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States - as
well as other key regional and national actors -
continue to stay involved and that they, together with
the United Nations, develop a sound division of labour.

We should not forget, however, that there are still
some developments that give rise to concern. I am
thinking in particular about the situation in the western
part of Cote d'Ivoire, where ethnically motivated
violence seems to be continuing unabated. The transfer
of weapons and of nomadic mercenaries, including
children, appears to be continuing on the borders with
neighbouring countries, especially Liberia. Those
developments demand immediate attention by the
Government of National Reconciliation and by
international actors. We urge UNOCI to continue to
cooperate with the United Nations Mission in Liberia
on those matters and would also welcome a thorough
assessment of the situation.

Finally, I should also like to underline that what
my delegation has stated in earlier meetings remains
valid. The measures provided for in the Council's
relevant resolutions continue to apply. The arms
embargo must be effectively implemented. We also
persist in our belief that any failure to implement the
provisions of the peace agreements should be met
immediately with determined measures and that
impunity must be ended.

