Ms. Rivera Senchez (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the presidency of the Netherlands
for convening this open debate, and we take this
opportunity to welcome the participation of Prime
Minister Mark Rutte. We also appreciate the concept
note (S/2018/184, annex) prepared for today's debate
and commend the Secretary-General and Ms. Fatimata
Toure for their valuable briefings this morning.

In the view of my delegation, peacekeeping
operations continue to be one of the most effective
mechanisms established by the international community
to provide collective assistance to countries transitioning
from conflict situations to peace. Everything that has
to do with improving their efficiency and effectiveness
therefore translates into an opportunity to contribute to
achieving better outcomes for those processes.

Historically, El Salvador has been committed to
peacekeeping operations and believes that they play a
fundamental role in bringing about peace in the world.
We therefore support all political processes aimed at
establishing inclusive and legitimate Governments,
providing security and promoting processes to build and
sustain peace. My country is currently contributing to
eight different missions with troops and police totalling
204 men and women, including a specialized air unit
of 60 personnel awaiting deployment to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali.

My delegation takes note of the report of Lieutenant

General dos Santos Cruz, which has become an important
tool for jointly addressing issues of concern and the
shared challenges we face, and which can contribute
to identifying a long-term strategy for achieving better
outcomes in peacekeeping operations. El Salvador
deems it important to highlight some aspects that
are essential to ensuring the success of peacekeeping
operations. One of them is the importance of holding
effective triangular consultations in which the Security
Council, contributing countries and the Secretariat can
conduct objective assessments that will enable them
to improve their operationality and functionality and
to renew and revitalize missions' functioning. The
perspectives oftroop- and police-contributing countries
must be kept in mind, particularly during the policy-
and decision-making processes, including deployment,
transition phases and the renewal of mandates, as well
as when other relevant changes are occurring. They
must have clear and achievable mandates that respond
to the challenges on the ground. The desired outcomes
can be achieved only through continued cooperation.

In order to be truly effective, peacekeeping
operations must be able to depend from the very
beginning on political support, adequate human,
financial, logistical resources, and clearly defined and
viable mandates, as well as personnel who are highly
trained for the purpose of fulfilling their mission on
the ground.
My delegation would like to acknowledge the vital
role that women and young people play in the prevention
and settlement of conflicts, and we emphasize the need
to encourage their full participation in peacekeeping
and advocating for peace, while underscoring the
importance of the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda and resolution 1325 (2000).

El Salvador is deeply concerned about the
precariousness of the political and security environment
in areas where United Nations peacekeeping missions
are deployed. The patterns of violence in conflict
areas in which peacekeeping operations are deployed
are at their worst level since 1994. In that regard, my
delegation believes that to achieve the goal of lasting
peace, operations must always be accompanied by
a parallel and inclusive process that is well planned,
carefully designed and backed by the consent and
commitment of the parties concerned.

We must ensure strict adherence to the purposes
and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, especially the principles of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of States and
of non-intervention in internal affairs, which are
fundamental elements of our joint efforts to promote
international peace and security. Respect for those
basic peacekeeping principles is essential to the success
of operations on the ground.

We believe that it is vital to ensure the highest
possible levels of ethical conduct of personnel
involved in peacekeeping operations and reiterate
our full commitment to the zero-tolerance policy of
the United Nations on sexual exploitation and abuse.
In that regard, we reaffirm our commitment to the
prompt investigation and eventual determination of
responsibility for all misconduct, in accordance with
due process and the memorandums of understanding
agreed to by the United Nations.

In conclusion, my delegation condemns all attacks
and acts ofviolence against United Nations personnel as
they carry out their functions and reiterates its concern
for the safety and security of mission personnel in the
field. To that end, we call for action to be taken to bring
those responsible to justice and take this opportunity
to pay tribute to the United Nations staff who have lost
their lives while doing their commendable work, and to
express our condolences to their families.

