Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
the Secretary-General for being here on such an
important occasion.

We are here because of dangerous choices made
by a State Member of the United Nations - the
Government of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea - including the choice to be the only country
in the twenty-first century to conduct a nuclear test;
the choice to defy the Council's clear and consistent
requirements by testing nuclear devices twice this year
alone; the choice to continue producing fissile material
for its nuclear programme; the choice to accelerate
prohibited ballistic missile launches to an unprecedent
rate - more than two dozen since January, including
from new delivery systems such as submarines; the
choice to keep threatening neighbours and countries
continents away with nuclear annihilation.

These choices reflect a calculated strategy. The
Democratic People's Republic of Korea is determined
to refine its nuclear and ballistic missile technology
to pose an even more potent threat to United Nations
Member States and, more broadly, to international
peace and security. Let us consider what the leader of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Kim Jong
Un, said after testing an engine for a long-range missile
in April - that North Korea

"can tip new-type intercontinental ballistic rockets
with more powerful nuclear warheads and keep any
cesspool of evils in the Earth, including the United
States mainland, within our striking range".

The United States recognizes China for working
closely with us in negotiating the extremely rigorous
and important resolution 2321 (2016). We are also
grateful for the critically important contributions made
by Japan and the Republic of Korea, which face a grave
threat that one Korean official likened to living with a
Cuban missile crisis every day.

Lately, the Council has been divided on many
issues, but the unanimous adoption of new sanctions
shows that, as long as the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea pursues this dangerous and destabilizing path,
the Council will impose ever harsher consequences
on those responsible. In March, the Council adopted
what were then the toughest sanctions to date on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, but that
country remained as determined as ever to continue
advancing its nuclear technology. The Democratic
People's Republic of Korea found ways to continue
diverting revenue from exports to fund its research.
It tried to cover up its business dealings abroad, and
it looked for openings to smuggle illicit materials by
land, sea and air.

Today's resolution systematically goes after each
of these illicit schemes. Let me highlight three ways in
which the resolution breaks new and important ground.

First, the resolution imposes major new restrictions

on the sources of hard currency, in particular coal
exports, that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
is using to pay for its nuclear weapons and ballistic
missiles. Of course, resolution 2270 (2016) bans coal
exports not exclusively used for what the Council called
"livelihood purposes", but the coal revenues of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea have remained
about high, accounting for about one-third of its entire
export revenue. Contrary to the letter and the spirit of
resolution 2270 (2016), that coal export revenue has
not been used to help the people of North Korea. It
has been used to further build up the regime's illegal
weapons programmes.

So the resolution imposes a new, binding cap on how
much coal the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
can ship out of the country, cutting what the country
earns by approximately $700 million per year from its
2015 total, or more than 60 per cent of its coal export
revenue. Much of this coal trade involves Democratic
People's Republic of Korea companies with links to the
regime and its prohibited nuclear and ballistic missile
programmes. In addition, the resolution imposes a
new ban on the export of copper, nickel, silver and
zinc, which will eliminate another $100 million or
more in annual hard-currency revenue for the regime.
In total, therefore, the resolution will slash by at least
$800 million per year, the hard currency that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea has to fund its
prohibited weapons programmes, which constitutes a
full 25 per cent of its entire export revenues.

But we knew going into this negotiation that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea has found
itself masterful at using non-traditional means to stash
currency, and the resolution goes after some of the less
obvious ways that the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea makes money. We have banned the export
of monuments. The Council might ask why on earth
would we ban the export of monuments. It turns out that
exports such as a statue of Laurent Kabila, standing in
Kinshasa today, two statues for which Robert Mugabe
paid $5 million to be stood up in Zimbabwe upon his
passing, and countless others found around the world
generate tens of millions of dollars for the regime. We
have called out countries that host Democratic People's
Republic of Korea labourers by urging those countries
to take steps to ensure that wages are not supporting
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea regime's
prohibited programmes.

Secondly, the resolution makes it much harder
for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to use
diplomats to advance its prohibited programmes. In the
past, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea has
tried to enable nuclear and ballistic-missile officials
to travel by giving them phony diplomatic titles.
Meanwhile, Democratic People's Republic of Korea
officials posted in embassies abroad have spent their
time running businesses and brokering arms sales to
fund the regime's military. But an arms dealer with a
diplomatic passport is still an arms dealer. So from now
on, States must restrict the travel of those affiliated with
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's nuclear
and ballistic-missile programmes or other prohibited
activities, diplomatic passports or not.

Thirdly, the resolution imposes unprecedented
measures to restrict the flow of illicit materials into
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. On land,
the resolution emphasizes that cargo heading into and
out of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea by
road or rail must be inspected. At sea, the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea will no longer be allowed
to mask its ships and evade scrutiny by flying the
flags of other countries or controlling other vessels
with their crews. And by air, Member States should
inspect the baggage of anyone flying into and out of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. In the next
15 days, the Security Council's Democratic People's
Republic of Korea Sanctions Committee will make
another important determination, publishing for the
first time a list of conventional arms dual-use items
that will no longer be allowed to enter the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. They are commercially
available components that have civilian uses, such
as sophisticated electronic sensors, but that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea can use to build
advanced military equipment, including radar systems,
night vision and stealth technology.

I began by talking about the fact that the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea made the choice to pursue
nuclear weapons, but, before closing, I would like to
discuss another choice that the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea regime has made - the choice to
systematically violate the human rights of its people.
As the United Nations commission of inquiry on human
rights in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
found in its 2014 report (A/HRC/25/63), the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea arbitrarily detains between
80,000 and 120,000 political prisoners in its gulags,
where they are subjected to deliberate starvation, forced
labour, executions, torture and rape, among other
abuses. As the report notes, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea seeks nothing less than total control
of organized social life, through tactics ranging from
summary executions to forced indoctrinations to the
methodical repression of freedom of expression.

Even though we have heard it before - and many
of us have repeated it - it is worth underscoring the
commission's finding that
"[t]he gravity, scale and nature of these violations
reveal a State that does not have any parallel in the
contemporary world." (A/HRC/25/63, para. 80)

The situation in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea reaffirms what we have said elsewhere - when
Governments flagrantly violate the human rights of
their own people, they almost always show similar
disdain for the international norms that help ensure
our shared security. For the first time, this resolution
enshrines that the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea must respect the welfare and inherent dignity of
people in its territory. That includes the North Korean
people, of course, but also those of other nationalities
in its territory, including unjustly detained Americans
and those abducted from countries such as Japan and
the Republic of Korea, whose families, in some cases,
have endured decades of suffering from not knowing
the fates of their loved ones.

The defence of human dignity is a basic demand,
and it is long overdue coming from the Council. The
same clique of leaders responsible for the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's pursuit of nuclear weapons
is the one responsible for systematically abusing their
people at home. For the first time, today's resolution also
recalls that, in keeping with Article 5 of the Charter of
the United Nations, if the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea continues on its current path, systematically
and flagrantly violating its Charter obligations, it could
see some or all of its rights and privileges here at the
United Nations suspended.

The United States is realistic about what today's
resolution will achieve. No resolution in New York
will likely persuade Pyongyang to cease its relentless
pursuit of nuclear weapons tomorrow, but this resolution
imposes unprecedented costs on the regime of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea for defying
the Council's demands. The door remains open for
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to choose
a different path - a path of negotiations towards
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization.
When the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
makes that choice, the United States - and I know the
Council - will be ready to engage, and with sustained
international pressure, it is possible to change the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's calculus.
To do that, the members of the Council and all States
Members of the United Nations must fully implement
the sanctions that we have adopted today. The strength
of this resolution and our ability to change the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's threatening,
belligerent behaviour depends on Member States
exercising maximum vigilance to enforce each and
every one of the provisions in today's resolution. We
call on all Member States to remain united in imposing
consequences on the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea for its many dangerous choices.

