Mr. llkin (Turkey): Let me start by
congratulating you once again, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. You have our
full support and cooperation in the discharge of your
duties. My warmest thanks also go to Ambassador
Heller, who presided over the Security Council last
month with great success. I also wish to thank
Ms. Karin Landgren for her briefing. As this is the first
time that she addresses the Council, I take this
opportunity to congratulate her on the assumption of
her duties. I wish her every success. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his informative
report (S/2009/22l), which reflects recent developments
in the country in an accurate and objective manner. In
that regard, we share the Secretary-General's cautious
optimism as to the implementation of the peace
process.

Since the beginning of this year, there have been
a number of concrete developments. In that regard, the
regular consultations on the integration and
rehabilitation of Maoist army personnel and the
progress achieved by the Constituent Assembly in
drafting a constitution are indeed worth underlining.
We also welcome the appointment of the members of
the National Security Council, which has met for the
first time in six years to make recommendations on the
mobilization, operation and use of the Nepal Army.

However, as reported by the Secretary-General,
the level of cooperation among the major stakeholders
in the peace process remains far from adequate. In fact,
the resignation yesterday of Prime Minister Prachanda
was a stark manifestation of the situation. As such, the
decision of the Prime Minister and what it entails for
the political stability of the country are a source of
significant concern. We sincerely hope that the
Government crisis will be resolved swiftly and in a
democratic manner and not constitute a major setback.
It should in no wayjeopardize the peace process.

Accordingly, we call on all parties in Nepal to
work together in the spirit of compromise and
cooperation that is necessary to keep the peace process
on track. As we see it, it is the common responsibility
of all political actors to continue to adhere to the
principles and the understanding that led to the signing
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in November
2006.

Along the same lines, the United Nations Mission
in Nepal (UNMIN), which has been most helpful
throughout the peace process, obviously has an
important role to play in this new situation too. Indeed,
UNMIN seems to enjoy the full confidence and support
of all Nepalese parties. We need to make the best use
of UNMIN. At this point, I very much look forward to
hearing the views and assessment of Ms. Landgren as
to what more could be done to facilitate the resolution
of the crisis through democratic means. On the other
hand, as to the future of UNMIN, I find the discussion
on possible exit strategies for UNMIN a bit premature,
especially in the light of the current situation. Indeed,
the urgent need now is to address the current political
crisis and to support all efforts that will keep the peace
process on track.

The United Nations and the international
community must remain committed to supporting the
process on which Nepal has embarked for the
consolidation of peace and the improvement of the
lives of its people. As such, the main conditions for
ending the United Nations Mission - namely, political
stability and peaceful coexistence - are yet to be
achieved fully. The Council should therefore continue
to monitor closely the political situation in Nepal with
a View to reaching the right conclusions before 23 July
2009.

Finally, we support the draft presidential
statement before the Security Council, which reflects
the expectations of the Council with regard both to
Nepal and to UNMIN.

