Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, the Argentine delegation would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We would also like to express our appreciation Mr.
John Holmes, Under- Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his briefing, to which we listened very
carefully.

Argentina attaches great importance to the
question of the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts. We had the honour of being a member of the
Security Council when resolutions 1265 (1999), 1296
(2000) and 1674 (2006) were negotiated and adopted.
Today, those resolutions constitute the legal regime in
that area. We understand that the effectiveness of the
Security Council in strengthening the protection of
civilians is one of the key areas in which international
public opinion evaluates the contribution of the
Council to the maintenance of international peace and
security.

As Mr. Holmes's predecessor pointed out, the
responsibility to protect civilians in conflict is a central
principle of humanity, which must be depoliticized and
transformed into joint action on the part of Security
Council members and international organizations.

The fact that, as regular Council assessments
have made clear, atrocities against civilians are
continuing leads us to consider the possibility of
adopting, in the case of certain conflicts, the measures
currently envisaged to deal with situations in which
States involved in conflict lack the political will or the
capacity to take effective action to protect civilians
affected by the crisis.

No national security considerations can prevail
over the obligation of States and other parties to a
conflict to comply with humanitarian law. Argentina
appreciates the work of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and United Nations
agencies regarding the protection of civilians,
including in the area of refugees and internally
displaced persons, as well as with respect to women,
children and other vulnerable groups, in the context of
armed conflict.

My country emphatically condemns attacks
against humanitarian personnel and would like to
express sincere condolences to the families and friends
of those who have so generously sacrificed their lives
while assisting people caught up in humanitarian
emergencies.

The responsibility of States to protect
humanitarian personnel and provide them with full,
unimpeded access to the civilian populations affected
is clearly established in current law and cannot be
denied under any circumstances.

Several years ago, the Security Council included
on its agenda the question of the protection of
civilians, and it has been establishing a legal regime in
that area. In that regard it has had at its disposal such
tools as the road map (see S/2001/614), the
aide-memoire (S/PRST/2002/6, annex) and the ten-
point platform (see S/PV.4877). Furthermore, it has
benefited from valuable suggestions for improving the
information mechanism for the protection of civilians.

It is now up to us to fully apply that framework.
Resolution 1674 (2006) must be implemented and
developed. The submission in October of the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
provides OCHA with an opportunity to undertake a
detailed assessment of the international situation in that
area and to propose new ideas and approaches, as well
as specific actions to be taken, including on issues
regarding access by humanitarian personnel to
populations affected by conflict and the security of
journalists, other media professionals and associated
personnel.

In conclusion, we would like to express to
Mr. Holmes our gratitude and our best wishes as he
carries out his tasks, as well as our commitment to
continue supporting OCHA in this and other United
Nations bodies.

