Ms. Lnj (Denmark): Denmark appreciates this
opportunity to discuss the issue of peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region. We welcome
the Tanzanian initiative to hold this debate and the fact
that you, Madam Minister, are presiding over our
discussion.

We would like to associate ourselves with the
statement delivered by the Permanent Representative
of Austria on behalf of the European Union.
We welcome the participation today of a large
number of ministers. Political dedication is the driving
force, and their strong commitment to promote peace
and stability is absolutely essential.

The progress in the transitional process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is encouraging,
because peace and stability in that country is seen as
one of the key factors in obtaining peace and stability
throughout the region. Respect for sovereignty, non-
interference and closer cooperation between individual
States in the region constitute another key factor. The
International Conference on Peace, Security,
Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes
Region provides a forum for cooperation, and we hope
that the second Great Lakes summit takes place as soon
as possible.

Atrocities and criminal behaviour by militias and
armed groups operating in the Great Lakes region
continue to pose a threat to regional stability. The
countries of the region must take measures to prevent
the use of their respective territories in support of
activities of armed groups. And they must combat the
cross-border trafficking of illicit arms and illicit
resources and the movement of combatants by strictly
enforcing the arms embargo applied to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

In that regard, I should like to underline that the
links among the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, the illegal trade in those resources and the
proliferation and trafficking of arms must be fully
recognized as yet another factor fuelling and
exacerbating conflicts in the region. We urge countries
in the region to enhance their cooperation in promoting
lawful and transparent exploitation of natural
resources. That will promote peace as well as
economic development.

The need for protection of civilian populations is
immense throughout the region. We should like to
stress that Governments in the region have the primary
responsibility to protect their populations in
accordance with international law and to ensure the
full, safe and unhindered access of humanitarian
workers to people in need.

In order to secure long-term stability and respect
for the rule of law, all States concerned must take
action to bring to justice perpetrators of grave
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. And all States should cooperate with
international criminal courts to ensure the
apprehension and surrender of suspects. Where the
United Nations is engaged, it should assist the States in
that endeavour.

Through the combined efforts of the countries of
the region, the United Nations and the African Union,
the various conflicts in the region have now turned a
critical corner towards resolution. We would like to
encourage enhanced African ownership and
participation in conflict-management on the continent.
The Security Council should explore how best to
support ongoing efforts to develop the African security
architecture and to work closely with the African
Union to advance ways and means of cooperation.

We are increasingly drawing on the resources and
legitimacy of a network of multilateral mechanisms,
regional and global, to provide collective responses to
the peace and security challenges of today. The task
ahead of us is to make sure that our cooperation
mechanisms work as well as possible. They must be
effective, efficient and mutually reinforcing, and they
must be flexible and responsive.

In its regional approach to the Great Lakes
region, the Security Council must focus not just on
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, but also on conflict
prevention and resolution, including governance issues
and the social and economic components of peace.

The issues that I have just touched upon are all
reflected in the draft resolution (S/2006/51) initiated by
Tanzania. The complexity of the draft resolution is a
clear indication of the comprehensive Security Council
engagement aimed at the resolution of the conflicts in
the Great Lakes region. Denmark wholeheartedly
supports the draft resolution.

