Mr. Qazi: The Secretary-General's report before
the Security Council comes at a time when the
challenges facing the Iraqi people have never appeared
more daunting. As emphasized in the report,

"the time has come for [Iraq's] constitutionally
elected Government and the international
community to place the safety and welfare of the
Iraqi people at the front and centre of all their
collective efforts" (S/2006/706, para. 69).

The key challenge to the Government of Iraq is to
develop a truly national agenda that is responsive to
the needs and aspirations of all Iraqis. Prime Minister
Al-Maliki has laid out a range of initiatives in his
National Reconciliation Plan and has taken initial steps
to broaden the basis of support for his Government and
to increase the effectiveness of the Iraqi security
forces. The Prime Minister has included the Baghdad
peace initiative in his National Reconciliation Plan,
which is aimed at establishing a basis for mutual trust
and protection among Baghdad's diverse communities.
It is also encouraging that the Government of Iraq is
seeking to establish a dialogue with those who have
hitherto remained outside the political process. Those
initiatives merit the widest possible support.

Ultimately, lasting improvements in security can
be achieved only through negotiated solutions to
complex political, economic, social and religious
issues that meet the legitimate needs and interests of all
Iraqis.

Although Iraq's problems have been
overshadowed in recent months by crises elsewhere in
the region, Iraq today has become one of the most
violent conflict areas in the world. As highlighted in
the report, in many parts of the country insurgent,
militia and terrorist attacks, as well as gross violations
of human rights, have continued to inflict untold
suffering, particularly on innocent civilians, most
notably women, children and minorities. The Iraqi
people have every right to expect their elected leaders
to reverse those worrisome trends, which could
endanger the social and political fabric of the country.
Given Iraq's importance and potential, its neighbours
06-52155
and the wider international community have a vital
stake in helping Iraq become a peaceful, stable and
prosperous partner, fully integrated within the region
and the international community.

The International Compact with Iraq could
become an important vehicle to that end. The Compact,
co-chaired by the Government of Iraq and the United
Nations, is an initiative for a new partnership between
Iraq and the international community. Considerable
preparatory work has been initiated to create an
effective framework for the Compact in which the
Government can develop its economic programme
according to clearly defined priorities, benchmarks and
commitments.

At the preparatory meeting held in Abu Dhabi on
10 September, the Government of Iraq outlined the key
priorities on which to form a Compact, such as
effective public resource management and economic
reform in private sector development and social sector
reforms. The Government of Iraq also pledged its
strong commitment to tackling corruption, creating a
transparent and efficient oil sector, developing a solid
budgetary framework, improving governance and
building and consolidating effective national
institutions. The Government recognized that good
governance and the resolution of security and political
challenges are interlinked and are prerequisites for
progress in all other areas. Participants welcomed the
commitments made by the Government and pledged
their support to work closely with the Government of
Iraq in further developing the Compact, with the
assistance of the United Nations and the World Bank.

For its part, the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) remains fully committed to
support and facilitate the development of the Compact
and to assist in its effective implementation. As the
Council is aware, the Secretary-General has taken the
initiative to convene a high-level meeting at United
Nations Headquarters on 18 September which, in
addition to reviewing progress in the implementation
of resolution 1546 (2004), will review the development
of the International Compact.

The commitments of the Government of Iraq to
make urgent progress on national reconciliation,
political inclusion and consensus-building, in addition
to the Compact, also deserve the full support of the
region and the wider international community.
Fostering national reconciliation and building effective
06-52155

national institutions must be an Iraqi-led and Iraqi-
owned process. As a key priority, Iraq's elected
parliament, the Council of Representatives, will need
to decide on a range of legislation to make substantial
parts of Iraq's Constitution operational. It must also
commence a constitutionally required review process
to strengthen the Constitution as a document that
reflects the national consensus.

The UNAMI Office of Constitutional Support has
facilitated very considerable preparatory work for a
constitutional review process through arranging several
multi-party dialogues between Iraqi political
representatives and constitutional experts, as well as
international experts and consultants on key
constitutional issues. I hope that a constitutional
review will be used as a vehicle to promote national
dialogue and reconciliation. Far from provoking
controversy, a well-prepared and managed
constitutional review can create a growing repository
of fundamental agreements that, if adhered to, will be a
solid foundation for Iraq's developing democracy.

The members of the Council of Representatives
bear a historic responsibility to pursue their
constituency interests only in the framework of the
national interest. Their credibility rests on the extent to
which they are able to exercise their individual
judgement to protect Iraq's newly established national
institutions from being influenced by particular
interests. In all our contacts, UNAMI has therefore
emphasized that Iraq's new independent institutions
must be protected by effective laws and be enabled to
discharge their responsibilities independently and
impartially, without fear or favour.

Similarly, good governance requires a
professional and well-managed civil service. Above all,
the effective and transparent delivery of public services
will depend on public confidence in the competence
and accountability of those charged with their
implementation. The Government has initiated
important reforms in key ministries following public
and international concern over the activities of some of
their personnel. It is to be commended for those efforts
and encouraged to ensure that adequate internal
oversight and professional performance maintenance
mechanisms are put in place.

All of that may seem far removed from the daily
realities that face so many Iraqis. As the Secretary-
General's report indicates, one of the key challenges
3
remains ensuring greater respect for human rights and
the rule of law. A priority for UNAMI is to assist the
Government in setting up a strong national human
rights protection system by establishing an independent
human rights commission, reinforcing the judiciary and
the capacity of key ministries to promote and protect
human rights, and by supporting non-governmental
organizations and the development of a culture of
human rights. Strengthening human rights and the rule
of law is necessary to create solid foundations for
development and reconstruction efforts. If effective
remedies for present and past crimes remain elusive,
more Iraqis might take the law into their own hands.
Action on transitional justice will complement those
efforts and help pursue with vigour the twin priorities
of national reconciliation and accountability for human
rights violations.

UNAMI is also providing advice to the
Government on the growing problem of internal
displacement, particularly with regard to shelter and
assistance. The report draws attention to the fact that
some 200,000 citizens have been forced to leave their
homes, mainly in Baghdad, since the Samarra incident
of 22 February this year. United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes have nearly depleted their
resources earmarked for emergency humanitarian
activities. Similarly, the Government is constrained in
its ability to adequately respond to the situation. There
is now an urgent need for new funding to meet the
needs of the displaced.

Highlighting those challenges is not to deny that
in a number of areas there has been measurable
progress in the delivery of services. But, as the
Secretary-General has stressed in his report,

"The Iraqi people and their leaders have arrived
at an important crossroads: if they are able to
build firm foundations for the common interest of
all Iraqis, the promise of peace and prosperity
will be within reach. However, if current patterns
of discord and violence prevail for much longer,
there is a grave danger of a breakdown of the
Iraqi State, and potentially of civil war". (ibid., 
para. 69)
Whatever the challenges of the moment - and
there are many - there is still reason for optimism.

The demonstrated resilience of the Iraqi people in the
face of a succession of calamities and tribulations is
reason enough to know that they will not be defeated in
achieving their aspirations. The best option of the
international community is to prove the pessimists
wrong by assisting the people and Government of Iraq
in realizing their national vision.

Accordingly, the time has come to hold focused
discussions on how best to assist Iraq on its way
towards a stable, peaceful and prosperous State. Those
discussions should be as open and inclusive as
possible, to ensure win-win approaches to addressing
critical issues. The Government of Iraq has already
made a bold start in addressing major issues through its
initiatives, programmes and outreach efforts and
through security and economic reforms. The
international community must seize this opportunity to
provide real support for Iraq's efforts to transform
itself into a participatory and institutionalized
democracy that ensures for all its people the full,
secure and prosperous lives they have struggled and
made sacrifices to achieve. There are few more noble
endeavours to which to devote our energies and
capacities.

UNAMI remains fully committed to play its part
pursuant to its mandates under resolutions 1546 (2004)
and 1700 (2006). I am grateful for the continued
support of the Security Council for UNAMI's role in
Iraq. A strong consensus in the Council in support of
the new Government of Iraq and the United Nations
role remains essential. While the United Nations
presence and ability to operate effectively remain
severely constrained by the security environment,
UNAMI is exploring how it can maximize its impact
and which tasks can be prioritized. In that regard, I
would like to reiterate my appreciation to Member
States, from both within and outside the Multinational
Force, who support the United Nations in Iraq by
providing military advisers, guard forces and
movement and aviation support. UNAMI will continue
to stand by the people of Iraq and will make every
effort to help generate tangible progress for a
democratic and prosperous Iraq that is at peace with
itself, its neighbours and the wider international
community.

