Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): We appreciate the
difficulty of the predicament the Security Council is
facing today. But in our view, this predicament is based
on a false dilemma. The maintenance of international
peace and security and the repression of heinous crimes
committed against humanity are not - and by all
means cannot be viewed as if they were - two
conflicting objectives.

On the contrary, peacekeeping operations and the
institution of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
are two important pillars for the realization of United
Nations goals, and we have to make sure that both
instruments work in a coherent and mutually
reinforcing manner.

That is precisely the reason why the Rome Statute
relies so deeply on a solid and very well crafted
relationship between the Council and the Court.

The decision to join an international treaty falls
within the purview of each country's sovereignty.
Brazil has already taken its own decision with respect
to the ICC and fully respects what others may decide in
accordance with their own interest and perceptions. We
were nevertheless struck by the very unusual decision
to "unsign" an international legal instrument negotiated
in good faith.

We understand that the ICC represents the
culmination of a process in our collective endeavour to
uphold human rights and defend them in every part of
the world. We trust that the creation of the ICC
represents a new asset for humankind and that its very
existence will contribute to making our world more
stable and conflict situations less threatening to
innocent people.

Nevertheless, we must face the fact that
differences of View on this matter can arise, given the
political implications of the Tribunal's jurisdiction and
in the light of our differing legal and constitutional
systems. But there can be no doubt that we all share the
same resolute determination to make sure that the
horrors of genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes defined in the Rome Statute will no longer go
unpunished or benefit from spurious immunities. That
is the clear message that all bodies of the United
Nations must convey.

Brazil aligns itself with those who are firmly
convinced that the Rome Statute provides all the
necessary checks and balances against possible abuses
and politically motivated misuse of the ICC's
jurisdiction. Articles 16 and 98, paragraph 2, are only
two examples. And there are many more, starting with
the very nature of the complementary jurisdiction of
the Court.

It is inconceivable that peacekeepers mandated by
the United Nations could ever be associated with the
kinds of crimes that fall within the jurisdiction of the
ICC. That has never happened, and it is most unlikely
that it ever will happen. Should it occur, however, it is
essential that the perpetrators be brought to justice to
preserve the mandate and the authority of the mission.

The United Nations cannot intervene or authorize
military intervention in any specific situation, only to
end up denying the very values upon which the
Organization was founded. We cannot accept - even
in theory - the possibility that peacekeeping might be
regarded as a haven for the commission of crimes
against humanity. That is why it is so difficult for us to
accept the terms under which the discussion of the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) is
taking place.

We came here to make a strong appeal to all
members of the Council not to take hasty decisions that
might cause irreparable damage to peacekeeping, to the
rule of international law and to the very credibility of
the Council. We understand that the Council faces a
genuine problem, to which an appropriate solution
must be found. That solution is not self-evident or
immediately available, but we are confident that it is
not beyond reach within a reasonable amount of time.

We strongly discourage proposals or initiatives
that ultimately seek to reinterpret or review the Rome
Statute, especially with respect to article 16, whose
provisions are applicable only on a case-by-case basis
and were never intended to give place to ad aeternam
deferrals of the Court's jurisdiction. The Security
Council must not take action that might, in the words
of the Secretary General in his letter to Secretary of
State Colin Powell on 3 July, "[fly] in the face of treaty
law". The Council cannot alter international
agreements that have been duly negotiated and freely
entered into by States parties. The Council is not
vested with treaty-making and treaty-reviewing
powers. It cannot create new obligations for the States
parties to the Rome Statute, which is an international
treaty that can be amended only through the procedures
provided in articles 121 and 122 of the Statute.

Let me return to my initial point. The Security
Council and the International Criminal Court do not
have competing jurisdictions. They must not represent
a threat to each other's legitimate competence under
the Charter and the Rome Statute. The Council would
be doing a tremendous disservice to its own authority
and credibility if it encroached unduly on the Court's
proceedings and jurisdiction. Any decision by the
Council that overreaches its mandate may risk not
being accepted by the States parties to the Rome
Statute.

The question before us today is undoubtedly
complex and requires time to be considered
appropriately. We believe that a satisfactory solution is
possible, and we encourage the Council to continue
advancing proposals with a View to ensuring a
constructive outcome. A compromise solution must be
found to ensure the continuity of peacekeeping
operations while respecting the specific concerns of
individual States. But let me stress that compromise
must not come at any cost; it must not infringe upon
the autonomy or the authority of the Court.

Brazil looks forward to contributing, in
cooperation with the Security Council, to a solution
that reaffirms our dedication to the fostering of
international peace and security and preserves the
integrity of the International Criminal Court. In the
meantime, we believe that the renewal of peacekeeping
mandates should not be held hostage to any country's
individual perceptions and that a provisional modus
operandi should be established. That could involve the
possibility for any country to decline participation in
peacekeeping operations whenever it feels that its
troops would be subject to unacceptable risks, and the
possibility to make full use of bilateral agreements
under article 98, paragraph 2, of the Rome Statute. In
the specific case of UNMIBH, and given the present
circumstances, we would favour an accelerated
schedule for the handover of the police training
programme, the continuation of which seems to be
crucial to ensuring the consolidation of the
international community's efforts in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Security Council members have a special
responsibility to maintain and promote a stable world
order, and it is the Council's duty to make every effort
to sustain international law and to help make it
universal; this is the only real source of legitimacy in a
world based on justice for all. The creation of
unnecessary and unjustifiable exceptions to the rule of
law with regard to international behaviour would be a
denial of that principle and a dangerous setback for the
Organization.

