Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, let me thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Salame for his briefing. I
commend his work and that of the entire staff of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya, operating
in a particularly difficult environment. I also thank
Ambassador Schulz for his briefing.

As the Special Representative just underlined,
the situation in Tripoli remains of great concern.
Libyan civilians, migrants and, more generally, the
most vulnerable persons are suffering on a daily basis
as a result of the fighting. The ongoing tragedy of
migrants off the Libyan coast must call us to address
that challenge. It is high time that the protection of
civilians became a genuine concern of the warring
parties. Belgium calls in particular on the parties to
refrain from committing grave violations involving
children, including through their recruitment and use
in armed conflict.

Belgium also commends the courage of medical
and humanitarian personnel who are paying a high price
for their commitment. Attacks on medical facilities,
such as that reported yesterday to the south of Tripoli,
constitute clear violations not only of international
law but also of resolution 2286 (2016). In that regard,
Belgium reiterates once again that those guilty ofserious
violations of international humanitarian law and, more
generally, those who threaten achieving peace in Libya
must be held accountable for their actions. All military
and civilian leaders exercising effective control,
authority and command over their subordinates could
be held criminally responsible for crimes committed
by their subordinates and prosecuted before national
courts or the International Criminal Court.

The security vacuum that has been created, in
particular in the southern part of Libya, has been
exploited by terrorist groups. The pursuit of the military
option will only lead to further chaos and the lasting
destabilization of the country. It is already threatening
to completely undo the political progress made over the
past two years. Belgium calls on the parties to return
unconditionally to the negotiating table. I urge them to
engage in good faith and constructively on the proposals
and ideas put forward by the Special Representative.
The urgent need for a ceasefire remains as relevant as
ever and rumours of a new offensive around Tripoli
are alarming. In that regard, Belgium stresses the
importance of the meaningful and equal participation
of women to achieve an inclusive and lasting solution.

Finally, Belgium calls for strict compliance by
all with the arms embargo adopted by the Council.
Violations of the embargo have the effect of prolonging
the conflict and the suffering of the Libyan people.
Accordingly, it is worth highlighting the essential work
carried out by the Panel of Experts on Libya established
pursuant to resolution 1973 (2011), with which the
Council has urged all States to cooperate fully.

The main Libyan actors continue to opt for the
military solution. Warlike rhetoric is not abating,
fighting and violations of the arms embargo continue,
international humanitarian law is being violated and the
use by both sides of Security Council-listed terror and
criminal elements is not being taken seriously. It appears
as though no one is genuinely interested in establishing
a ceasefire and returning to political dialogue. In part,
that is also due to the Council remaining silent for
too long. I therefore hope that we will soon be able to
express our opinion by adopting a resolution to ensure
that no one in Libya doubts the will and determination
of the Security Council.

