Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): We, too, would
like to begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Marie Guehenno for his usual comprehensive
briefing. We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report and, like our colleagues, we
would also like to pay a special tribute to Mr. Hans
Haekkerup, who demonstrated wise and effective
leadership at a crucial time for Kosovo. Obstacles were
overcome and steps forward were made. Our only
regret is that Mr. Haekkerup is not here to say goodbye
to us and to share with us his farewell reflections. We
are of course pleased to hear that a letter will be on its
way shortly to Mr. Haekkerup's successor, but I gather
that the press revealed the name of his successor to
most of us before we were told officially.

Before going into the latest events, it may
perhaps be useful to step back and look at the big
picture a little, and perhaps to bear in mind that
Kosovo is a somewhat unusual peacekeeping operation.
It functions, in some ways, more like a trusteeship
operation. The United Nations is, in a sense, holding
Kosovo in trust before a final political solution is
found~ of course, on the basis of resolution 1244
(1299). But we all know that today no territory can be
held in trust forever. I think one common condition that
all of mankind wishes to enjoy is the sense of control
over our lives, the sense of being in charge. This must
be, in a sense, the direction that we should be heading
in, and it must be clear that whatever we do must take
steps towards that goal.

Of course, we are aware that to achieve that there
will be many serious problems in the short term.
Indeed, Mr. Guehenno referred to the very tragic
killings on 17 January. Actually, we are also
disappointed to hear that the elections for President
have not yet taken place. But while we should bear in
mind these short-term problems, we should perhaps
also balance that by bearing in mind that the long-term
future of Kosovo and its people has to be bright. It has
to be bright because they have the good fortune of
being situated in the very fortunate continent of
Europe, where we are, in some ways, seeing what may
perhaps be the greatest social and political experiment
ever undertaken in the history of man. A continent
where for centuries countries used to fight over their
borders - and, indeed, where millions died fighting
over those borders - is now becoming truly a
borderless world and, frankly, with the launch of the
euro, that borderless world has been carried to a great
new height. That is ultimately the happy destination
that Kosovo and its neighbours can enjoy. Our
challenge is to see how we can help Kosovo reach that
happy destination as quickly as possible. It is therefore
in this light that we raise a few questions and make
some suggestions about where we go from here.

Clearly, the first point to emerge - even in
listening to my colleagues from Norway and Mexico -
is clearly that after the elections we have to move
Kosovo towards greater self-governance and, in a
sense, towards greater autonomy. For that to happen it
is necessary for the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to try to
devolve as many of its responsibilities as possible to
Kosovo leaders, except, of course, core civilian
functions. That must be, in a sense, the direction in
which the United Nations must go. The leaders of
Kosovo must be allowed to show that they can exercise
due responsibility and care in governing the province,
even in a limited way. As I said earlier, that is the
direction in which all of us want to go. In this way we
hope that the elected leaders will also gain the
confidence of the people of Kosovo, both the majority
and the minorities. Hopefully, over time mutual trust
between the leaders and the people can be built up, as
well as among the various ethnic communities. We
hope that will lead to reconciliation. A democratic,
multi-ethnic and economically vibrant society in
Kosovo is the only solution to the Kosovo problem.
The key is therefore to get UNMIK to gradually hand
over the appropriate responsibilities to the Kosovo
leadership.

Before I move on to my second point, let me also
add that I completely agree with the observation made
by our colleague from Mexico when she referred to
Mexico's multi-ethnic background, and how one can,
in a sense, live in peace in a country with different
ethnic groups. I am pleased to confirm that Singapore
too, like Mexico, has a multi-ethnic background,
although we do not have 56 ethnic groups. But, as our
colleague from Mexico has emphasized, the key is
education. I certainly endorse the point that she has
made that perhaps UNMIK could look into various
means of educating the population and telling them that
they can live in a multi-ethnic environment and that
they do not have to live in ethnically coherent enclaves.

Let me now move to my second point. We think
that it would be appropriate, especially now, for
UNMIK to be treated like any other United Nations
peacekeeping operation in terms of management by the
Security Council. We understand from reading
resolution 1244 (1999) that the mandate given to
UNMIK is for perpetuity, without any formal periodic
reviews. By the way, this is rather unique. Every other
peacekeeping operation - in Africa, Asia and, indeed,
throughout the world - always has a formal annual
renewal before it proceeds. The case of Kosovo is
unique because the operation just goes on in perpetuity.

We are very puzzled about his, so, actually, we
did something unusual. We wrote to some of the
members of the Council that were present when the
decision was made to create the peacekeeping
operation in Kosovo to ask them why they decided to
have that perpetuity instead of a regular annual review.
Unfortunately, as we all know, the Security Council
does not keep records of any kind of explanation for
the decisions that are made. But the best answer we got
was that, at that time, the members of the Security
Council were so relieved that this problem had been
transferred from outside the Security Council into the
Council that it was decided that, having got hold of it,
the Council should keep it in perpetuity.

But I frankly think that as Kosovo moves towards
greater self-government there is a need to have regular
reviews for the extension of UNMIK. Indeed, the latest
report of the Secretary-General on Kosovo states that

"UNMIK is reaching a critical stage in the
implementation of its mandate and has made
substantial changes in both structure and focus to
encourage and support provisional self-
government while upholding the provisions of
resolution 1244 (1999). The next phase will
require careful management and the continued,
strong commitment of the international
community." (S/2002/62, para. 44)

I think that the Security Council clearly needs to
be at the centre of the exercise to determine how that is
done. One way to do this is through a formal review of
the operations of UNMIK, as we do with other
peacekeeping operations. That is also a way to ensure
that the Council maintains regular oversight and that
we impose discipline on a system by ensuring that we
have benchmarks to assess how we are progressing.

That brings me to my third and last point - a
point which I actually raised at the last public meeting
on Kosovo, held last November. To be on top of things,
the Security Council must also have a clear exit
strategy for Kosovo. As we all know, the Council has
taken a fundamental decision that exit strategies must
always be well managed; the only way to manage them
well is to start thinking about them as soon as possible.
That has to be done for Kosovo as well, and we hope it
will be done reasonably soon.

Let me emphasize one point to avoid
misunderstanding: we are not calling for the quick
withdrawal of the international presence in Kosovo.
Clearly, UNMIK and KFOR have a lot more to do
before the mandate under resolution 1244 (1999) is
fulfilled. More important, a precipitate withdrawal
would reverse what has been achieved in Kosovo and
would squander the resources and efforts expended on
the province. Worse still, another conflict could be
ignited, destabilizing not only Kosovo but the Balkan
region as a whole. Therefore, we emphasize that the
international presence in Kosovo must be gradually
withdrawn in a way that bolsters and does not
undermine the progress that has been painstakingly
achieved. But of course, that does not take away from
the fact that it would be useful for the Council to know
how the international presence would be eventually
downsized and eventually withdrawn.

What are the steps forward we can take? What are
the benchmarks we need in order to move from one
step to the next? What are the rough time frames? What
would be the impact on the structure and the size of the
Mission? For example, in the context of the latest
restructuring of UNMIK, should the benchmark of
provisional autonomy be met by some downsizing of
the Mission? That is why we emphasize the point about
UNMIK devolving some responsibilities to the newly
elected Kosovo Government.

Finally, we note also that resolution 1244 (1999)
calls on UNMIK to facilitate "a political process
designed to determine Kosovo's future status, taking
into account the Rambouillet accords" (para. 11 (e)).
Those accords, as we know, call for the convening of
an international meeting three years after entry into
force to formulate a mechanism for a final settlement
for Kosovo. The Rambouillet accords were signed on
18 March 1999; the three-year time frame would take
us to 18 March 2002, which is about two months from
now. Perhaps it would be helpful if we could be
enlightened on whether any discussions are taking
place on the convening of such an international
meeting. I do not know whether Mr. Guehenno has any
information on that point.

