Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The solution to
the question before the Council today will constitute a
defining moment for the United Nations. Since the
Council acts, in accordance with the Charter, on behalf
of all Member States, such action must be based on a
solid knowledge of the views of the membership as a
whole. We therefore welcome the continued
willingness of the Council to hold an open debate on
this issue.

Some three months after the unanimous adoption
of Security Council resolution 1441 (2002), there are
clearly diverging views on how to proceed with regard
to the implementation of that resolution. Nevertheless,
there is also broad agreement on several key questions.
No matter what the position may be on the desirability
or necessity of military action, there is a strong
consensus that the role of the United Nations in the
maintenance of peace and security is at stake.

It has been said that only military action can
make it clear that the Council is willing to enforce, if
necessary, the implementation of its resolutions and
that inaction will render the Council an irrelevant body
and marginal player in the international arena. There is,
of course, another way of viewing the credibility of the
United Nations, a view which we would advocate. This
is an Organization of peace, a body that was created to
find peaceful solutions to conflict situations which
would otherwise, in the absence of the United Nations,
most likely lead to an armed conflict. This is what
makes the essence of the United Nations, and this
constitutes the basis of its credibility and thus of its
relevance. The United Nations is unique in that it
provides legitimacy under international law. This is the
standing it must maintain and this is why it must
ponder its decisions carefully.

The Charter imposes the obligation on the
Council to exhaust all non-violent means of conflict
resolution before authorizing the use of force and the
Council must live up to this obligation in connection
with the present situation. We also recall in this context
that all resolutions of the Council, regardless of their
status under Chapter VI or Chapter VII of the Charter,
are legally binding and that non-implementation in all
cases undermines the role of the Organization,
especially when it is mainly due to a lack of political
will and the absence of political pressure.

The other issue where broad agreement continues
to exist is the need for unanimity. The Security Council
as a whole has supported resolution 1441 (2002). This
was a crucial element in providing the inspections
regime under the auspices of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) with the essential role it is playing
today. Unanimity is therefore also needed for any
future action the Council might consider.

The debate we witnessed last Friday made it clear
that such unanimity does not exist at this particular
moment. We share the view that the use of force would
need to be authorized by the Council in a separate
resolution. Furthermore, we believe that the reports
submitted by UNMOVIC and IAEA do not allow for
the conclusion that such a decision is warranted or,
indeed, justified at this time. While the decision-
making power lies obviously with the Council, its
decisions must nevertheless be based on the findings of
the inspections regime it has established unanimously.

There is also agreement that UNMOVIC and
IAEA are doing a fine job in carrying out the tasks
entrusted to them under the terms of resolution 1441
(2002). At this juncture, I would like to express the
gratitude of my Government to Mr. Blix and Mr.
ElBaradei for the highly professional way in which
they have shouldered the heavy responsibility given to
them. There has been no criticism of the way in which
the inspectors carry out their mandate, only criticism of
the nature of cooperation extended by Iraq. This
criticism, again, is shared in all quarters, while the
Council has recently also listened to the reports of
improvements in cooperation. The debate is thus
sometimes narrowed down to the question of whether
or not cooperation by Iraq will ever reach a level that is
fully satisfactory for the full implementation of
resolution 1441 (2002). However, a question of such
magnitude must not be limited to a controversy of
beliefs. We should rather ask ourselves whether we can
afford not to keep insisting on full and active
cooperation through political pressure and the threat of
serious consequences, short of armed intervention, in a
situation where there is still room for the successful
completion of the work of the inspectors.

The Council must not limit itself to the sole
question of whether or not it faces a situation of
material breach in the terms of resolution 1441 (2002).
It also has an obligation, in considering the option of
armed intervention, to look at the consequences of such
action. Unpredictable as some of them may be, they are
certainly immense for the civilian population, for
regional stability and for this Organization. We are
therefore of the view that an in-depth humanitarian
assessment and an outline of the role of this
Organization in a possible post-conflict situation must
be essential elements in any future deliberations.

