Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan):
This morning, we make statements in remembrance
of those who suffered so cruelly and in such great
numbers 20 years ago in Rwanda. But, as so many
before us have said, on other such sombre occasions,
can statements ever meet the needs of a moment such as
that, when more than 800,000 lost souls, still 20 years
later, must be asking: Well? Have the 15 members ofthe
Security Council, particularly the permanent members,
learned anything from our slaughter after we were
beaten, carved up by machetes or shot over the course
of 100 days?

What words would we, the current members of the
Security Council, use? What words would be immune
to the inevitable mockery and cynical laughter of the
people of the Central African Republic, whose relatives
have been killed or who have fled their homes in huge
numbers. Once we strip away the obvious differences
between the Rwanda of 1994 and the Central African
Republic of 2014, even with the welcome early African
and French deployments to that country and the
adoption of resolution 2149 (2014), other aspects of
the way in which the United Nations confronts such
crises have, regrettably, remained the same. The long
deployment time lag is still there, as are the concerns
over securing troop contributors in sufficient numbers.
Financial constraints also apply and, ultimately, are we
not too late again? We all care - yes, maybe - but it
is equally clear that we still do not care enough to act
immediately and overwhelmingly in those cases where
an intervention is needed.

We do not care enough because the labels by which
we identify ourselves and others still hide from view
the obvious crucial point. While those who were killed
20 years ago met a sudden and brutal death because
they were Tutsis or moderate Hutus who opposed the
genocide, it is not because of who they were, Tutsi
or moderate Hutu, that we mourn them. We honour
and remember them today because they were people,
humans, like us. Our very categorization of humans
according to race, nationality, religion, ethnicity and
circumstances of birth still overwhelmingly defines
how we see each other. The inevitable stacking is then
there, whereby many of us dangerously View ourselves,
and are viewed, as more important than others. That
has been humanity's principal curse. Our tendency
towards classification, based on only one point of
reference, is the foundation for ethnic extremism and
ethnic nationalism. Those, in turn, abuse and corrupt
victimhood.
The alarming fact is that most of the killers in
Rwanda were not raving sadists or psychopaths. Most
of the killers were ordinary people. If our historical
understanding of genocides and mass killings tells us
anything, it is that ordinary people in very specific
circumstances will behave with a cruelty never thought
imaginable to them, let alone their victims. Even after
they commit such horrific crimes, few are able to
express remorse without some offer of a quid pro quo,
for they can almost not believe it themselves. Of all the
representatives sitting here in the Chamber, more than
we would ever dare imagine could potentially commit
mass atrocities in extreme and unusual conditions.
Whether we would be one of them, we would never
know unless, to our great misfortune, we found
ourselves enveloped by that toxin we call mass atrocity.
That is what our understanding of genocide tells us.

Part of what makes it possible for ordinary people
to become something else entirely is fear. It is as if fear
switches off the higher cerebral functions one by one
and, as it balloons in the mind, it finally extinguishes
empathy. Whatever capacity for thought is left in that
shrunken mind falls into a self-reinforcing closed
loop, where the killing, even of children, has been
rationalized as just. After the atrocities, those beings
become human again. Yet their guilt has been edited
so heavily by their returning reason that it becomes
distorted: Was it not, after all, an understandable case
of preventive self-defence, they rationalize. If we had
not tried to kill all of them, they eventually would have
killed us all. It is simple.

Fear, based on lies and fed by extreme ideologies,
grinds the morality in many individuals down to
nothing, leaving only the primitive shell of a being.
Fear is the fuel of genocide. It also creates hesitation
in those who could intervene to stop it. The events in
Somalia in 1993 shaped the international response to
Rwanda in 1994, as Ambassador Keating has analysed
thoughtfully in his writings. It did not help that Rwanda
was then on the Council, which made the Secretariat
hesitate in sharing more broadly General Dallaire's
cable of 11 January. Hesitation produces the excuses
and the very rationality for cowardice.

If fear is our enemy then courage must be our
friend, and not one that is rarely seen, but one that
will be with us when needed most. We, the individual
members of the Council, need the courage to contribute
more to United Nations peacekeeping, not just to order
it and shape it, or even to finance it, but to share in
the danger and to participate in it with vigour. The
Secretariat needs the courage to give us the unedited
truth; we need the courage to recognize it; and they,
the peacekeepers, need the courage to protect civilians
in extreme circumstances, with or without a mandate.
In such circumstances, what would mandates matter
anyway?

In addition, we need the courage to understand that
our methods of work in the Council generate a sense of
routine that is deadening and dangerous. And we need
the courage to confront the basic fact that, whatever
its remaining weaknesses, there is no alternative to
the International Criminal Court. The sooner we all
strengthen it and adhere to it, the sooner it will fulfil
its stated mission to end impunity for all such crimes.

And finally, on courage, my delegation will submit
a draft resolution for adoption in due course by the
Council, with the aim of instituting a distinctive United
Nations medal for extreme bravery. The Secretary-
General would award it to those military and civilian
United Nations personnel who demonstrate outrageous
courage in the face of the most incredible and
continuous danger when saving or rescuing people from
almost certain death, in the service of humankind and
the United Nations. And it must be called the Mbaye
Diagne medal for exceptional courage in honour of the
greatest hero the United Nations has ever had.

Captain Mbaye Diagne of Senegal was killed after
he had saved hundreds of, perhaps even a thousand,
Rwandans from death. That he did so unarmed and
practically on his own at a time when the Tutsis and
moderate Hutus of Rwanda were disowned shamefully
by almost the entire international community makes
Diagne's feat all the more humane and distinguished.
And I urge the members to see or listen to a moving
BBC TV and radio documentary called "A Good Man
in Rwanda".

There were others too, like General Romeo Dellaire
and his Deputy, General Henry Anyidoho, as well as
United Nations military observers, humanitarian aid
workers and journalists who, working together with
many courageous Rwandans, behaved honourably in
the impossible circumstances of 20 years ago.

The draft resolution will propose that the Secretary-
General establish a team to design the Diagne medal
and to create an external committee comprising a
diverse and select group of former peacekeepers to
review all proposals and to confirm all submissions to
guard against unwarranted recognition. The General
Assembly should also consider creating a special fund
to help families of those meriting the award. The medal
would have to be presented by the Secretary-General
to the recipient or next of kin in a formal ceremony
witnessed by the full membership of the Security
Council.

Now is the right time for the Security Council to
recognize those who labour on its behalf and whose
humanity and courage in theatres of war far exceeds
our own by a very considerable amount. And we need
to inspire ourselves and all United Nations personnel
serving in the field to be like them, ifwe are ever to end
the wickedness we refer to as genocide permanently.
Only then, can we utter to the souls of those who
were murdered in Rwanda 20 years ago, "Yes, we, the
members of the Security Council, have learned; we
have changed."

