We would like to start by praising the tireless efforts on the ground of the staff of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, as well as the formidable work of the Panel of Experts of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). We also thank the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Stephanie Williams, and Ambassador Juergen Schulz for their briefings. The Dominican Republic strongly condemns the continued flagrant attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure, especially residential areas, airports and hospitals in and around Tripoli, which inevitably add to the human suffering. It is unacceptable that more than seven health facilities have been directly targeted or impacted so far in 2020, and more than 62 attacks of this nature were reported in 2019. The continued violations of the arms embargo, which clearly undermine the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire, are particularly worrisome and gravely hamper the ability of the Libyan authorities to effectively tackle the impact of the coronavirus disease outbreak. We express grave concern for the dire humanitarian situation these actions create for the most vulnerable groups, including women, children and internally displaced persons, refugees and migrants, as well as political prisoners and human rights defenders currently being held in detention centres. In this regard, we reaffirm our call to ensure unhindered access to humanitarian aid and personnel, while encouraging a return to the negotiating table, in order to attain an immediate and unconditional ceasefire. We deeply regret the announcement made on 27 April by General Khalifa Haftar declaring himself leader of Libya. These developments most certainly undermine United Nations-led dialogue initiatives. It is clear that, in Libya, despite the challenges, young people have managed to start many initiatives for national reconciliation to resolve the conflict. However, this does not match the low numbers of young participants in reconciliation committees. We therefore support UNSMIL efforts in mainstreaming gender and ensuring the meaningful participation of women and young people throughout the three-track dialogues, as well as the capacity-building provided by the United Nations Mine Action Service to young people and women, aimed at addressing the proliferation of small arms and light weapons. The Dominican Republic welcomes the ongoing efforts of the European Union on the implementation of the Berlin Conference conclusions, the international follow-up committee on Libya and the establishment of the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI, and highlights the importance of close consultations with the internationally recognized Government of National Accord, in addition to regional organizations and neighbouring countries. We applaud the positive steps taken on the military, economic and political tracks, and encourage the negotiations within the framework of intra-Libyan dialogue to continue in good faith, to achieve sustainable peace for the Libyan people. With regard to the 1970 Committee, we thank the Panel of Experts for its relentless endeavours in shedding light on critical events taking place on the ground in Libya. The countless flagrant violations like the ones mentioned in the recent Panel of Experts reports shall not continue to be committed with impunity, and we urge all members to exercise restraint. Furthermore, in order for the Panel of Experts to work efficiently, Member States should continue to share information as requested by the Panel in a timely manner. To conclude, we reaffirm the United Nations central role in facilitating a Libyan-led, Libyan-owned political process, and urge the Secretary-General to appoint a Special Representative for Libya as soon as possible.
