Mr. Dieng (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the delegation of
the United States on assuming the Security Council
presidency for this month and for organizing this
debate on such an important issue as the reform of
peacekeeping operations.

I would also like to thank Mr. J ean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and Ms. Sarah Blakemore, Chief Executive Officer and
Director ofthe non-governmental organization Keeping
Children Safe, for their most enlightening contributions.

I also welcome and support the statement made
by the representative of Cote d'Ivoire on behalf of
the African members of the Council and to endorse
the statement made by the Permanent Observer of the
African Union.

As a major player in peacekeeping operations,
Senegal wishes to reaffirm the special interest it
attaches to the question of reforming these missions.
That is why my delegation welcomes the Security
Council's ongoing focus on this issue, particularly in
the framework of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, which Senegal had the honour of chairing
during our time as a member of the Security Council.
I recall that, in October 2017, Senegal and the United
States of America jointly organized a triangular
dialogue on this important issue in keeping with the
spirit of resolution 2378 (2017).

The recurrence of these deliberations reflects the
constant concern to allow peacekeeping operations to
be more efficient and more responsive to pressing needs
and challenges - both current and future - against a
constantly changing backdrop. We therefore believe that
the urgency of peacekeeping operations reform must
be viewed in the light of new and evolving challenges
to international peace and security. In this respect,
the recommendations made by eminent personalities
in their various reports, as well as those adopted by
the General Assembly, contain ambitious measures in
terms of both the modernization of equipment and of
improving funding for peacekeeping operations.

The effective implementation of these measures
should allow peacekeeping operations to take a further
step in the accomplishment of their missions through
ongoing dialogue, including in terms of the definition
and content of their mandates. Among the various
stakeholders, I wish to highlight troop-contributing
countries, such as Senegal, donor countries, the
Security Council and the Secretariat. In this spirit of
triangular dialogue extended to all actors, we must
pursue and even accelerate the process of reform in
order to better adapt peacekeeping operations to the
needs and challenges that arise.

We must recognize today that there is a need to adapt
peacekeeping operations to the specific challenges
faced by each theatre of operation if we want to achieve
a better performance. In Mali, for example, where
our troops operate in a sensitive environment marked
by targeted attacks on Blue Helmets, United Nations
personnel, civilian populations and infrastructure,
appropriate equipment is required in order to work
effectively and, above all, safely. That is why Senegal
deployed two armoured units within each of our
contingents, allowing us to ensure the escort of convoys
between Gao and the northern sector without loss of
human life for two years.

However, if we are to have a greater impact on the
ground, particularly in the context of anticipating needs
for the protection of civilians and infrastructures, we
must strengthen our missions in terms of equipment
and operational capacity by considering greater use of
new and modern technologies. Indeed, better access to
detection technology and risk-mitigation programmes
related to improvised explosive devices, data collection
and the enhancement of resilience through capacity
development in such areas as mobility and medical
support could enable peacekeeping operations to
function more safely and effectively.

In any event, the experiences we have drawn
from the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated

Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, which are now endowed
with improved military capabilities and modern
technologies, have shown that the responsible use of
these tools leads to multiple benefits.

Strengthening training for troops is also crucial
to the effectiveness and success of peacekeeping
operations, which have become multidimensional and
now cover many areas, such as humanitarian assistance,
the protection of human rights, assistance for displaced
persons and refugees, participation in political
processes, the reform of judicial systems, training
police forces, the disarmament, demobilization and the
reintegration of former combatants, mine clearance and
peacebuilding, to name but a few.

For its part, Senegal has built a training centre that
meets United Nations standards. Contingents there
undergo predeployment training that takes experience
into account but also and above all sensitizes them to
the issue of sexual exploitation and abuse, specifically
through a dedicated module. Under the leadership
of President Macky Sall, a member of the Circle of
Leadership on the prevention of and response to sexual
exploitation and abuse, Senegal fully supports the zero-
tolerance policy on this issue.

In this same spirit and in line with resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, my country
supports the greater involvement of women in conflict
prevention, management and resolution. Senegal has
also put in place a national policy for the integration of
women in the defence and security forces. It is in this
framework that Dakar hosted a seminar organized by
the United Nations Police Division all-female selection
assistance and assessment team in 2017. My delegation
reiterates the importance of implementing the identical
Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General
Assembly resolution 70/262, on sustaining peace.

It is equally essential to give priority to political
issues, ensuring that missions are based on a clear
political strategy and that they have clear, realistic and
achievable targeted mandates. Missions must work as
hard as possible to establish and maintain a relationship
of trust with States and host populations. That is why,
beyond consent, it is the cooperation of the host State
that we must seek to secure as the best way to overcome
some ofthe obstacles faced by peacekeeping operations.

In the same vein, the Council will also have to
ensure greater cooperation with neighbouring States and
regional and subregional organizations, in particular
the African Union. That is all the more necessary as
these organizations have not only displayed their
ambitions in this area, but have also demonstrated their
effectiveness in finding political solutions to conflicts,
giving priority to prevention and mediation. With the
African Union in particular, we invite the Council to
continue discussions on the issue of predictable and
sustainable funding for African Union peace support
operations, in accordance with resolution 2320 (2016),
a the joint initiative of Senegal and the United States.

I will conclude by highlighting that Senegal has
just endorsed the Secretary-General's Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations. Senegal also reaffirms its unwavering
commitment to continuing to contribute to peacekeeping
operations in the hope that the men and women whom
we deploy on increasingly volatile and unpredictable
environments will have access to and benefit from
adequate tools adapted to sufficiently clear and robust
mandates, with a view to properly executing their
increasingly complex and dangerous tasks.

