Mr. Liden (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). Turkey,
Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia,
Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova align themselves
with this statement.

Developments over the past year have clearly
shown that we must move swiftly towards a renewal of
the peace process in the Middle East. The European
Union urges the Palestinian Authority and the
Government of Israel to enter into serious peace
negotiations as soon as possible, respecting
international law and previous agreements, including
implementing their Road Map obligations. We hereby
reiterate the need for a political solution, with an
independent, democratic, contiguous and viable
Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with the State of Israel.

We welcome the commitment of the United States
Administration to pursue vigorously a two-State
solution and a comprehensive peace in the Middle
East. The European Union is ready to work with the
parties to the conflict as well as with the United States,
the other Quartet members and Arab partners to
achieve that goal. The EU welcomes the initial step
announced by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of
commitment to a peace that would include a
Palestinian State.

A durable solution to the Gaza crisis has to be
achieved through the full implementation of Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009). The European Union
remains gravely concerned at the humanitarian
situation in Gaza and calls for the immediate and
unconditional opening of crossings for the flow of
humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to
and from Gaza. Reconstruction and economic recovery
has to be allowed. An effective mechanism to prevent
ammunitions smuggling into the Gaza Strip must also
be established. The European Union calls for a
complete stop to all violence, including a sustained halt
to rocket attacks on Israel. We reiterate our call on
those holding the abducted Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit
to release him without delay.

The declared readiness of the Government of
Israel to promote Palestinian economic development is
a positive sign. We look forward to further and
7

sustained improvements in movement and access in all
of the occupied Palestinian territories. The Agreement
on Movement and Access of 2005 must be fully
implemented.

The European Union remains deeply concerned at
the continued settlement activities, house demolitions
and evictions in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including in East Jerusalem. We urge the Government
of Israel to end settlement activities immediately,
including so-called natural growth, and to dismantle all
outposts erected since March 2001. The EU reiterates
that the settlements are illegal under international law
and constitute an obstacle to peace. The European
Union will not recognize any changes to the pre-1967
borders other than those agreed by both parties.

The European Union is also very concerned about
the recent incidents in East Jerusalem. We have been
following closely the situation around the Al-Aqsa
mosque and Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif in
recent days. We urge all parties to refrain from any
provocative actions that could further inflame tensions
or lead to violence. Everyone must take action to avoid
escalation. If there is to be genuine peace, a way must
be found to resolve the status of Jerusalem as the future
capital of two States.

The European Union expresses its continued
encouragement for inter-Palestinian reconciliation
behind President Mahmoud Abbas and its support for
the mediation efforts by Egypt and the League of Arab
States. Overcoming divisions among Palestinians
would help prevent a deeper separation between the
West Bank and Gaza and preserve the chances of
restoring the unity of a future Palestinian State. The
EU calls on all Palestinians to find common ground,
based on non-violence, in order to facilitate
reconstruction in Gaza and the organization of
elections. The EU urges Arab countries and other
partners to be forthcoming, both politically and
financially, in assisting the Palestinian Authority.
Underlining the importance of the Arab Peace
Initiative, the EU reiterates its call on Israel and all
Arab countries to take confidence-building measures in
order to stimulate mutual trust and create an
atmosphere conducive to conflict resolution.

A lasting settlement of the conflicts between
Israel and Syria and between Israel and Lebanon
should be pursued, creating mutually reinforcing
processes. In this regard, the EU expects Syria and
8
Israel to resume peace negotiations. The EU welcomes
the formation of a new Lebanese Government as soon
as possible.

The report of the United Nations Fact-Finding
Mission on the Gaza Conflict contains allegations
regarding grave violations of international
humanitarian law. As it has said in the Human Rights
Council, the EU is committed to assess the report and
its recommendations seriously. We will do so based on
the clear positions expressed by the European Union on
the conduct of the conflict and the importance the EU
that attaches to a durable peace. The EU deeply
deplores the loss of life during the Gaza conflict,
particularly the civilian casualties. The EU has
consistently reminded all parties to the conflict of their
obligations under international human rights and
humanitarian law.

One of the European Union's overarching human
rights priorities is combating impunity. On this basis,
we call upon both parties to fully adhere to
international humanitarian and human rights law. The
European Union emphasizes the importance of
appropriate and credible investigations into possible
violations of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law by the parties to the
conflict in accordance with international standards,
noting that the Mission directs its recommendations to
both Israeli and Palestinian actors.

The Human Rights Council should ensure
appropriate follow-up, in particular by assessing
whether credible investigations have been conducted
by both sides. During the continued consideration in
the Human Rights Council, we will engage
constructively in the search for a consensual resolution.

