Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin by welcoming
Her Excellency Ms. Sigrid Kaag, Acting Minister
for Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation of
the Netherlands. We all welcome your presence in the
Chamber, Madam President. I also congratulate the
Netherlands for having chosen to convene a debate on
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) today on 8 March, International Women's
Day. The Government of Equatorial Guinea expresses to
everyone its most heartfelt gratitude and congratulations
for the magnanimous initiative of occupying today,
International Women's Day for working women, this
Chamber of entrepreneurial women, whose mere
attendance motivates me to send a message to all of
the Government and the leaders of the world, especially
the Government of Afghanistan: if we women can be
sitting here today, the women of Afghanistan can too.

I also wish to convey our thanks to Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, for the comprehensive and
detailed annual briefing on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict in Afghanistan. I also thank Ms. Habiba
Sarabi, Deputy Chairperson of the Afghan High Peace
Council, and Ms. Mariam Safi, Executive Director of
the Organization for Policy Research and Development
Studies, for their invaluable briefings in the Chamber
on the situation of Afghan women.

Today we wholeheartedly celebrate 8 March, an
important day for all women of the world, as it seeks
to achieve gender equality and to empower women
and girls - as yet unfulfilled tasks of our era and the
greatest human rights challenge worldwide. Secretary-
Genera Antonio Guterres affirms that idea in his 2018
message about this important day. He also stated that
today we have the opportunity to transform impulse
into action in order to empower women in all contexts
and, above all, to pay tribute to women activists who
work tirelessly to champion women's rights and to
encourage women to reach their full potential.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea, by supporting
the renewal of UNAMA's mandate, fully recognizes
and duly appreciates the crucial role of the Mission and
of all United Nations agencies in backing the people
of Afghanistan, in promoting peace and reconciliation,
in ensuring and promoting human rights, in helping
to improve the credibility, integrity, inclusivity and
sustainability of electoral processes, and in improving
the coordination of assistance of the international
community in Afghanistan.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/165) indicates that the number of civilians
that have lost their lives has decreased by 9 per cent
as compared to 2016. Nevertheless, we are concerned
because we continue to see appalling statistics of
civilian deaths and wounded in 2017 and in 2018 thus
far. We are troubled that the rate at which women are
killed or injured is on the rise and that grave injuries
are inflicted on civilians by constant suicide bombs
attacks and other attacks with improvised explosive
devices, which disproportionately affect women, boys
and girls. Attacks on public places, as we witnessed
in the attacks carried out in January, are particularly
unsettling. As such, we call on all parties to the conflict
to take all the necessary measures to protect the civilian
population, especially women and children, in line with
international humanitarian law and the basic norms of
human rights.

Sexual and gender-based violence against women
and girls in Afghanistan continues to be a global
concern. Although sexual and gender-based violence,
including the practice of bacha bazi, has been outlawed,
such crimes regrettably continue to be committed
without adequate legal remedy. The entry into force of
the criminal code is a step forward, but we urge the
Afghan Government to ensure its implementation, as
well as the enforcement and compliance with the law on
the elimination of violence against women.

The Government of Equatorial Guinea welcomes
the ongoing efforts of the Afghan Government to seek
appropriate strategies to put an end to the violence and to
forge sustainable peace. Evidence of such efforts is the
call of the Government on 28 February to initiate peace
talks with the Taliban, thereby attempting to establish
a framework for peace in the second conference of
the Kabul Process for peace and security. Resolution
2344 (2017), adopted by the Council on 17 March
2017 (see S/PV.7902), seeks to support the efforts of
the Government of Afghanistan and the fulfilment
of the commitments pledged in the London, Kabul,
Bonn and Tokyo Conferences in order to strengthen
governance and the rule of law, among other things.
The resolution also urges UNAMA to collaborate in
the implementation of the constitutional provisions and
international treaties on the full enjoyment of the rights
of women, including the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, as
well as to support Government efforts to ensuring an
inclusive electoral process, including measures to allow
the full and safe participation of women.

While the proportion of women on the High Peace
Council rose from 9 to 20 per cent, including at its
highest levels, it is also true and regrettable that in
real conversations, including during the Kabul Process
last year and in talks in Muscat, no women attended.
As a result, our delegation urges the Government of
Afghanistan to ensure that in upcoming dialogues and
conversations on peace and security, women participate
actively and that they be optimally represented in all
State institutions and have a significant role in political
decision-making - as is the case in the policies of
the President of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea,
Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that we must
all take advantage of the opportunities we have before
us in all contexts to add our grain of sand in order to
transform the lives of women wherever they are. Now is
the crucial moment to seek gender equality in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, to transform
the lives of Afghan women in all of its dimensions
and manifestations. That is why our delegation calls
upon the Government of Afghanistan and UNAMA to
continue its work and to actively follow up to ensure the
effective implementation of the national action plan on
women, peace and security through the establishment,
in due course, of strategies and mechanisms to finance
the plan's budget.

John F. Kennedy said,

"I do not say that all men are equal in their ability,
character and motivation. I do say that every[one]
should be given a fair chance to develop all the
talents he may have."
