Mr. Almanzlawiy (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):

At the outset, allow me to welcome the Russian Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs. I congratulate the Russian
Federation on its able presidency of the Security Council
this month and I thank you, Mr. President, for holding
this meeting to discuss the situation in the Middle East.
The Palestinian people have long suffered from
unjust occupation, oppressive and racist policies and
illegitimate settlement incursion. We would like to pay
tribute to the Palestinian people for their resistance
and their fight to defend their territory, children and
holy sites.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has always supported
the Palestinian cause and the brotherly Palestinian
people in every way possible. The most recent example
of this was our $50 million contribution to the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, which we presented during
the twenty-ninth Summit of the League of Arab
States - the so called Jerusalem Summit - which was
held in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia calls on States to not
recognize any alterations made by Israel, the occupying
Power, beyond the 4 June 1967 borders. We call on the
Security Council to assume its responsibility and ensure
that Israel complies with the Council's resolutions and
international law aimed at putting an end to Israeli
occupation; the full withdrawal from the occupied
Arab territories, including the occupied Syrian Golan
and the Lebanese territory; and the release of all
Palestinian prisoners.

My country reiterates that achieving peace on the
basis of the two-State solution, in accordance with the
international terms of reference and the Arab Peace
Initiative, is a strategic choice for a comprehensive and
just solution to the Palestinian question, and to putting
an end to the Arab-Israeli conflict and all the tragedies
and human suffering that it engenders.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia also welcomes the
adoption by the General Assembly of resolution ES-
10/20, on the protection of Palestinian civilians, and we
deplore the fact that the Security Council has not been
able to adopt a similar resolution.

In cooperation with our allies - a coalition
countries - my country is carrying out a military
operation to restore legitimacy in Yemen, save the
Yemeni people from obscurantists who are leading
them to their doom and retake certain regions that
are now being controlled by terrorist militias that
are supported by Iran. We are taking very calculated
measures to reduce the number of casualties on both
sides, especially among civilians. That military
operation was initiated at the request of the legitimate
Yemeni Government and in accordance with resolution
2216 (2015), which calls for the withdrawal of Houthi
rebels from all Yemeni cities, among other things. That
is in line with the coalition's approach to assisting
the Yemeni Government. Coalition forces are acting
with the utmost restraint to ensure the best protection
for civilians, while, regrettably, the Houthis are
using women and children as human shields, thereby
demonstrating their cruelty and lack of respect for the
norms of international law.

Iran continues to support the Houthi rebels in
Yemen and to supply them with weapons and missiles,
which from time to time target cities in my country. In
fact, there have been 155 cruel missile attacks against
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The most recent, carried
out on Sunday, 24 June, targeted my country's capital,
with missile debris falling on residential neighborhoods.
Independent reports by the United Nations confirm that
those missiles were manufactured in Iran and that Iran
supplied them to Houthi rebels. The most recent of such
reports, the fifth report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), published on
12 June, states that

"The Secretariat has carefully reviewed all
information and material available regarding the
allegations of the transfer of ballistic missiles,
parts thereof or related technology by the Islamic
Republic of Iran to the Houthis in Yemen that may
have been used in ballistic missile launches aimed
at the territory of Saudi Arabia. On the basis of
the information and material analysed, it is the
assessment of the Secretariat that the debris of five
missiles launched at Yanbu' and Riyadh since July
2017 share key design features with a known type
of missile manufactured by the Islamic Republic
of Iran. It is also the assessment of the Secretariat
that some component parts of the debris were
manufactured in the Islamic Republic of Iran."
(S/2018/602, para.10)

The report also mentions nine additional launches
of ballistic missiles against my country, which were
Iranian Qiam-l ballistic missiles. Those are flagrant
violations of resolutions 2216 (2015) and 2231 (2016).
The Security Council must take a firm stand against
Iran to show that the international community
is not powerless in the face of those aggressive
terrorist practices that are destabilizing regional and
international peace and security.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia condemns the random
laying ofthousands ofmines by the Houthis - in Yemen
generally and in Al-Hudaydah specifically - which
poses a serious threat tocivilians. That is why we today
we launched the Saudi Project for Landmine Clearance,
a $40 million programme in partnership on the ground
with Yemen's national demining programme.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia also strongly
condemns Houthi attacks against United Nations aid
agencies and other humanitarian personnel since 2015.
The Houthis have seized 19 humanitarian assistance
ships carrying 200,000 tons of fuel, while also looting
and destroying another 65 ships and numerous trucks
carrying humanitarian assistance. The Houthis have
also been planting mines and imposing fees in order to
earn money for their military activities.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia highlights that the
most severe deterioration of the humanitarian situation
is to be found in the areas controlled by the Houthis,
in particular in the vicinity of Al-Hudaydah, where,
despite its proximity to the port, the people are being
deprived of their most basic humanitarian rights. The
Houthi militias have impeded access to humanitarian
assistance so as to achieve their own political goals,
to the detriment of the most vulnerable members of
society. They are hampering humanitarian work and
targeting populated areas, including humanitarian
workers, while using children as human shields - an
internationally prohibited crime. They are also using
anti-aircraft weapons in civilian areas and targeting
cities in the Kingdom of Saudi with ballistic missiles.

With regard to Syria, we pledged $100 million
to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people at the
Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria
and the Region, held last April. We also contributed
approximately $1 billion to support refugees in Syria
and neighbouring countries. Moreover, we have hosted
approximately 2.5 million Syrian citizens since the
conflict began.

The report issued on 13 June by the Fact-finding
Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons confirmed the use of a toxic
chemical as a weapon on 24 March 2017. My country
strongly condemns that act, which is a heinous crime
that requires a firm and clear response from the
international community, led by the Security Council,
so as to hold accountable those responsible.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
once again underscores the importance of ending the
tragic situation to which the Syrian people have been
subjected. We will pursue our efforts to resolve the
issue peaceably based on the first Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex) and pursuant to resolution 2254
(2015). The settlement of the crisis must be based on a
Syrian consensus so as to realize the aspirations of the
Syrian people, with the support of the Security Council.

