Ms. Loj (Denmark): During the last few weeks,
we have seen the situation in the Middle East
deteriorate steadily. An already very difficult situation
has become even more volatile, with dire consequences
not only for the civilian population but also for the
prospects for lasting peace. In the midst of all this grim
news, the relationship between Lebanon and Israel has
worsened. It now poses a grave threat to the wider
security of the region.

My Government has condemned Hizbollah's
provocations in the strongest possible terms. Those
who provide the means to carry out its deadly attacks
are equally responsible for their consequences.
Moreover, given the prevailing tensions, Hizbollah's
attacks inside Israel are simply irresponsible and
unacceptable.

The abducted Israeli soldiers must be released
immediately and unconditionally.

Denmark is unwavering in its recognition of the
right of States to self-defence - in this case Israel's.
However, care must be taken to ensure that the exercise
of that right is proportional and measured. All actions

must conform to international law and must be carried
out with due respect for the obligations of States to
protect civilians and civilian infrastructure in times of
war.

Denmark is gravely concerned about the wide-
scale damage caused by Israel's actions to civilian life
and infrastructure. Of special concern is the attack on
the civilian airport in Beirut and the air and sea
blockade against Lebanon. My Government strongly
urges Israel to show utmost restraint.

The Security Council has repeatedly called on the
Government of Lebanon to restore its sovereignty over
all its national territory and to exercise the sole right to
the use of force on that territory. My Government
welcomes the fact that the Lebanese Government has
distanced itself from Hizbollah's actions. We join in
urging all countries in the region to act responsibly and
to do everything possible to calm the situation.

The humanitarian consequences of recent
developments are cause for grave concern. The
situation is alarming and requires urgent attention, first
and foremost from the parties but also from the
international community.

In conclusion, the level of tension in the region
makes it imperative that all parties refrain from any
action that would inflame the already tense situation.
In this situation, the Secretary-General's decision to
dispatch to the Middle East a senior diplomatic mission
is extremely timely and welcome. The parties must
extend their full cooperation to this team, as well as to
delegations from other key players, allowing them to
fulfil their missions to contain the conflict. Any effort
to ease the tension in this dire situation, including the
efforts of the Secretary-General, are very welcome.

