Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): The delegation of
Brazil is grateful to Ambassador Cesar Mayoral, Ellen
Loj and Mihnea Motoc for their valuable briefings on
the activities of the Committees they chair.

Concerning the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, my delegation finds that the
period since our previous joint public meeting has been
very productive. Among other activities, the
Committee has been working successfully on
cooperation with Interpol and has been considering the
recommendations of the third report of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team (8/2005/572),
which contains valuable contributions on how to
further many aspects of the Committee's work. The
Chairman has undertaken a second trip to selected
countries to improve dialogue with Member States.

Some urgent tasks remain before us, however. In
our View the most important among them is the
revision of the draft guidelines of the 1267 Committee,
as mandated by resolution 1617 (2005). Work on the
guidelines is urgently needed in order to update them
and better adapt them to the new needs of our task.
Special attention should be paid to the issues of listing,
delisting and associated procedures. Present
mechanisms for both listing and delisting leave
significant room for improvement in transparency,
effectiveness and fairness. The Monitoring Team has
formulated some noteworthy suggestions to that effect
in its proposed revisions to Committee guidelines. We
hope to be able to start working soon on those
suggestions, as well as on other ideas.

As regards the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and taking into account that this is the first
public meeting on terrorism since the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
has become fully operational, I would like to make a
few comments on important issues currently under
discussion that are likely to influence the work of that
body in years to come.

First and foremost, our delegation believes that
from now on the CTED will be in a better position to
carry out its ambitious programme of work under the
policy guidance of the plenary of the CTC.

In our view, CTED's primary role is to identify
States' technical assistance needs and facilitate the
provision of that assistance. Unfortunately, many
Member States still lack the institutions and qualified
personnel necessary to deal with the terrorist threat.
Therefore, we emphasize that providing assistance to
States in areas related to institution-building and
training is one of the best ways to counter terrorism
and also a very efficient way to persuade Member
States, which may be under the false impression that
international terrorism poses only a remote threat to
their countries, to be more involved in this issue.

Brazil strongly encourages States that might
benefit from such assistance to request it. We also
stress the need for the United Nations to reach mutual
agreement on the potential technical needs of States
through increased dialogue and to handle with utmost
care any sensitive information that may expose State's
vulnerabilities to terrorism.

In accordance with resolution 1535 (2004), Brazil
hopes that visits to States with their consent will
provide the CTC with a more thorough understanding
of the situation in those countries, including further
insight into the difficulties States may face in
implementing resolution 1373 (2001). It is also
essential that a proper follow-up mechanism to those
visits be put in place, so as to ensure that technical
assistance and other needs identified during the visits
are duly taken into account. We believe that the
CTED's work will contribute to the identification of
possible best practices in various areas related to the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), such as
those involving the financing of terrorism. We recall
that best practices are, by definition, non-binding
instruments that should be in conformity with existing
international law.

Another important issue on the CTC's agenda is
the incorporation of the human rights perspective while
countering terrorism - that is, the idea that all United
Nations bodies should always act in conformity with
international human rights law. Despite the fact that the
CTED's mandate does not include a monitoring role in
that field, it is important that its work actually
contribute to strengthening the observance of human
rights standards. We believe that General Assembly
resolution 59/191, entitled "Protection of human rights
and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism",
which was adopted by consensus, should be a primary
reference for the CTED's work in that area. While
respecting the Committee's own mandate, the CTED is
expected to liaise with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and with the
Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism, and with other human rights
organs in matters related to counter-terrorism.
Furthermore, we expect to engage in a fruitful Security
Council discussion in December, involving a
comprehensive review of the CTED's work, as
mandated by resolution 1535 (2004).

As regards the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), my
delegation is pleased to note that, with the valuable
support of the group of experts, the Committee has
been able to conclude the examination of the first
round of national reports submitted by Member States.
That is a most welcome achievement. At the same
time, we continue to encourage those States that have
not yet done so to present their first reports as soon as
possible.

In the coming weeks, the Committee will begin to
devote itself to considering the responses to requests it
has made for additional information. That exercise, we
believe, will allow the Committee to have a full and
comprehensive picture of the state of worldwide
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). It will also
serve as the basis for the final report to be submitted by
the Committee to the Council by April 2006. It seems
appropriate to mention that that reporting exercise has
also proved to be very positive for Brazil at the
domestic level, as it has stimulated Brazilian
authorities to proceed with a broad assessment of our
legal system and to identify redundant provisions with
a View to facilitating the modernization of the national
legal framework.

Concerning technical assistance, I wish to stress
that the Brazilian Government is ready to provide
assistance, as appropriate, to States in the Latin
American and Caribbean region and to other
developing countries possibly lacking the legal or
regulatory infrastructure and implementation
experience required to implement the provisions of
resolution 1540 (2004).

Finally, I should recall that for Brazil, the very
existence of weapons of mass destruction, either in the
hands of non-State actors or in the possession of States
themselves, is a matter of grave concern. Our
Government continues to call for complete, verifiable
and irreversible disarmament.

This is probably the last opportunity in 2005 for a
regular briefing from the Security Council Committees
regarding terrorism. We are all aware of the urgency of
dealing forcefully and decisively with the menace of
international terrorism. Yet we must not let a
heightened sense of vulnerability - given that
terrorism can now threaten anyone, anywhere - lead
us to forgo fundamental principles and rights. Our
delegation will continue to cooperate constructively on
this issue, which has considerable impact on the type
of society we want to build in the years to come.

