Miss Durrant (Jamaica): It is a pleasure to see
you, Sir, the Foreign Minister of Bangladesh, presiding
over the deliberations of the Security Council. Your
presence here today clearly reflects the commitment of
Bangladesh to inculcating a culture of peace and non-
violence in international affairs. I also wish to thank
you for the kind words addressed to my country,
Jamaica, and to our Foreign Minister, The Honourable
Mr. Paul Robertson.

Allow me to also express my delegation's
appreciation to Deputy Secretary-General Louise
Frechette for her important statement and her
introduction of the report of the Secretary-General on
the prevention of armed conflict.

We welcome this comprehensive response to the
discussions held last July, during Jamaica's presidency,
in which the Security Council reviewed the complex
dimensions of the causes and prevention of armed
conflicts and which led to the adoption of the
presidential statement inviting the Secretary-General to
submit a report containing an analysis and
recommendations on initiatives within the United
Nations.

The Secretary-General's own commitment to
promoting a culture of prevention within the United
Nations system and among Member States is clearly
borne out in his report. The report not only highlights
the roles of the key players in conflict prevention
within the United Nations system, in particular those of
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council, the Secretary-General, and United Nations
funds and programmes, as well as the Bretton Woods
institutions, but also appropriately identifies the
important and indispensable roles of national
Governments, international, regional and subregional
organizations, the private sector, non-governmental
organizations and other civil society actors. The report
provides analyses and recommendations that should
guide the Security Council in carrying out its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Secretary-General's report
upholds the principle that being proactive in dealing
with potential conflicts rather than responding to
conflicts after they have occurred is a core mandate of
the United Nations, with the Security Council having a
primary role.

On a number of occasions we have examined the
root causes of deadly conflicts and how they ultimately
manifest themselves in the outbreak of war, causing
death, suffering and economic devastation. What we
have not determined, however, are the means to engage
the international community in meaningfully
preventing these causes from turning into deadly
conflicts. The experiences of Rwanda, Srebrenica and
many other conflicts around the world should have
provided us with the political will and the impetus for
conflict prevention. Yet we are left to answer the
questions posed by the Secretary-General: Why is
conflict prevention still so seldom practised, and why
do we so often fail when there is a clear potential for a
preventive strategy to succeed?

It is my delegation's hope that the result of
today's debate and the debate to follow in the General
Assembly will support the realization of the goal of
prevention as the rule rather than the exception
throughout the United Nations system.

The report of the Secretary-General contains a
number of important recommendations addressed to
many parts of the United Nations system. The Security
Council must give serious consideration to those
recommendations specific to its responsibilities and
must undertake to work in collaboration with other
organs in giving effect to them. The Secretary-General
has urged us to demonstrate the political will necessary
to assume our responsibilities in support of the United
Nations in carrying out effective preventive action.

While it is not possible for me to dwell in great
detail on the recommendations contained in the report,
I will highlight those that relate directly to the premise
that the Security Council has a key role to play in the
prevention of armed conflict.

First, the Secretary-General's stated intention to
provide periodic regional or subregional reports to the
Security Council on threats to international peace and
security and to provide suggestions with respect to how
these threats might be addressed by the Council is an
important first step in the process. It is imperative that
the Secretary-General tell the Council what it needs to
know so that the Council can formulate meaningful and
effective responses.

Working in tandem or in cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations in preparing
those reports will enable us to benefit from those
organizations' unique perspectives. We also support the
idea of the Security Council considering the use of
multidisciplinary expert support in its fact-finding
missions to potential conflict areas and the
establishment of new mechanisms for discussing
conflict prevention measures on the basis of the reports
of the Secretary-General and of the missions.

Second, Jamaica supports the steps proposed by
the Secretary-General to enhance his traditional
preventive role with respect to: the increased use of
United Nations interdisciplinary fact-finding and
confidence-building missions; to develop regional
prevention strategies with regional partners and
appropriate United Nations organs and agencies,
including the possibility of establishing liaison offices
with regional organizations; to use eminent persons for
advice and action in support of preventing and
resolving armed conflicts; and to improve the capacity
and resource base for preventive action in the
Secretariat. The issue of the Secretariat's capacity and
resource base must be addressed by the relevant bodies,
and the Secretary-General's request for a United-
Nations-system-wide policy and analysis unit must be
considered as a matter of priority. Early warning is a
prerequisite for effective conflict prevention, and the
Secretariat must have the capacity to carry out its
responsibilities in that regard.

Third, Jamaica supports discussion in the Council
on the use of preventive deployments before the onset
of conflicts and the employment of such a strategy
where appropriate. Where such missions have been
used in the past, the United Nations has demonstrated
success in preventing armed conflicts.

Fourth, we support the view that the Security
Council should include peace-building components
within peacekeeping operations. As we have stated in
the past, peace-building is an important tool in conflict
prevention, which may be applied before, during or
after a conflict, as appropriate.

Fifth, Jamaica fully supports the view that
adoption by the international community of measures
to prevent the misuse and illicit transfer of small arms
is of great importance in the prevention of armed
conflicts. In that context, we support efforts to address
the problems caused by the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons, and we look forward to meaningful
action being taken at the United Nations Conference on
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
all its Aspects, to be held in July. In that vein, we
support also the inclusion by the Security Council of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
components in United Nations peacekeeping mandates,
and we urge full support for such programmes.

Sixth, we support the call to address the needs of
children and adolescents as a long-term conflict
prevention measure, including the deployment of child-
protection advisers in peacekeeping operations, and we
support policies and resources that target the needs of
children, including adolescents, in situations of
potential conflict. Jamaica will participate fully in
addressing many of those issues during the special
session of the General Assembly on children, to be
held in September.

Seventh, as the Secretary-General has aptly
reminded us, the Security Council adopted resolution
1325 (2000), aimed at giving greater attention to
gender perspectives in its conflict prevention and
peace-building efforts. While some progress has been
made, much needs to be done. Jamaica fully supports
increased action to give full effect to resolution 1325
(2000), and we look forward to the action plan being
developed by the Secretary-General's task force on
women, peace and security.

We are being constantly challenged by an
increasing number of deadly conflicts, which threaten
international peace and security as well as the social,
political and economic well-being of the global
community. The ability of the international community
to relieve the suffering of a vast majority of the
affected is severely strained. The high cost of
peacekeeping and of reconstruction in post-conflict
situations weighs heavily in favour of prevention and
peace-building measures to address the root causes of
deadly conflicts. Already those costs deplete the
limited resources made available to the international
community to meet the development needs of the least
developed countries. In his report, the Secretary-
General confirms the view that although poverty by
itself is not a root cause of violent conflict, poverty
breeds conflict, and that equitable sustainable
development does indeed have an important role in
preventing armed conflict. The Secretary-General also
reminds us that development cannot take place in
conflict situations.

Finally, my delegation supports the convening of
a meeting of the Security Council at the ministerial
level, as requested in the presidential statement
contained in document S/PRST/2000/25, in order to
take appropriate action in furthering the Council's role
in the prevention of armed conflict.

