Mrs. Viotti: I thank you, Madam President, for
inviting me to brief the Security Council in my
capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission. I extend a warm
welcome to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guinea-
Bissau, His Excellency Mr. Adelino Mano Queta. I also
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, for his remarks and for
his work at the helm of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS).

Since I last briefed the Council (see S/PV.6281),
a number of developments have affected the peace
consolidation process in Guinea-Bissau and the
engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission in that
country. I refer, in particular, to the acts perpetrated by
members of the military on 1 April, which brought
further challenges to the prevalence of civilian rule in
Guinea-Bissau.

The members of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
met on 26 April to discuss the situation on the ground.
It was agreed that I should send a letter to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, which I have done. The letter
expressed concern with the situation created after the
events of 1 April and regretted that they took place at a
time when Guinea-Bissau was making important
progress in many domains. It noted the importance of
the Government and the military leadership working
together to strengthen State institutions, promote
economic development, uphold the rule of law, fight
impunity and combat drug trafficking and organized
crime. It also called on the civilian and military
authorities to engage in genuine national dialogue.

The Peacebuilding Commission emphasized that
the April events illustrated the centrality of security
sector reform and referred to the high-level event that
was being planned before the events of 1 April to
mobilize resources to establish a pension fund for the
military. It also noted that successful security sector
reform efforts would require the appointment of new
military leadership in accordance with the letter and
spirit of the constitutional framework. It further
stressed the priority attached by the Peacebuilding
Commission to the need for the former Chief of
General Staff of the armed forces and other officers
arrested in April to be either released or legally
prosecuted.

In his response to the Peacebuilding Commission,
Foreign Minister Mano Queta reiterated his
Government's commitment to the peacebuilding
process and the implementation of critical reforms,
including the reform of the security sector. He
informed us that the Government had taken action to
restore constitutional order and the normal functioning
of State institutions. Minister Mano Queta also
expressed the expectation that the planned security
sector reform high-level event would strengthen the
Government's relations with the Peacebuilding
Commission and generate support for urgent projects.

The Peacebuilding Commission remains firmly
committed to supporting Guinea-Bissau in its peace
consolidation efforts. We so stated in the
aforementioned letter to the Minister of Foreign Affairs
and would like to reiterate it now. Our engagement is
based on the principle of mutual accountability and
aims at consolidating democratic institutions, without
which peace and stability will always be fragile.

The April events reflected a sad pattern of
addressing political disputes by force and therefore
should be strongly condemned. Events such as these
send a wrong message of disrespect for the rule of law.
They represent a setback to the peace consolidation
process and tend to discourage partners from
deepening their engagement with the country. Instead,
what should be required at this stage is a message of
strong commitment to the rule of law. The population
needs to perceive Government institutions as legitimate
10-45202
bodies that work within a framework of democracy and
constitutional order.

In this regard, a solution to the Zamora Induta
case is indispensable to boosting the peacebuilding
process in the country. We reiterate the need for the
former Chief of General Staff and other detained
officers to be either released or legally prosecuted with
full respect for due process.

In spite of the current challenges, it is necessary
to find ways to maintain the international engagement
with Guinea-Bissau. It is imperative to help Bissau
Guineans to consolidate their institutions as a means of
addressing the root causes of instability.

Security sector reform remains a critical
peacebuilding priority. Measures to train the security
and military forces and strengthen professionalism are
indispensable. It goes without saying, however, that
any successful security sector reform strategy in
Guinea-Bissau must rely on cooperation and dialogue
between the international community and national
interlocutors who have the full support of the
Government and international partners alike. The
subordination of the military to civilian rule is also an
essential ingredient of such a collective endeavour. The
Secretary-General has proposed, in this regard, ways to
strengthen the security of civilian authorities.

Another issue of grave concern to the members of
the Peacebuilding Commission is drug trafficking. An
effective fight against illegal drugs requires
functioning State institutions, especially in the areas of
justice and security, as well as firm political will. The
latter is key to securing the international assistance
necessary for Guinea-Bissau to increase its national
capacity in this domain.

We welcome the recent statement by President
Malam Bacai Sanha in which he urged the armed
forces to submit to civilian rule. He also highlighted
the importance of a security sector reform process led
by the State and of a relentless fight against drug
trafficking and organized crime.

These efforts must be reinforced by a regional
approach. We therefore emphasize the important role
played by the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). Also,
as individual Governments and collectively, we must
all do more and better to support implementation of the
ECOWAS regional action plan and the West Africa
Coast Initiative. These are all necessary undertakings
to strengthen the capacity of the Bissau Guinean police
forces in their fight against drug trafficking.

International cooperation efforts to consolidate
peace should not rest solely upon security-related
aspects. In order for peace to take hold, the foundations
for social and economic development must be
strengthened. We need to support capacity-building and
help the country revitalize its economy. At the end of
the day, it is the revitalization of the economy and the
creation of job opportunities that will generate the
resources to provide basic services to the population
and those necessary for the State to function in a
sustainable manner.

In Guinea-Bissau, as everywhere else,
peacebuilding will succeed if society and its leaders so
wish and if, as a country, they are ready to make the
difficult decisions needed to consolidate stability and
lay the foundations for prosperity.

The events of 1 April, despite their worrisome
consequences, reflected one positive aspect - the
significant support shown by the population for the
country's democratic institutions. This is a clear
indication that Bissau Guineans are a peaceful people
who cherish the value of democracy and are eager to
reap the long-awaited dividends of peace. The
reconciliation forum to be organized by the National
Assembly in January 2011 will be a good opportunity
to further engage the population in a frank discussion
of the country's future. We hope that it will contribute
to identifying ways and means to break the pattern of
settling disputes through violent means.

