Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Ambassador Llorentty Soliz, Chairman of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), for his briefing. China attaches great importance
to the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). The
1540 Committee has been conducting its work recently
in an orderly manner in line with its programme of
work. China commends Ambassador Llorentty Soliz
and his team for their efforts.

Preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery has a bearing
on international peace, security and stability. It
constitutes the common challenge and major task
facing the international community. Furthermore, it is
importantly part and parcel of global governance.

During his visit to international organizations in
Switzerland earlier this year, the President of China,
Xi Jinping, delivered a speech at the United Nations
Office in Geneva, entitled "Working together to build
a community of a shared future for humankind". In his
speech, which took a historical perspective, President
Xi elaborated on the basic principles underlining
international relations, which include, inter alia,
sovereignty, equality, peaceful reconciliation,
justice, the rule of law, openness, inclusiveness and
humanitarianism. It laid down the basic outlines for
building a shared future for humankind.

Moreover, in the light of the current major
challenges throughout the world and from a practical
perspective, he advocated building a world of enduring
peace, universal security, shared prosperity, openness,
inclusiveness and a world that is clean and beautiful. He
chartered the way forward by outlining specific targets.
That proposal has lent impetus to the transformation
and improvement of the international system and global
governance. It also constitutes the fundamental point
of departure for China's engagement in international
affairs, especially global governance in the field of
non-proliferation.

In recent years, thanks to the concerted efforts
of the international community, international
non-proliferation has forged ahead in greater depth and
with concrete results. Nevertheless, grave challenges
remain. A number of issues continue to defy our
efforts to find solutions. Technological advances have
lowered proliferation thresholds. Non-State actors
and terrorists, in particular, are more likely to acquire
weapons of mass destruction and related materials
and technologies. In that regard, the international
community should unite to bolster global governance
in the area of non-proliferation.

First, we need to foster innovation in the area of
security and build an enabling security environment.
The issue of non-proliferation is highly complex. Its
complex and difficult nature is further compounded
by a range of factors, including historical disputes,
regional conflicts, security concerns and terrorism. The
fundamental way forward lies in discarding Cold-War
mentalities, shaping a security architecture conceived
for and by all on the basis of justice, and promoting
a concept of shared, comprehensive, cooperative and
sustainable security, thereby building an international
and regional environment featuring universal security,
enhancing the sense of security for all countries, and
eliminating the hotbeds of terrorism, extremism and
the drivers of their proliferation, so as to generate an
environment conducive to non-proliferation.

Secondly, we must uphold the rule of law
and consolidate and develop the international
non-proliferation regime. Through years of tireless
efforts, the international community has put in place
an international non-proliferation regime guided by the
Charter of the United Nations and legally anchored in
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological
Weapons Convention, supplemented by the relevant
non-proliferation mechanisms. Efforts should be made
to safeguard the authority and effectiveness of the
international non-proliferation regime, formulate and
improve relevant international norms, and effectively
prevent non-State actors, not least terrorists, from
acquiring weapons of mass destruction and related
materials and technologies.

Thirdly, we must remain committed to
multilateralism and to dealing with hotspot issues
related to proliferation through political and diplomatic
means. Any action that might cause further tensions
can only lead to the escalation and spill-over of
conflicts, which, in turn, would heighten the risk of
proliferation. All parties should remain committed to
the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula so as to
maintain peace and stability in that region and to the
settlement of differences through dialogue. The top
priority for the parties concerned is to cease and desist
from provocative actions and diffuse tensions on the
peninsula. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
regarding the Iran nuclear issue did not come about
easily. All parties need to embrace political mutual
trust, completely fulfil their commitments and push
for steady progress in their implementation, so as to
achieve a far-reaching impact.

Fourthly, we must take a multipronged approach
to enhancing the comprehensive and effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Last year,
the 1540 Committee took stock of the implementation
of that resolution by various parties and all aspects
of the Committee's work over the previous five years
and came up with a comprehensive review and report
followed up by the unanimous adoption of resolution
2325 (2016). The Committee should strictly adhere
to the mandate derived from its programme of work
and resolution 2325 (2016), maintain the leading role
of Member States in non-proliferation and refrain
from setting up new mechanisms. Priority should be
given to meeting the needs of developing countries
for assistance and intensifying the capacity-building
efforts of countries that are working to implement
the resolution.

Working with the international community
China will continue to contribute to improving the
international non-proliferation regime, strengthening
global governance in the area of non-proliferation and
safeguarding world peace and security.

