Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela welcomes the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, and
thanks for her introduction of her eleventh report on the
investigation on the situation in Libya, in accordance
with resolution 1970 ( 2011). In that regard, we consider
these exchanges among members of the Security
Council and representatives of the Court to be relevant
and timely. We reiterate to Ms. Bensouda our support in
helping her management contribute to the fight against
impunity in pursuit of the noble objectives of achieving
full international justice.

Venezuela has been a State party to the Rome
Statute since its inception in 2002, and therefore fully
supports the strengthening of its institutions and the
effective functioning of the International Criminal
Court. In this respect, we urge those countries that are
not parties to the Rome Statute to accede to it in order
to achieve its universalization.

The fight against impunity for the most serious
international crimes is based on international
cooperation, which is an essential element in achieving
the objectives of the Court and requires the commitment
of all States to implementing its decisions and winning
support for its work, as the Security Council has done
on multiple occasions. Strengthening the international
criminal justice system established after the creation of
the International Criminal Court requires States parties
to take no measure that may weaken its important role
in combating impunity. In this context, it is necessary
to maintain the independence and impartiality of the
Court, free of individual interests that may undermine
its credibility and the effectiveness of its operations.
The consistent nature of the Court does not allow double
standards or ambiguous signals in reference affairs by
the Security Council.

The political instability resulting from institutional
collapse of the Libyan State caused by the military
intervention of NATO in 2011 - which is recognized
today as having been a major error on the part of several
Heads of State - has severely affected the rule of law
in that Arab nation, in particular its judicial system,
whose repercussions can still be felt today. Regrettably,
it has left the country dismembered and prey to terrorist
groups and left the people thirsting for peace and
tranquillity. The absence of strong institutions and the
confrontations among factions that are fighting over
control of the country are impeding the functioning of
the State.

In the light of this situation, we cannot say that
Libya has a strong judicial system that guarantees due
process and the human rights of people suspected of
committing the most serious international crimes.
Libya is a country that has been plunged into profound
chaos and widespread violence, which has been
exploited by terrorists of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham, Al-Qaida and Ansar Al-Sharia in order to
expand their criminal agenda throughout the country
and neighbouring nations. Those crimes should be the
subject of investigations by the International Criminal
Court in accordance with the Rome Statute.

The Government of Venezuela and its people
support Libya's efforts to realize, build and strengthen
the Government of National Accord. We commend
that effort and express our firm support. We should
continue to work decisively with a view to help promote
and protect the human rights of Libyan citizens. In
that regard, we encourage them to strengthen their
cooperation with the International Criminal Court
in order to facilitate the surrender of Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi so that he may have an impartial trial, in
accordance with due process and in compliance with
resolution 1970 (2011), which facilitates the transfer of
Al-Qadhafi to the Court.

The evidence of torture of Al-Qadhafi family
members and former members of the Government
of President Muammar Al-Qadhafi, as well as the
disappearance and persecution of human rights activists,
reveal the institutional weakness of the country's legal
system, the absence of due process, and human rights
violations. The Libyan Government of National Accord
should take all the necessary measures, under the rule of
law, to guarantee the human rights of Saadi Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi. Similarly, all actions that
violate the human rights of the mentioned citizens
and the rest of those affected should be investigated
and punished.

Venezuela rejects the July 2015 decision ofthe Tripoli
Court of Assize, by which Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
was sentenced to the death in absentia, because that trial
lacked the minimum due process to ensure a fair trial.
The verdict has been rejected internationally by various
organizations, including the Human Rights Council. For
that reason, we call on the Libyan authorities of the new
Government of National Accord to fully cooperate with
the International Criminal Court in order to transfer
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to The Hague to stand trial
in accordance with due process and with full respect
for his human rights.

Paragraph 5 of resolution 1970 (2011) urges Libya
and States and regional and international organizations
to fully cooperate with the International Criminal Court
and with its Prosecutor. That call has been affirmed in
resolutions 2174 (2014), 2213 (2015) and 2238 (2015),
which reiterate Libya's obligation to fully cooperate
with the Court and the Office of the Prosecutor in
order to surrender Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the
immediate custody of the International Criminal Court
for prosecution.

We welcome the cooperation of the Office of
Libya's Prosecutor General, which is reflected in the
report of the Prosector of the International Criminal
Court. However, we urge the authorities of that Arab
nation to coordinate with the Office of the Prosecutor
and to carry out the necessary consultations to address
issues pertaining to the surrender of Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi, who is currently being held by a militia
group in Zintan.

In conclusion, we believe that, although significant
efforts have been made, which resulted in the Agreement
of 17 December 2015, the Government of National
Accord should continue making progress in building a
State grounded in the rule of law, with strong judicial
institutions, through which human rights are promoted
and respected, including the international principles of
due process, the right to defence and the presumption
of innocence, as basic legal guarantees that must be
respected. Those elements are more important than
ever to the process of reconciliation and national unity

needed to rebuild the country and achieve peace and
stability for the brotherly Libyan people.

