I want to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his frank update. Let me also take this opportunity to pay tribute to his Deputy, Jamie McGoldrick, an Irish citizen, who retired last month. Jamie has spent a distinguished career in the service of the United Nations and we wish him well. Today, our thoughts and prayers are also with Secretary General Saeb Erekat as he battles the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Ireland and its European Union (EU) partners share a firm commitment to a negotiated two-State solution that ends the occupation that began in 1967, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States, on the basis of international law, including relevant Security Council resolutions. We believe that the Security Council should spare no effort to achieve that goal. Ireland is committed to supporting all constructive efforts. Confidence-building measures that can build trust are vital. The engagement of the parties themselves and that of international partners are critical to enabling a route to inclusive engagement, including through the Quartet mechanism. Ireland welcomes the efforts towards strengthening Palestinian unity. We also welcome President Abbas's announcement about Palestinian elections, which will allow a new generation to engage in the democratic process. Elections are a vital connection between government and its citizens and are critical to uniting Gaza and the West Bank under a single national authority. We also await with interest the follow-up to President's Abbas's remarks during the General Assembly general debate regarding an international peace conference. Ireland also welcomes the agreements of Israel with the United Arab Emirates and with Bahrain. Ireland believes, however, that the suspension of Israeli annexation plans over the West Bank should be made permanent. Ireland reaffirms its long-stated position that all settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory is illegal under international law. Ireland's Minister for Foreign Affairs condemned the latest announcement of significant further settlement expansion of close to 5,000 new housing units in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. The construction of settlements in the Har Homa, Givat Hamatos and El areas undermines the viability and territorial contiguity of a future Palestinian State. Continued settlement activity is not only illegal but corrosive to trust between Palestinians and Israelis. We urge the Israeli Government to reverse its actions in relation to these settlement plans and halt all settlement construction. We are also extremely concerned at the acceleration in demolition or confiscation of Palestinian-owned structures in the West Bank in recent months, notwithstanding the severe impact of COVID-19. We call on Israel to halt demolitions and to allow for legal construction for Palestinian residents. Ireland is a proud supporter of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), whose programmes deliver essential services to Palestinians in the occupied Palestinian territory and elsewhere in the region. I call on others in the region and elsewhere to step up and fund UNRWA, whose work needs support now more than ever, facing as it does a shortfall of $130 million. Ireland is particularly concerned about the situation in the Gaza Strip, where 80 per cent of the population depends on humanitarian assistance. The rise in COVID-19 cases has affected children in Gaza in need of access to life-saving medical treatment. Once again, Ireland calls on Israel to lift the illegal blockade against Gaza. Ireland stands with the Palestinian and Israeli people as they, too, battle the dreadful virus and the havoc it has wreaked on their lives. I want to pay tribute to the health-care professionals and other front-line workers, including UNRWA and other United Nations agency staff. Turning to the situation in Syria, where the conflict continues to cause terrible suffering, the only way to bring lasting peace for the Syrian people is through a sustainable, Syrian-owned political process. Ireland and the EU fully supports United Nations Special Envoy Pedersen in his efforts and urges the parties to engage fully with him. In particular, the Syrian authorities should engage positively in a further meeting of the Constitutional Committee. A sustained peace in Syria will require respect for human rights and strong human-rights safeguards. Those responsible for violations of international human rights law and international humanitarian law must be held accountable for their actions. The impact of COVID-19 and worsening economic conditions have made the people of Syria even more vulnerable. We must do all that we can to support the work of humanitarian organizations in reaching those in need, and remain gravely concerned about the major challenges facing United Nations agencies and non- governmental organizations with regard to humanitarian access to Syria.
