Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to thank the Russian presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this meeting, Ambassador
Saikal of Afghanistan for his statement and Special
Representative of the Secretary- General for Afghanistan
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Yamamoto, for presenting
his report (S/2018/539).

Unfortunately, as the report indicates, security
continues to remain Afghanistan's major challenge.
Improving its security is one of the main requirements
for long-term stability and socioeconomic development.
In order to confront that challenge, the National Unity
Government of Afghanistan needs the robust and
sustained support of the international community. That
is of the utmost importance ifwe are to establish lasting
peace and stability in that part of the world.
As a neighbouring country, Iran has been steadfast
in supporting and promoting Afghanistan's security
and stability, as well as its socioeconomic development,
which are all very closely interlinked. Our support for
the Afghan National Unity Government is unrelenting.
We welcome any progress on the path to an Afghan-
owned and -led peace process leading to lasting and
comprehensive peace. It is in that context that Iran
welcomes and participates in the Kabul process for
peace and security cooperation and similar processes
to help bring peace and security to Afghanistan.

Iran welcomed the recent temporary ceasefire
announced between the Government and the Taliban,
as well as the Government's good faith efforts to ensure
its continuation. We also welcome the recent positive
developments in relations between our two neighbours
Afghanistan and Pakistan. We hope they will continue
and that the relations will be further strengthened.

Terrorism and extremism are not only a threat to
Afghanistan and its neighbouring countries, but also to
regional and international peace and security. Counter-
terrorism efforts must be given the highest priority.
In the same vein, supporting Afghanistan's counter-
terrorism measures advances regional and international
peace and security. In that regard, we believe that the
growing threat ofDa'esh and its affiliates in Afghanistan
should not be underestimated.

As we approach the elections in Afghanistan and
take into account the role that successful elections
could play in strengthening the political institutions
and national unity in the country, improved security
conditions become more relevant and essential.

Iran also attaches great importance to promoting
regional cooperation in support of peace, stability
and development in Afghanistan. We welcome the
continued work of the joint committees entrusted with
formulating a comprehensive framework agreement
for bilateral cooperation. We hope that will soon lead
to the agreement's conclusion, ensuring sustained and
increasing cooperation between the two countries.
The ongoing efforts in the port of Chabahar will have
a significant impact on promoting trade and economic
cooperation with Afghanistan. Any attempt to disrupt
that vital project will play into the hands of those Who
do not want peace and progress for the Afghan people.
We need unconditional international support for such
innovative projects.

We believe that special attention should be paid
to combating the interlinked sources of insecurity and
instability in Afghanistan, particularly the production
of, and trade in, narcotic drugs as a major source of
income for terrorists, extremists and illegal armed
groups. Accordingly, the international community must
support the relevant international and regional projects
and activities, especially the tripartite initiatives by
Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan, to fight the menace
of narcotics.

We continue to support the dedicated work of
UNAMA and United Nations agencies in providing
reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan. Sustained
ownership and partnership with the Afghan Government
are needed in order to utilize the best potential of
UNAMA and the United Nations system to deliver the
necessary services in priority areas, as requested by the
national Government.

As always, I would like to conclude my statement
by expressing Iran's solidarity with the fraternal people
of Afghanistan and by reassuring them of our full
support in their challenging endeavour to achieve peace
and prosperity in their country.

