Mr. Meszaros: The North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) allies and the international
community as a whole confront a wide range of terrorist
challenges that pose a direct threat to the security of our
populations and to international stability and prosperity
more broadly. We have faced terrible terrorist attacks
on our soils and in our cities. In the changing security
environment, NATO is strengthening its capabilities
for deterrence and defence. That means investing in
and improving military capabilities, but it also means
improving nations' resilience to the full range of
threats, especially those that are aimed directly at soft
targets, such as our civilian populations, our critical
infrastructure, our cybernetworks and our essential
Government functions. That is why at the Warsaw
Summit NATO Heads of State and Government
committed to enhancing resilience in those and other
critical areas.

More important, from the perspective of
critical-infrastructure protection, NATO nations
agreed to meet resilience requirements in seven
sectors: continuity of Government, energy supplies,
civilian supplies, civilian transportation systems, civil-
communication services, food and water supplies and
the ability to deal with mass casualties and large-scale
refugee movements. Those requirements define the
level of resilience that allies require in order to be able
to counter the full range of threats. NATO member
nations are now doing what is necessary to meet
those requirements.

For NATO, building resilience is in the spirit of
article 3 of the founding Washington Treaty, which
obligates every ally to do what is necessary in order
to be able to resist attack. But in an age of global
interconnectedness, we note that our own resilience is
directly linked to the resilience of our neighbours. That
is why NATO's work to improve resilience and protect
critical infrastructure also includes our partners. If our
partners are more resilient, NATO will be more secure.

The Warsaw Summit commitment therefore

underlined the need to provide continued support
for partners and improve cooperation with other
international organizations in order to address
vulnerabilities and make the alliance, NATO's
neighbourhood and the wider international system more
secure. No single entity holds all the tools necessary to
achieve resilience.

Accordingly, we are working with the European
Union to bolster resilience to hybrid threats and are
offering capacity-building assistance to partners in
Eastern Europe, South-East Europe, North Africa and
the Middle East, particularly in establishing robust
crisis-management systems and in training. We are
taking this work forward by engaging our partner
nations, the private sector and our counterparts in the
European Union on the resilience-baseline requirements
so as to ensure transparency and compatibility and to
foster a sense of shared responsibility.

NATO can act as a platform for allies and partners
to share expertise and best practices, but also eventually
to provide training and awareness-raising in the area of
the protection of critical infrastructure and on wider
counter-terrorism issues. We stand ready to share
best practices and lessons learned as appropriate with
the relevant United Nations bodies, in particular the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and the
Working Group under its auspices. Taking into account
our interconnectedness with others, we consider
resilience and critical-infrastructure protection to be a
shared responsibility, and we stand ready to contribute
NATO's experience and expertise to the wider
international efforts to enhance resilience.

