Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The increased pace of United Nations
humanitarian operations in Iraq that was set in motion by
Security Council resolution 1153 (1998) requires the
adoption of urgent measures to rehabilitate the Iraqi oil
industry. We proceed from the premise that this work can
and must begin in accordance with resolution 1153 (1998)
and with the distribution plan approved by the Secretary-
General in the framework of the fourth phase.

Nevertheless, we understand the desire of a number
of delegations to adopt a separate resolution which
regulates the provision of equipment and spare parts to
the Iraqi oil industry. During the course of the work on
this resolution, we were guided by the fact that it needed
to be based on the recommendations of the Secretary-
General, as contained in his letter of 15 April 1998, and

 

to help achieve the goals set forth in Security Council
resolution 1153 (1998).

The United Nations humanitarian programme in Iraq
is a temporary, necessary measure. The serious
humanitarian problems of the Iraqi people can be fully
solved by a lifting of the oil embargo, pursuant to
paragraph 22 of Security Council resolution 687 (1991),
once the Security Council has established that Baghdad has
complied with section C of that resolution. We trust that
this will take place in the near future.

That is why it is important that resolution 1175 (1998)
adopted today does not change the existing approval
procedures of the distribution plan, as set forth in the
Memorandum of Understanding on procedures for
implementing the 1996 humanitarian programme. For each
new phase of the operation, if such is necessary, the Iraqi
Government submits a draft of a new plan approved by the
Secretary-General. This clearly flows from the fourth
preambular paragraph and operative paragraph 5 of today's
resolution.

Today's resolution is the outcome of difficult
negotiations, as a result of which it does not include
unacceptable politicized provisions aimed at revising the
existing procedures of the humanitarian programme. We
have maintained the new spirit of cooperation between Iraq
and the United Nations established by the Secretary-
General's visit to Baghdad. Nevertheless, like other
delegations, we regret that the resolution does not fully take
into account the recommendations of the Secretary-General
with regard to a procedure for approving contracts for the
delivery of spare parts to the Iraqi oil industry. However,
we proceed from the premise that the resolution allows
once again for this item to be considered in the Committee
on sanctions and for an approval procedure of such
contracts by oil overseers to be adopted. Those who were
most interested in the resolution's being adopted today have
the special responsibility of ensuring that the overall
mechanism for humanitarian programmes functions
effectively and speedily. Although the resolution is not
ideal - and in our View constructive work to improve it
might have been continued - our delegation, bearing in
mind the position of the other members of the Security
Council, has joined in the consensus.

