Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Mr. President, we
are honoured to see you preside over today's open
debate. We thank the Dominican Republic for having
arranged this important meeting addressing the impact
of climate-related disasters on international peace and
security. We are also honoured by and acknowledge
the presence in the Council Chamber today of
many Ministers.

We would like also to thank the many briefers
for the information they provided to the Council. We
took note of the remarks made by Ms. Getschel and
amplified by Lord Ahmad of Wimbledon regarding the
role of youth in this debate.

We associate ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed on behalf of
the African Union.

South Africa fully shares the views expressed by
the Secretary-General at the 24th Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC), held in Katowice,
Poland, in December 2018, where he stated that

"climate change is the single most important
issue we face. It affects all our plans for
sustainable development and a safe, secure and
prosperous world".

The Secretary-General has issued a warning
that time is running out to address climate change.
That warning is premised on the clear findings of
the international scientific community, as well as by
the new reality of increasingly frequent and extreme
climate-related disasters. The special report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) on
the impact ofa 1.5°C temperature rise confirms that we
are already seeing the consequences of climate change
for nature and for people and their livelihoods and that
the worst is yet to come.

We note with great concern the erratic nature and
ferocity of the natural calamities that have struck the
Caribbean and many islands, including those in the
Pacific, such as hurricanes; in Indonesia and Japan,
repeated tsunamis; in Australia and the United States of
America, devastating wildfires; in Europe, floods and
heavy snows; and in Africa, drought, among others.
These natural catastrophes caused untold human
suffering, destroyed the livelihoods of millions of
people and displaced hundreds of millions more.

Africa is particularly vulnerable to climate change
as the single greatest threat to its development and
prosperity. We in South Africa have experienced
devastating weather events in recent years, with several
regions of our country suffering their worst drought in
decades. Africa therefore stands in full solidarity with
other regions similarly affected by natural disasters,
such as those highlighted in the concept note prepared
by the Dominican Republic (S/2019/ 1, annex). We
remain firmly committed to addressing climate change
and responding to natural disasters at the national,
regional and international levels.

It is clear to us that climate change is a global
sustainable development challenge that can realistically
be addressed only if we do so collectively, through
a rules-based multilateral regime that is based on
science, equity and a differentiation in terms of action
and support between countries with very different
national circumstances. Climate action needs to be
dramatically scaled up while protecting and furthering
the development gains of developing countries and
eradicating poverty.

We have strong foundations for this multilateral
solution already in the form of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, reinforced by regional
development programmes such as the African Union's
Agenda 2063. We look to the UNFCCC, its Kyoto
Protocol and the Paris Agreement for policy direction
and leadership on climate change and also refer to the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction.

In those security situations that are within the
purview of the Security Council where climate change
is thought to be a significant factor contributing to
insecurity, such as the Sahel and Somalia, it is important
that the Council highlight climate change as a factor
that must be addressed by the international community.
By adding its voice to the conversation, the Security
Council will increase awareness of the problem,
which will, hopefully, in turn help to mobilize global
action and the provision of means of implementation
and support to developing countries. The Council
may also help with the preparation of context-specific
risk-mitigation strategies that address all factors
leading to insecurity. However, as the IPCC and other
evidence-based studies have shown, it is often difficult
to determine a direct causal nexus between climate
change and natural disasters, on the one hand, and
threats to international peace and security, on the other.
In specific circumstances, they may be an exacerbating
factor, or threat multiplier, to more direct and specific
root causes ofconflict. That reality has been recognized
in Africa, where the African Union Master Roadmap of
Practical Steps to Silence the Guns by 2020 identifies
a number of key areas as constituting serious threats
to the African peace and security agenda, including,
potentially, climate change.

The true nature of the threat posed by climate change
is existential and global in nature. We therefore need a
multilateral response that gives a voice to the widest
possible representation of States, and with a strong role
for all other stakeholders. As the Secretary-General has
often said, the solution lies in a transformation of the
global economy. And that "requires inclusivity, because
everyone is affected by climate change". In that regard,
we should be aware that the Security Council's limited
membership and specific peace and security focus
means that it may not be the appropriate forum for
addressing the issue of climate change. Consequently,
we should be cautious about duplicating the efforts of
other bodies in the United Nations system that are better
placed to address the matter. However, we remain open
to further discussions on the issue.

