Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): My delegation is greatly
concerned about the current turn of events. It is extremely
worrying that while the Council was for the first time
discussing the reports submitted to us today by the United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) - and it had
not concluded its consideration of those reports - a
decision to strike Iraq based on the same reports had been
taken, and, in fact, the strike seems to have already been
under way.

As we have repeatedly said in this Council, any
decision to take further action against Iraq remains the sole
responsibility of the Security Council. We have maintained
that position and ensured that it was reflected in our
resolutions. In our statement on 5 November this year,
during consideration of resolution 1205 (1998), my
delegation stated,

"that the present draft resolution contains nothing that
could open the door in any eventuality for any kind of
action without the clear and precise authority of the
Security Council. In that respect, we are happy to note
that the Security Council, in operative paragraph 6 of
the draft resolution,

'Decides, in accordance with its primary
responsibility under the Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
to remain actively seized of the matter."

"It is, inter alia, on the basis of that
understanding that my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution." (S/PV.3939, p. 7)

We regret that the understanding agreed upon then by
this Council, and on the basis of which we and many
others, on several occasions, joined in a consensus, was not
taken into account when the decision to strike Iraq was
taken today.

We find it even more difficult to understand the
reasons for today's attack, given the contents of the two
reports and the letter submitted to the Council today. As
the Secretary-General observed in his letter submitting the
IAEA and UNSCOM. reports,

"The report from IAEA states that Iraq 'has
provided the necessary level of cooperation to enable
the above-enumerated activities to be completed
efficiently and effectively'. (5/1998/1172)

With respect to UNSCOM, the Secretary-General
said,

"The report from UNSCOM. includes material
that relates to issues prior to 17 November 1998.
With regard to the period since then, the report
presents a mixed picture and concludes that
UNSCOM. did not enjoy full cooperation from Iraq."
(ibid.)

In our reading of the report, this does not in any
way indicate that UNSCOM. suffered a total lack of
cooperation, but, on the contrary, indicates that there was
a considerable degree of cooperation extended to it. Given
these two positions, of IAEA and UNSCOM, the
Secretary-General in his wisdom offered three possible
options which, in our view, would have moved the
process of disarming Iraq forward.

Any decision taken to force compliance by Iraq with
resolutions without the Council's prior authority, in our
view, is contrary to the spirit and purpose of those very
resolutions, because it also deprived the Council of an
opportunity to analyse the reports submitted today and to
take a collective decision on them.

It is for these reasons, in line with our declared
policy on the non-use of force to resolve international
disputes, that we regret today's air strikes against Iraq and
call for their immediate cessation and a de-escalation of
tension, if the Council is to remain seized of this matter
and to continue fulfilling its mandate under the United
Nations Charter.

