I thank High Commissioner Bachelet, Special Representative Shearer and Mr. Dismas Kitenge Senga. It is critical that the Security Council hear from civil society, including human rights defenders, and I am particularly grateful today that we were able to hear Mr. Kitenge Senga's insights. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has created unprecedented challenges to United Nations peacekeeping missions around the world. Mandates are being reprioritized as peacekeeping operations shift to focus on COVID-19 response. In the light of this, it is essential that peacekeeping continue to protect and promote human rights. Human rights are universal, and defending them is non-negotiable. That is why 154 Member States, including the United States, endorsed the Secretary- General's Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations. The commitments in part recognize that lasting progress in human rights is fundamental to advancing political solutions to conflict. Integrating human rights into peacekeeping enhances the impact of peacekeepers while helping conflicts recede. Peacekeeping missions' monitoring and reporting on human rights violations is essential to creating the conditions for accountability, justice and, eventually, peace. The missions must work with host nations to develop human rights vetting procedures that build post-conflict security institutions that help sustain that peace. We fully support the human rights divisions, joint protection teams and mixed gender engagement teams in peacekeeping missions. Although some members of the Council regularly attempt to cut human rights officers and funding from peacekeeping budgets, the Trump Administration will continue to advocate for their retention - their work is simply vital. These peacekeeping missions have clear mandates to engage in the promotion of human rights, and we have an obligation to support them in doing their work. There are several peacekeeping missions doing excellent work in the protection and promotion of human rights. First, we would like to highlight the innovative and steadfast efforts of the human rights division of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan to release women and children from captivity, document violations and support South Sudan's nascent institutions in respecting human rights. Those efforts are life-saving, and the United States fully supports them. Secondly, the human rights division of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali has documented and reported in central Mali on Government forces' violations in the region. That is the first step to tackling impunity and holding Governments accountable. The United States values the independence and candour of that human rights reporting. Only when we improve accountability can we rebuild trust between Malians and their Government. Thirdly, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic, jointly with the United Nations Development Programme, supports the Central African Republic's Ministry of the Interior and Internal Security Forces with a vetting process for police recruits and staff. The application of the United Nations Human Rights Due Diligence Policy is fundamental in that regard. Through this collaboration, the United Nations ensures that its support to the Central African Republic's justice and corrections sectors is in compliance with international human rights standards. As Mr. Kitenge noted, armed groups and Congolese security forces have repeatedly violated human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are encouraged by increasing judicial accountability for wrongdoing and expect to see more progress in this area. We encourage other members of the international community to join us in supporting efforts in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region to hold violators responsible for their actions. We also believe it is necessary to increase women's meaningful participation in peacekeeping missions, and the United States continues to push for an increase in recruitment. Women peacekeepers offer unique skill sets, perspectives and opportunities for engagement that can make peace operations with a civilian protection mandate more successful. Missions with protection of civilian mandates often face challenging decisions on ways to respond to threats against civilians. Real-time cooperation and information-sharing between mission components is critical to facilitating the timely identification, prevention and mitigation of threats to civilians and human rights abuses. There is room for greater integration among civilian and military mission components. Such integration should take place among the mission's various analytical and reporting cells, as well as with non-governmental organizations and the United Nations country team. Integrating human rights into peacekeeping is essential to building the conditions to sustain peace. We cannot lose sight of that. As we reprioritize mandates, it will be important to fully support the protection and promotion of human rights so that those living in conflict-affected areas can have a better future for themselves and for their children. In the end, that work is critically important for creating a more peaceful world and it helps us to live up to the high expectations the world has for the Council. We must support and fulfil that mission.
