Mr. Ramirez Carreflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela thanks you,
Mr. President, for convening this briefing on Ukraine.
We also welcome Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman and Mr. Alexander Hug, Deputy Chief Monitor
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine,
for the information they have given us.

Our country expresses its concern at the recent
escalation in the armed conflict as a result of the
fighting in Marinka and other cities west of Donetsk,
which have led to the loss of human life and injuries.
Venezuela reiterates its call on the parties to promote a
peaceful political negotiated solution to this crisis. We
also urge them to respect international humanitarian
law, in particular the obligation to ensure the protection
of civilians.

We insist on the full implementation of resolution
2202 (2015), in support of the decision reached by the
negotiators of Ukraine, Russia, France and Germany
on 12 February in Minsk. We must pursue efforts
to achieve a political and diplomatic solution to the
Ukrainian crisis, in which the parties would commit to
working towards a firm and lasting peace. A definitive
end to the hostilities therefore remains an objective
that cannot be postponed. Any incident should be
investigated independently on the basis of reliable
evidence that should lead to the adoption of measures
that meet the aspirations for peace and stability of the
populations affected by the conflict.

To that end, the parties must continue to demonstrate
good will to achieve a joint agreement. In that regard,
the mediation and efforts of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe deserve the support
of the Council, and all parties should facilitate its
work. We must fulfil the agreements reached in Minsk
to address the underlying causes of this conflict and
respect the political and human rights of all those living
in that territory, irrespective of their ethnic origin. We
encourage the implementation of the provisions of the
Minsk agreement that are being implemented by the
Trilateral Contact Group. In that regard, on 6 May we
were informed of the establishment of four working
groups assigned to the areas of security, political
affairs, internally displaced persons and refugees, and
humanitarian assistance, as well as economic issues
and rehabilitation.

The parties must move to restore conditions
conducive to the maintenance of dialogue, with the
support of the international community. That is the
only way to channel the concerns of all parties in order
to find a solution to this conflict. We cannot allow
to prevail a propagandistic environment that incites
confrontation and ethnic hatred, or the thousands
of accusations that contribute only to farming the
conflict and exacerbating the situation, all of which are
preventing the implementation of the Minsk Agreement.

Venezuela insists on restraint in order to prevent
the dialogue from being affected by unilateral actions
that would jeopardize the peace process. In that regard,
my country rejects the application of unilateral coercive
sanctions, which violate international law and erode the
necessary trust between the parties.

Finally, we reiterate our call on all parties to
redouble their efforts in the search for ajust and lasting
political solution to the benefit of their peoples.

