Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
also like to thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special
Representative of the Secretary- General for Afghanistan
and the Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan to the United Nations,
Mr. Mahmoud Saikal, for their important briefings.

Unfortunately, during the first half of 2017, the
security situation in Afghanistan deteriorated, with
an increase in deadly terrorist attacks. The attacks,
including the 31 May suicide bombing in Kabul, which
caused at least 90 dead and more than 500 wounded
have once again covered Afghanistan with blood. My
delegation reiterates its firm condemnation of those
attacks, which have once again cost the lives of hundreds
of innocent people. My delegation also wish to express
its condolences to the victims and to their families.

The demonstrations that took place in the wake
of those attacks, far from calming the political
situation, have only served to exacerbate both political
and ethnic tensions. Nevertheless, we are pleased
that the two highest authorities of the country, the
President, Mr. Ashraf Ghani, and the Chief Executive,
Mr. Abdullah Abdullah, undertook a constructive
dialogue aimed at improving their relations.

Another positive event that my delegation wishes to
welcome is the continued implementation of the peace
agreement between the Government and the Hizb-i
Islami organization of Mr. Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, as
attested to by the return to Kabul of Mr. Hekmatyar
on 4 May. However, we regret the lack of meaningful
progress in the peace talks between the Government
and the Taliban, a situation that contributes to the
high level of violence, which we deplore, throughout
the country.

Nevertheless, despite this environment, we are
pleased to note that the Afghan Government, as well
as its partners, remain determined to make efforts for
peace and stability to return to Afghanistan. As such,
we believe that the vision for peace expressed by the
Afghan Government in a document that stresses the
need for an inclusive peace process to put an end to the
conflict, as well as the appointment of the Chair of the
High Peace Council, are steps in the right direction.

The efforts of international forces to support their
Afghan counterparts has continued to be a determining
factor in combating terrorist groups, in particular the
Taliban and Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. With
regard to regional cooperation, besides the efforts of
the Afghan and Pakistan Governments to improve
relations, we can also highlight the fact that the
countries of the region have spared no effort to restore
peace in Afghanistan. Accordingly, the situation in
that country fortunately remained the primary focus of
concern during substantive meetings held in Astana, as
well as during the recent Kabul process for peace and
security cooperation conference on 6 June.

For its part, UNAMA, whose outstanding work I
would like to take the opportunity to commend, has
continued to actively support local peace initiatives
in a number of provinces and, moreover, worked in
multiple ways to support the Government and the
people of Afghanistan.

I am pleased to note that, on 6 June, UNAMA
supported a conference on women's role in the peace
process - something that we deem to be important - in
Herat province at which participants vigorously called
for concrete action to implement Afghanistan's national
action plan on resolution 1325 (2000).

The human rights and humanitarian situation
remains concerning because of persistent insecurity,
which, as we know, has entailed an increase in the
number of civilian casualties, including, unfortunately,
many women and children.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to commend the commitment of not only the relevant
United Nations agencies but also that of the relevant
non-governmental organizations as well as their crucial
contribution to meeting the needs of the population - a
push spurred by solidarity that Afghanistan still urgently
requires in a difficult economic situation characterized
by weak growth and a regrettable level of productivity.

On behalf of the Senegalese delegation, I would
like to conclude by reiterating its encouragement to the
Afghan Government as well as its full support for the
Special Representative and the UNAMA team.

