Mr. Hamidon (Malaysia): My delegation joins
others in congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. We also wish to pay tribute to your predecessor,
the Permanent Representative of France, for his
stewardship of the Council last month.

I wish to thank you and members of the Council
for convening this public debate to consider the report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 1690
(2006). I would like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste, Mr. Jose Luis
Guterres, for his invaluable briefing, and the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ian Martin, for his
comprehensive presentation of the report.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General.
It is clear from the report that the process of nation-
building and reconciliation is a highly complex and
sensitive matter. At the same time, the formation of a
sustainable democratic State will require a higher level
of maturity on the part of the people of Timor-Leste. In
that regard, we hope that the leaders of Timor-Leste
will place great emphasis on the issue of the rights of
the people. Given current developments, we firmly
believe in the will and ability of the leadership and the
people of Timor-Leste to tackle the crucial issues
facing the country. Malaysia believes that, with
political stability and sound economic and social
planning, the economy will gradually progress and
develop.
We would also like to commend the Security
Council for coming to the aid of Timor-Leste in its
hour of need, and especially for supporting the
deployment of the international security force, which
has played a significant role in maintaining peace and
security in the country. As the Council prepares to re-
engage in Timor-Leste, in establishing a follow-up
mission it is crucial that the quality as well as the
duration of the international presence be evaluated and
improved. In that regard, Malaysia supports the
establishment of a multidimensional and integrated
United Nations peacekeeping mission, prioritizing the
long-term needs of the people of Timor-Leste, and in
that regard recognizes their immediate humanitarian
and security concerns. We have confidence that the
United Nations is able to meet Timor-Leste's need for
economic development, education, recovery,
transparency, capacity-building and justice in a
comprehensive and effective manner.

Timor-Leste is an independent, sovereign
member of the community of nations. In the exercise of
its rights, the request contained in the letter dated
4 August 2006 addressed to the Secretary-General from
the Prime Minister of the Republic of Timor-Leste
should be the basis for serious consideration by the
Security Council and the international community. The
request for a strong civilian component, with a police
force of considerable strength backed by a small
military force under the command and control of the
United Nations, is a matter of Vital urgency for the
mandate of the new mission, in conformity with the
will of the Timorese people. The call was a
manifestation of Timor-Leste's exercise of its rights as
a sovereign nation. In that regard, we call on the
United Nations and other international agencies,
including the international security forces, to respect
the spirit and decisions of the people of Timor-Leste.

Malaysia will continue to uphold its commitment
to the collective attainment of global peace through its
unwavering support of the central role of the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security. In August 2003, the Royal Malaysian Police
deployed a self-sustained unit consisting of 125
personnel to serve in the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor to form the international police
unit in support of the Timor-Leste national police.
Currently, the Royal Malaysian Police continues to
deploy a formed police unit of up to 250 police
personnel under a bilateral agreement between the
Government of Malaysia and the Government of
Timor-Leste.

The Government of Malaysia is continuously
reviewing its position with a view to being further
involved in Timor-Leste. In that regard, Malaysia looks
forward to and is ready to meet our obligations in the
form of making available a formed police unit of up to
140 police personnel for the new mission in Timor-
Leste. Malaysia shall continue to provide competent
and well-trained police officers to that component.

Finally, it is clear to Malaysia, judging from the
Secretary-General's report, that the international
community must assess and take stock of the progress
and challenges faced by the Government and people of
Timor-Leste, and that it has a common responsibility to
contribute to Timor-Leste's progress and development
in the period following the draw-down of the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste. It is crucial for us to
meet the urgent and indispensable requirements of the
country in its time of need. In that connection, my
delegation looks forward to the adoption of a
comprehensive draft resolution to meet the urgent
needs of Timor-Leste.

