Mr. Kandangha-Bariki (Togo) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Herve Ladsous
and the four Generals who briefed us this morning.
Togo, like the previous speakers, welcomes the holding
of this fourth consecutive interactive meeting, which
gives Council members the opportunity to receive
up-to-date operational information from the various
United Nations peacekeeping operations and on the
difficulties they face.

My delegation pays a well-deserved tribute to the
components ofthe peacekeeping missions, in particular
to the soldiers of peace who, through their courage and
at the price of their lives, work to keep, re-establish
and maintain international peace and security. We also
commend the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support for their ongoing
efforts to further operationalize these missions in the
context of the mandates that the Council has given
them.

Given the difficulties currently faced by the
various missions, my country believes that if they are
to accomplish their respective mandates with greater
effectiveness and to minimize negative performance,
peacekeepers must have military training that meets
international norms and standards, particularly those
of the United Nations. There is no doubt that this
imperative for quality requires a frank evaluation of the
level of training and education of the different troops,
which will require further pre-deployment training
when circumstances require it. Given budgetary
constraints, it is increasingly obvious that some
peacekeeping operations are encountering difficulties
in fully implementing their mandates because of their
limited resources.

In order to remedy this situation, even if only
slightly, Togo calls for strengthened cooperation
among missions. Such cooperation is crucial and has
the advantage of allowing us to optimize our use of
available resources. For example, when unexpected
events threaten to destabilize a country, or when
precursor signs of resurgent conflict arise in some
countries, this cooperation is an adapted and effective
response that will promptly strengthen, in manpower
and material, those missions that need it. This was
the case when the intercommunal crisis erupted in
Jonglei in December 2011 and January 2012, when
the United Nations Interim Security Force in Abyei
provided the United Nations Mission in the Republic
of South Sudan with substantial and needed assistance,
particularly logistical assistance. Such cooperation was
also exhibited between the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and the United Nations Mission
in Liberia, particularly during the post-electoral crisis
in Cote d'Ivoire. It is still ongoing, fortunately, in the
monitoring of the Ivorian-Liberian border where armed
rebel groups and mercenaries are at work.

We welcome the ongoing deployment of the
Intervention Brigade, mandated to combat armed
groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo.
We believe that, given the nature of its mandate, the
Intervention Brigade should have the effective military
materiel necessary to carry out its mandate. We
therefore once again welcome the acquisition by the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Congo of drones, whose basic job will be to monitor
the movements of armed groups and to reveal them to
the Brigade. They will also monitor and locate internally
displaced persons in order to assist and protect them.

In conclusion I would like to ask a question. What
is the status of cooperation between UNOCI and the
defence and security forces of Cote d'Ivoire in fighting
organized groups that are sowing insecurity throughout
the country.

