Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
At the outset of my statement, I would like to welcome
you, Sir, Your Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Gambia, and congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. I am also
pleased to extend my sincerest appreciation to the
Permanent Representative of Gabon, His Excellency Mr.
Dangue Rewaka, for his able presidency of the Council
last month.

Firstly, I would on behalf of Egypt like to pay
tribute to the sincere and persistent efforts of the
Secretary-General and congratulate him for the historic
success achieved in accordance with his responsibilities
under the Charter. He managed to defuse the crisis and
sign a Memorandum of Understanding with Iraq that
allows for special arrangements for the inspection of
presidential sites, which, in any country throughout the
world, are considered important symbols of sovereignty.
The intensive negotiations that were held by the
Secretary-General with all the members of the Council,
both permanent and non-permanent, as well as his
constant contacts with the leaders of States that were able
to influence the course of the crisis have undoubtedly
been fruitful and saved the world from sliding into the so-
called abyss of the use of force. Certainly, it could have
had devastating effects, not only on the Iraqi people, but
also on the peoples of the region as well as on peace and
stability in the region. It could have even spilt over to the
world as a whole.

 

Undoubtedly, in Egypt we think that the success of the
Secretary-General in his historic mission attests to the
central role that the United Nations must perform in order
to maintain international peace and security in all parts of
the world. We think that the success of his mission
demonstrates that it is necessary to depend on the him
when it comes to very sensitive diplomatic missions.

Since the outbreak of the crisis, Egypt has expressed
its rejection of the use of military force as a means to
settling international disputes. In general, the use of force
is not only prohibited internationally under the rules of
international law but also in accordance with the Article 2,
paragraph 4, of the Charter. There are controls in Article 42
on when force can be resorted to, and also in Article 51,
which is related to legitimate self-defence. In all cases,
these controls must be subjected to the discretion of the
Council.

Egypt hastened to intensify its contacts with all the
concerned parties. President Hosni Mubarak, when the
crisis was at its height, sent a number of letters to the Iraqi
President urging him to take part in reaching a solution that
was in conformity with the Security Council resolutions.
The President also made a number of contacts with the
leaders of the Arab States with all influential countries and
with the Secretary-General. He also dispatched Mr. Esmat
Abdul Maguid, the Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States, to Baghdad to exert his utmost influence to
find a peaceful solution to the crisis, which contributed,
along with the Russian Federation and France as well as
other States, to creating a favourable atmosphere for the
successful visit of the Secretary-General to Baghdad.

The United Nations Special Commission and the
International Atomic Energy Agency for almost seven years
have made tangible progress in the disarmament of
prohibited weapons in Iraq in accordance with paragraphs
8 to 13 of Security Council resolution 687 (1991). This
progress must be taken into consideration when taking stock
of Iraqi compliance as a prerequisite for lifting the
sanctions that have led to the deterioration of the living
conditions of the Iraqi people. In this connection, Egypt
would like to see similar progress made when it comes to
the question of the Kuwaiti prisoners of war, missing
persons, and properties.

In conclusion, the Egyptian delegation places great
importance on recalling paragraph 14 of resolution 687
(1991), related to zones free from weapons of mass
destruction, which has yet to be implemented. Since 1990,
Egypt has requested that this paragraph should include all
of the countries of the region without any exception.
While we confirm the importance of Iraq complying with
all its commitments in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, it is necessary for the
Council not to ignore seriously considering the
implementation of this important paragraph in order to
achieve national security of States in the region; such
consideration would also help the Security Council to
discharge its responsibilities without any selectivity.

