Mr. Okamura (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to pay tribute to His Excellency Mr. Linas Antanas
Linkevicius for his initiative in organizing this open
debate. I would also like to thank Mr. Jan Eliasson,
Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Christophe Deloire,
Director-General of Reporters Without Borders, and
Ms. Mariane Pearl for their respective briefings.

According to the Committee to Protect Journalists,
27 journalists have been killed so far this year,
including Japanese journalist Kenji Goto. Attacks
against journalists are not just attacks against
individual persons, but also affronts to the ideals of
freedom of expression and freedom of the press, which
are the foundations of democracy. Japan is absolutely
set against such acts of depravity and is determined
to work together with international society to prevent
further tragedies.

The perpetrator commonly known as Jihadi John
murdered Mr. Kenji Goto, Mr. James Foley, Mr. David
Haines and many others. He, together with other
perpetrators, continues to walk freely under blue skies.
Japan strongly condemns those despicable acts of
terror. We must hold the perpetrators responsible for
their deplorable acts and bring them to justice.

The reality, however, is grim. Less than 5 per
cent of well-known perpetrators have actually been
apprehended and prosecuted in the past 10 years,
despite continuing reaffirmations in numerous United
Nations resolutions of our determination to put an
end to impunity for the perpetrators. In the light of
that circumstance, Japan appreciates the decision of
the Security Council to adopt a new resolution on the
matter (resolution 2222 (20lS)). But we should not stop
there.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
included in the mandates of 10 ongoing peacekeeping
operations. Journalists are civilians; therefore, it is
the duty of United Nations peacekeepers to protect
journalists under their mandates. We should go a
little further. As the concept note for this open debate
(S/20lS/307, annex) suggests, we should recall that
journalists are subject to protection under the Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocol I, in order
to ensure their security. Identifying journalists as a
special category in the text of resolutions would increase
awareness and eventually save more journalists' lives.

Japan recognizes the significant role of the reports
of the Secretary-General on both peacekeeping
operations and the protection of civilians, which
would include information on the situation regarding
journalists' safety.

In February, the Prime Minister of Japan,
Mr. Shinzo Abe, made a statement in which he resolutely
condemned those impermissible and outrageous acts of
terrorism. Japan will never give in to terrorism. Mr. Abe
has pledged assistance totalling some $200 million for
those countries contending with the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), to help build human capacity,
infrastructure, et cetera. Japan will steadfastly fulfil
its responsibility in the international community in
combating terrorism.

At the time of the adoption of the Security Council
resolution 1738 (2006), the safety ofjournalists in areas
under the control of brutal non-State actors and terrorist
groups such as ISIL was not on the list of agenda items.
Now, it is time to address this significant issue, which
cannot be overlooked. The Security Council must take
decisive measures to tackle the issue of serious crimes
committed by non-State actors and extremist groups
and never allow any impunity for such perpetrators.

International society must fight against acts of
terror so that the foundational values of contemporary
democracy, including freedom of expression and
freedom of the press, shall not be shaken. Japan has
committed itself to engaging in that endeavour of great
importance.

