Mr. Berger (Germany): I thank Ambassador
Osorio for his briefing and for his work as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).

The E3+3 and Iran have expressed their
willingness to engage in talks. We acknowledge that
Iran has finally responded to the European Union High
Representative's letter of 21 October 2011. We call on
Iran to engage seriously in meaningful discussions on
concrete steps aimed at restoring confidence in the
exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear
programme. The early resumption of nuclear talks
offers an important opportunity. It is now up to Iran to
seize the moment, return to the negotiating table in a
constructive spirit and be ready to cooperate.

Last week, Minister for Foreign Affairs
Westerwelle reiterated our concern that the Iranian
nuclear programme challenged the stability of the
Middle East region and the international
non-proliferation regime. In the debate on the situation
in the Middle East (S/PV.6734), Minister Westerwelle
made clear that a nuclear-armed Iran was not
acceptable. We are concerned that, despite the efforts
made so far, access to Parchin was not granted to the
most recent missions of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). We also regret that Iran
recently increased its uranium enrichment activities at
the Fordo and Natanz facilities, as reported by the
IAEA. It remains essential that Iran intensify its
cooperation with the Agency in order to resolve all
outstanding substantive issues, in particular those
having possible military dimensions.

We repeat our call on Iran to finally comply in
full and without delay with all its international
obligations under the relevant resolutions of the
Council and the IAEA Board of Governors. We urge
Iran to apply the modified Code 3.1 and implement the
Additional Protocol.

It is unfortunate that Iran continues to be in
Violation of its international obligations. As we were
told during today's briefing, more cases of sanctions
Violations have been reported. We reiterate our concern
over the weapons exports from Iran to other countries,
especially to Syria, and to Hizbullah. Likewise, we
notified, together with France, the United Kingdom
and the United States, yet another Violation of
paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010) - the launch of
the Navid satellite into space in early February, using
Iran's Safir space launch vehicle.

These incidents underline the importance of
properly implementing the existing sanctions regime.
The 1737 Committee and its Panel of Experts have a
Vital role to play in that regard. We believe that,
pending a final solution to the Iranian nuclear issue,
the international community should make the best use
of the tools at its disposal. We welcome the
forthcoming briefing by the Committee's Chair in early
April to inform the broader United Nations
membership about how to implement the Iran
resolutions.

On 7 May 2011, the Panel of Experts presented
its final report. We reiterate our call for that useful
report to finally be released. The report of the Panel of
Experts is an important tool for all Member States,
which are themselves requested to report on the
implementation of the sanctions measures. That makes
it all the more urgent to release the report of the Panel
of Experts. We will continue to support the
independence of the Panel. We hold that its travel plans
must remain unimpeded. The Panel must be in a
position to investigate incidents wherever and
whenever deemed necessary.
12-27140

Additional designations under the Council's
sanctions regime are an important element in our
toolkit. Germany welcomes the Committee's ability to
designate sanctions violators, as stipulated in
paragraph 26 of resolution 1929 (2010). We support the
listing of sanctions Violators to demonstrate to all
individuals who disrespect the Council's resolutions
that they will be confronted by harsh measures for their
bad conduct.

Finally, let me reiterate our determination to find
a diplomatic solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. We
remain prepared to restart dialogue with Iran aimed at
restoring international confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme.

