Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me first to thank Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Central African Republic, for his valuable briefing
to the Council. I should also like to thank Mr. Moussa
Nebie, Special Representative of the African Union
to the Central African Republic; Mr. Koen Vervaeke,
Managing Director for Africa of the European External
Action Service; and the Permanent Representative of
Cote d'Ivoire, in his capacity as Chair ofthe Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013), for their
informative briefings.

In my statement, I shall address three issues related
to our discussion today: the security situation, the
humanitarian situation and the political situation.

First, as to the security situation, during our
participation in the official visit to the Central African
Republic, from 2 to 5 October, we observed a number
of positive steps that had been taken at the security and
political levels, despite the continued fragility of the
security situation in the capital, Bangui, and in Kaga
Bandoro, which was included in our visit. The security
situation in general is unstable. Since the outbreak of
violence in the Central African Republic in 2013 and
2014, the gravity of the situation has been exacerbated
by acts of violence committed by armed groups and
parties to the conflict and as a result of hate speech and
incitement to religious and sectarian violence.

We would like to express our serious concern about
the continued violations and attacks carried out by
those extremist armed groups against United Nations
personnel, members of United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) and humanitarian workers. We
strongly condemn the attacks targeting Muslims and
their religious symbols, setting fire to their homes
and attacking places of worship, just as we condemn
any attacks targeting people on the basis of their
religion or place of worship, regardless of what party
they belong to. We support the efforts by the Central
African Republic authorities to halt such actions and to
raise people's awareness in order to limit hate speech
and consolidate the principle of peaceful coexistence
among society's various sectors.

Strengthening justice in the Central African
Republic will represent an important step forward for
the stability and security of the entire country. In that
regard, we pay tribute to yesterday's inaugural formal
session of the Special Criminal Court, which we hope
will contribute to ending the culture of impunity and to
bringing those who perpetrate crimes against civilians
to justice. We also welcome the proposed appointment
of a joint United Nations-African Union special envoy
and the proposal to consolidate all African initiatives
in support of the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.

Secondly, we regret that the humanitarian situation
is still critical and that nearly half of the inhabitants
of the Central African Republic require urgent
humanitarian assistance. There are more than 616,000
internally displaced persons and 572,000 refugees
living in neighbouring countries, making the Central
African Republic one of the countries most in need of
humanitarian assistance in the whole world. Even more
worrying is the fact that many of those in need are
women and children.

Thirdly, with regard to the political situation,
the African Initiative, which enjoys a high level of
acceptance among most of the political parties in the
Central African Republic, is an essential pillar for
a dialogue between the Government and the armed
groups. We call on all the parties to participate in the
dialogue process in order to resolve this prolonged
conflict. In that regard, I would like to pay tribute to the
efforts ofthe African Union, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the European Union,
through its Military Training Mission in the Central
African Republic, which handles the training of Central
African armed forces. I would also like to salute the
efforts deployed in the region with the aim of bringing
the conflicting parties to the dialogue table within the
African Initiative. They will help to achieve security
if they can continue until the holding of presidential
elections in 2020 and 2021, which we hope all segments
of society will participate in, including young people
and women.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore our
support for extending MINUSCA's mandate for
another year, until 15 November 2019. The Mission is
an essential element in achieving the priorities of the
Central African Republic - support for the political
process, the protection of civilians, the creation of an
environment that ensures access for humanitarian aid
and support for the national armed forces. We also
support the Secretary-General's recommendation to
add two new tasks to the Mission's mandate - support
for the electoral process and the provision of limited
logistical support to the armed forces and internal
security forces - as well as the recommendation on
amending the Mission's role with regard to national
resources. We sincerely appreciate the Special
Representative's tireless efforts and pay tribute to all
those working in MINUSCA.

