Mr. Hasan (Iraq) (interpretation from Arabic): Allow
me also to apologize for taking the floor a second time.

I do not know why the representative of the United
States has insisted on availing himself of his right of reply,
because each us has spoken and expressed our points of
View. This is not a democratic way to work at the United
Nations. The statement of the representative of the United
States is completely trivial and undeserving of a reply.

The report of the Secretary-General to the Security
Council reaffirmed that Iraq is cooperating with the Iraq
programme. Regardless of whatever paragraph laying the
blame at Iraq's doorstep the United States attempts to insert
here or there, the problem is that the programme cannot
work or put an end to the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Iraq. I do understand that the world's super-
Power need not lie. However, it seems that the power of
the United States is a sham hiding behind unlimited
intellectual and moral weakness.

The report of the United Nations Children's Fund -
whose Executive Director is the American Ms. Bellamy -
states that the sanctions have led to the deaths of half a
million Iraqi children under the age of five.

Ambassador Amorim's report to the Security Council
states that the sanctions have destroyed the social fabric of
Iraq.

The facts set forth by the United Nations regarding the
situation in Iraq before the sanctions were imposed show
that Iraq had attained the highest level of socio-economic
development in the region, under the very same
Government it has today, which does care for its people. So
why do the Americans insist on denying these facts? Why
does the United States insist that the emperor is wearing the
fanciest of clothes? Iraq today says that the emperor is
naked. The emperor is a liar, an arms merchant and a
bloodsucker of the people. Many voices will be raised in
the future to say the very same thing.

As for the talk about the relations between the Iraqi
Government and the Iraqi people, I do not believe the
Americans are to be the judges of that. Let facts speak for
themselves. The Iraqis are rallied around their
Government and their leader, President Saddam Hussein,
despite the siege imposed by the United States and
despite hunger. Let me tell you this: hunger does not
cause great peoples to kneel.
