The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

We express our appreciation for the briefing of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir Tanin. We also
welcome the participation in this meeting of the First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dacic', and Ms. Vlora Citaku.
Venezuela wishes to reiterate its full support for
international law represented in the peaceful settlement
of disputes, non-intervention and respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political
independence of Serbia. In that regard, we believe that
resolution 1244 (1999) continues to be the applicable
international legal basis to reach a general solution in
the framework of a political negotiation on the issue
of Kosovo. We recognize that the United Nations has
been playing a key role in Kosovo, especially through
UNMIK, through the promotion of security, stability
and respect for human rights. That work has been
complemented by the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX).

UNMIK, KFOR and EULEX, based on their
respective mandates, must continue to play a
proactive, balanced, neutral and complementary role
in direct dialogue with a view to promoting a lasting,
sustainable, fair and mutually acceptable solution to
the issue of Kosovo. That is especially so at present,
since the last time that the Council met to study this
issue (see S/PV.7563), the opposition has continued its
activities and made it impossible to continue discussing
important aspects of the implementation of the First
Agreement on Principles Governing the Normalization
ofRelations of 19 April 2013. That fills us with concern.
For Venezuela, dialogue among the various Kosovar
political sectors is a necessity to prevent continued
acts of violence, which may affect efforts to fulfil the
2013 agreements.

Venezuela supports dialogue in Brussels between
Serbia and the local authorities of the province
of Kosovo in order to reach a mutually agreeable
solution between the parties. We deplore the fact
that high-level meetings have not been held recently.
However, progress in certain technical areas, such
as telecommunications and relations between the
Chambers of Commerce, are positive. We suggest that
the parties continue conversations and their efforts,
aimed at rapprochement. We believe that is essential
for the parties to continue their work to establish the
association of Serb-majority municipalities in northern
Kosovo. We call on the authorities of that province to
pursue that process over the short term, as agreed at the
highest level in Brussels.

As on previous occasions, we are once again struck
by the what the report refers to as the low number of
voluntary returns of Serbs who had been displaced from
their homes in Kosovo. We believe that, in follow up to
the Brussels Agreement of 2013, no effort should be
spared at the State and local levels to ensure security,
religious tolerance, property and economic rights and
the freedom of movement of Kosovo Serbs. Only in that
way will real national reconciliation be obtained on the
basis of the promotion and respect for human rights
and the full application of international standards in
this area to prevent discrimination against displaced
persons and minorities.

With regard to cultural and religious heritage,
we stress the need for the parties to work together to
effectively protect the important heritage of the various
Kosovar communities. We also call on the parties to
step up their joint work to clarify the situation of those
who disappeared during the war, and we commend
the efforts that have been made going forward in that
area. Moreover, we welcome the work carried out by
UN-Women with survivors of acts of sexual violence
committed during the war and the awareness campaigns
on gender Violence.

With regard to the fight against impunity, we
welcome the offer of the Government of the Netherlands
to host the specialist court to investigate accusations
of war crimes and crimes against humanity committed
during the armed conflict in Kosovo. We will call
on all the parties concerned to continue their work
so that the court can begin its work as soon possible.
The enforcement of justice in respect to those cases,
within the framework of due process, will facilitate
reconciliation and peace between all parties.

We recognize the efforts of the authorities of the
province of Kosovo to continue implementing measures
to combat the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters
with a view to preventing the recruitment of the
citizens of the province by terrorist organizations.
The fight against terrorism must be bolstered by
effective strategies directed against social exclusion,
poverty, violence and intolerant ideologies in order
to prevent radicalization, especially among young
people. Furthermore, work must be done to effectively
implement the Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions prohibiting the funding, training and
transferring of weapons to those groups.

To conclude, once again we encourage the parties
to redouble their efforts in the search for a peaceful,
fair and lasting political solution within the framework
of international law, including full compliance with
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Brussels Agreement
of 2013.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Mr. Dacie has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I give him the floor.

