Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Francois Lounceny
Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa, and Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director for
Operations and Advocacy of the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for
their briefings. I also wish to commend the efforts and
activities made by members and staff of the Regional
Office in discharging its mandate.

I shall focus on three aspects in my statement.

First, with respect to the security and political
situations in the region, the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/1065) on the situation in the Central Africa
region outlines the activities of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, as well as a detailed
explanation of the recent political, economic, social
and security developments in the region and their
impact on peace and security in Central Africa and the
States that are facing various challenges there. On the
political level, elections have taken place in a number of
Central African States, such as Rwanda, Sao Tome and
Principe, Gabon and Cameroon, without significant
violent incidents, despite ongoing security instability
in Cameroon. We share the concerns expressed by the
Secretary-General regarding the deterioration of the
security and humanitarian situations in the North-West
and South-West regions of Cameroon.

The scheduled elections in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo are 10 days away. We hope that they will
take place with inclusiveness, transparency and safety.
In that regard, we emphasize that the political processes
and the elections in any State of Central Africa, if
conducted in an inclusive, free and credible manner,
represent an important step towards maintaining peace
and security and achieving the peaceful transfer of
power. That would also have positive effects on stability
across the Whole region.

We are monitoring the political and security
developments in the States cited in the report, and would
like to stress the importance of the efforts made by the
Regional Office, as well as the regional organizations
and United Nations peacekeeping operations in the
region, with the aim of establishing a comprehensive
dialogue between Governments and all community
groups, especially in certain States of the region, and
attaining the political transfer of power during the
upcoming periods.

We are very concerned by the waves of violence
and armed conflict in the region, regrettably claiming
innocent and civilian lives. We need to find radical
solutions to stop the violence and hold the perpetrators
accountable. In that regard, we condemn in the strongest
terms the criminal acts, suicide attacks, repeated armed
attacks, looting and abductions perpetrated by Boko
Haram and the Lord's Resistance Army in the region.
Those acts hinder progress made at the political,
security and development levels and even at the social
and humanitarian levels. It is the responsibility of
the United Nations, the Security Council, regional
and subregional organizations and all the States of
Central Africa to confront those attacks and ensure
that sustained and common solutions are found for acts
of vandalism.

Secondly, we regret the generally worsening
humanitarian situation in the region. The number of
those in need ofurgent humanitarian assistance is on the
rise, as is the number of refugees and forced displaced
persons. The reason is violence and the outbreak of
cholera, Ebola and other diseases.

Regional organizations have cooperated with the
States of the region, and we commend the adoption by
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) of a strategy to prevent and combat terrorism
in Central Africa. We also commend the decision to
carry out a comprehensive reform of the Council for
Peace and Security in Central Africa (COPAX). We
pay tribute to the fruitful cooperation between ECCAS
and the Economic Community of West African States,
as embodied in the summit convened in Lome in July.
The summit exemplified the genuine commitment of
both communities to working together to address the
various challenges faced by the States of the region.
We look forward to the continued cooperation between
the two communities and other international partners
interested in achieving the desired peace and stability
in the region.

Thirdly and lastly, cooperation between the
Regional Office and other regional and international
organizations. The many challenges faced by Central
Africa, such as the increasing number of conflicts
linked to transhumance, climate change, armed
conflict and the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, along with other economic challenges and
social problems, require serious cooperation among the
Governments of the region, ECCAS, the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community, the African
Union and all regional and subregional organizations.
Such cooperation is necessary if the aspirations of the
people of the region to stability, security and decent
living conditions are to be fulfilled. This is all the
more crucial, given that the region has a vast wealth
of natural resources, which, if properly tapped, would
help it to achieve those aspirations.

I would like to conclude by thanking once again
Mr. Fall and the staff of the Regional Office for their
tireless efforts.

