Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
O'Brien and Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun
for their detailed briefings about the development
of the military, political and humanitarian situation
in the Lake Chad basin region. We would also like
to thank Ms. Fatima Yerima Askira for her very
moving statement.

We are particularly concerned about the continuing
activities of Boko Haram, which, in spite of the losses
that it has suffered, remains a major source of instability
in Cameroon, the Niger, Nigeria and Chad. The fact
that Boko Haram pledged allegiance to Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant in March 2015 makes it even
more urgent to mount an immediate, unified and robust
response to the terrorist threat in Africa.

We are very worried about the group's new tactic,
whereby it refrains from direct clashes with Government
armed forces, preferring to attack civilians or civilian
facilities and use suicide bombers and explosive devices.
That is precisely why ridding territories of fighters has
not led to improvements in the humanitarian sphere.
The problems of refugees, humanitarian access and
other issues related to terrorist activities cannot be
resolved without eliminating the threat posed by the
terrorist group. In that connection, we welcome the
efforts of the Lake Chad Basin Commission States and
the Multinational Joint Task Force, which was created
by them and Benin. We are convinced that only through
joint efforts will it be possible to achieve victory.

In that connection, we also think that the decision
adopted at the twenty-seventh African Union Summit,
held in Kigali in July 2016, on establishing a counter-
terrorist fund for the continent will be crucial to the
elimination ofterrorism in Africa. We also greatly value
the measures taken by the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel and the specialized agencies
of the United Nations in providing multifaceted
assistance to the countries of the Lake Chad basin
region. We are convinced that, in addition to combating
the terrorist threat, it is essential to tackle the deep-
rooted causes of the region's problems, which requires
eliminating poverty and fostering social and economic
development. We will continue to actively cooperate
with the States of the region in the framework of
regional structures, including the African Union, and
on a bilateral basis.

