The President: I thank the Executive Director of
the United Nations Children's Fund for her statement
and for the kind compliments she paid to Council
members, including especially those paid to the French
presidency for initiating this idea.

Before giving the floor to the next speaker, I
should like to acknowledge and welcome the presence
at the Council table of the distinguished Minister of
State in charge of external relations of Cameroon, His
Excellency Mr. Francois-Xavier Ngoubeyou.

We shall now hear probably the three most
important voices in the debate this afternoon. I now
give the floor to the young man Wilmot.

Wilmot Wungko: My name is Wilmot, from
Liberia. I am 16 years old. At age five, I fled from
Liberia with my mother to Sierra Leone. I was too
young at the time to really understand what was
happening. I heard the sounds of guns. I saw people
running. I saw people shooting. I saw people being
killed. I saw people dying. People as young as I was
were dying. On two occasions, I saw a man being
killed because of his tribe. Another man was
slaughtered right in front of our family. I could not
stand the sight and hid in my mother's arms.

I saw schools and buildings destroyed. I saw
families like mine, in the thousands, leave everything
behind and run. I was later told that a war was going
on. That was 11 years ago, when the war had just
began.

Today, as I speak, the children of Liberia are
suffering again from war. We do not have good
education because of war. We are malnourished
because of war. There are many reports that children
are being recruited. We are dying because of war.

Our hopes and dreams for the future are bleak.
The cry of the Liberian children is for peace. We, as
children ourselves, are involved in trying to put an end
to the war. I am working with an all-children television
programme, Kiddies' Corner, that discusses the plight
of children along with issues affecting our well-being
and the development of our fullest potential. Another
all-children radio programme, C'est la Vie, run by
children themselves, has been effective in sending out
the message of peace across the country. These are
things that children in Liberia have been doing to find a
way for peace.

Other organizations, like the Children's
Assistance Program, provide support for war-affected
children. Don Bosco Homes provide homes for street
children. Children against Violence has provided
shelter and education for these kids. The Young Men's
Christian Association provides recreational activities.
But none of this will mean anything if the war does not
stop.

The children of Liberia appeal to the Security
Council of the United Nations to do everything
possible to stop the fighting in Liberia. We are
experiencing war again in Liberia and want it to end
now. We are dying every day. Our human rights are
being abused every day. These human rights abuses,
including the recruitment of children, will continue
unless the war is brought to an end. Please help stop
the war for the sake of the children. We know that it is
your responsibility to promote world peace. Please do
not forget Liberia now. Help save the lives of the
Liberian children.

I thank you for this opportunity today.

The President: I thank Wilmot for conveying to
us the appeal on behalf of the children of Liberia.

I now give the floor to Eliza.

Eliza Kantardzic: My name is Eliza. I am 17
years old and I come from Bosnia and Herzegovina.

War; it sounds horrible and it is very hard to
describe how awful it is when you actually live through
one. Your whole world falls apart. Everything that you
know disappears. The only thing you can see is fear
and death. You feel trapped in every way. You ask
questions but there are no answers. You are seven years
old and your dad is not home for months. He comes for
a few days and then he goes away again. And the only
thing that you know is that he might never come back.
Complete darkness is everywhere.

This horror hits everybody. If you are lucky
enough you will not lose everything. Sometimes whole
families were split up and nobody knew for months,
and even years, if their parents or children or sisters or
brothers were alive. There was no way to find them.

I was one of the lucky people. My family is alive.
I know where they are. But I am surrounded by people
who are refugees. They came to my town. But you do
not look at them as refugees. They are new friends, that
is how you see them. Some of them are my best friends
at the moment. They came to school, and school is very
important for us. It is the only thing to do, when war is
going on, to try to forget.

I am a member of a youth centre in Banja Luka.
In that centre there is a group of young people, and we
work on the implementation of children's rights. We
are trying to help the refugees - to help them fit in.
Being a friend to someone is the best thing you can do.
You do not have to be a member of a youth centre to do
something like that.

But through a group we do things together. For
example, we make crafts and sell them. With that
money we can buy some candies and toys, which we
then give to orphans and refugee children. It is a small
thing, but it means a lot to them. We are also doing
workshops in the schools. Through the workshops the
children get to know what their rights are, like the right
to live, the right to have a home and an education, to
participate, and the right to play. The more they are
aware of what they can do and what they have a right
to do, the more things will be done. Together we can do
it.

When you are in a group and that group is made
up of different people with different experiences, it
helps to get some ideas. That kind of a group is here at
the Children's Forum at the United Nations. The main
thing I want to do here is to learn from the others here,
the children. That is the way I will get the knowledge I
need, and I will use it when I go home and share it with
others to make some progress.

But we also need your help. The best thing you
can do is to stop war, to prevent it. That is the only way
to avoid the consequences and everything that war
brings. And that is something that the Council has the
power to do. The real question is: Is that power used?
You are making decisions here that affect whole
nations. That is a fact. I hope that you will remember
my words when you get the opportunity to make
another decision that could prevent and stop war.

Finally, I have brought a message with me from
all the children at the Children's Forum:

"War and politics have always been an
adult's game, but children have always been the
losers."


The President: I thank Eliza for the appeal she
has made to the Council.

I now give the floor to Jose.

Jose Cabral: My name is Jose. I was born and
brought up in East Timor. I am sure that many of you
are quite familiar with our recent history. I would like
to use my short time with you today to explain my own
part in that history, and also some things that I hope we
can learn from that.
I think and I think again and try to look for the
answer in my past experience to the war in my beloved
country, East Timor, during September 1999. I was at
my school at that time. The directors of my school,
myself and 18 of my friends took care of many people
who came to shelter at my school, Saint Joseph College
High School. There were about 4,000 refugees.

We saw that everyone around us was afraid, and
we tried to do the best for the refugees. It was very
strange, and it seemed terrible, when we found there
was no child playing, there was no singing, there was
only silence or guns. We began to play the guitar and to
sing together to help us forget.

Today in East Timor I am a journalist at my
school. I have learned so many things from talking to
children, especially street children. There are still many
children with no opportunity to get an education. Some
of them spend their time on the street selling
newspapers, compact discs and other things to get
money. Some children just put out their hands to ask
for money. The money that they get may be used to pay
for their school - or they may give it to their
parents- but some of them are forced to give the
money to those people who threaten them on the
streets.

The children do not know anything about war, but
they are the victims of war. And even though it is over,
some of these children still have to face violence
because of things that they were never involved in.
Most of the children around the world were born to
give their smile, which brings happiness. But many of
them were also born only to see and to face the
suffering given to them by those who create war.

On 20 May 2002, East Timor will celebrate
independence. It will stand on its own for the first time
in over 500 years - a great day for the East Timorese
to start a new life and to rebuild our country, which had
been burnt down. When East Timor joins the United
Nations this month, the Convention on the Rights of
the Child will be the first convention ratified by the
new Government. I hope that children's rights will be

given attention by the Government and by everyone
who is responsible for children.

For the future of Timor, we want a Timor that is
clean, beautiful and shiny and where every person's
dignity and human rights are respected - not a Timor
that is dirty, rough and hypocritical. East Timorese
children, including the children living on the streets,
have dreams to become doctors, engineers, President,
but they do not have the opportunity to get an
education to reach for their dreams. What we need
from you is your help to keep our peace and unity so
that all children in East Timor can get an education and
live in a peaceful country. No more war.

I realize that I am very lucky to have this chance
today to represent children, not only from East Timor,
but also from Kosovo, Bosnia, Afghanistan and other
countries in armed conflict. Because I am here for the
special session on children, today is my chance to ask
you very powerful people here, on behalf of all
children, not just those of East Timor, to please ensure
that our rights are respected. I think we have the laws
and conventions, but we are not so good at doing what
we say. I am sure that, only when children's rights are
properly respected and children can grow up in safety
and peace, will those children be able to live in peace
together, throughout the world, when they are adults.
Please give us that chance.


The President: I thank Jose' for making an appeal
on behalf not just of the children of East Timor, but
also of children in other armed conflicts elsewhere in
the world.

My last duty this afternoon is to read out a
presidential statement which, following consultations
among members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make:

"The Security Council, recalling resolutions
1261 (1999), 1314 (2000) and 1379 (2001) on
children and armed conflict, expresses its
commitment to the protection of children affected
by armed conflict as an essential component of its
work to promote and maintain international peace
and security.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
at the grave impact of armed conflict in all its
various aspects on children and reiterates its
strong condemnation of the continued targeting
and use of children in armed conflicts, including
their abduction, compulsory recruitment,
mutilation, forced displacement, sexual
exploitation and abuse, and calls on all parties to
conflict to desist from such practices
immediately.

"The Security Council reaffirms its call for
the inclusion of provisions for the protection of
children, with particular attention to the special
needs of girls, in peace negotiations and peace
agreements; mandates and reports concerning
peacekeeping operations; rehabilitation and
peace-building programmes; training programmes
for peacekeeping and humanitarian personnel; as
well as the inclusion of child protection advisers
in peacekeeping and peace-building operations, in
accordance with previous resolutions and
presidential statements adopted by the Security
Council, in particular resolution 1379 (2001).

"The Security Council looks forward to a
successful final document concerning the
protection of children affected by armed conflict
on the occasion of the General Assembly special
session on children. The Security Council further
reiterates its call to all parties to abide by their
obligations, as well as concrete commitments
made to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, the United Nations Children's Fund and
other relevant United Nations bodies, to ensure
the protection of children in situations of armed
conflict in all its various aspects.

"The Security Council welcomes the entry
into force of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict and
urges Member States to consider ratification and
States parties to fully implement these provisions.

"The Security Council underscores the
importance of unhindered humanitarian access for
the benefit of children and, in this connection,
calls on parties to conflict to make special
arrangements to meet the protection and
assistance requirements of children, including
where appropriate the promotion of 'Days of

. . ,
Immunization .

"The Security Council will remain actively The Security Council has thus concluded the

seized ofthis matter." present stage of its consideration of the item on its

This statement will be issued as a document of filings. The Security Council Will remain seized of the

the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2002/12. The meeting rose at 2.45 p.m.

