Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): First and
foremost, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
country's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I wish you and the sisterly State
of Kuwait every success. I would also like to congratulate
the State of Kuwait for successfully presiding over the
Security Council high-level meeting this month - led
by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait (see S/PV.8548) 4 during which the
Council unanimously adopted a presidential statement
on cooperation between the Council and the League of
Arab States (S/PRST/2019/5).

The Government of Yemen has expressed its full
commitment to positively cooperate with the Secretary-
General through his Special Envoy for Yemen. We have
made many concessions and demonstrated greater
flexibility, openness, credibility and transparency in
order to achieve comprehensive and lasting peace in
Yemen, based on the GulfCooperation Council Initiative
and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcome of the
comprehensive National Dialogue Conference and the
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015).

Our efforts are also geared towards easing the
suffering of the patient Yemeni people and starting
the reconstruction process in the new federal State
of Yemen, so as to meet the aspirations of our people
and build a modern, democratic, civilian State based
on justice, equality, national partnership, the peaceful
transfer of power and respect for the rule of law and
State institutions. To that end, the Government of
Yemen participated in all the peace talks with the
putschists, under the auspices of the United Nations,
although we know that the rebel armed groups do not
believe in dialogue or peace.

Iran supported and instructed them to take part
in the talks in order to buy time and take advantage
of the suffering of the Yemeni people, while at the
same time carrying out their die-hard sectarian plans,
fanning the flames of conflict, sectarian division
and discrimination, rendering the social and cultural
fabric of Yemeni society and destroying our economic
capabilities. The aim is to carry out Iran's agenda for
Yemen and the region and destabilize the situation at
the regional and international levels. The gravity of the
violations and practices committed by the militias is
such that we cannot overlook it or remain silent.
The militias are violating every agreement and
ignoring all the concessions made by the Government of
Yemen, prolonging the war, hampering peace efforts and
using erroneous and narrow-minded interpretations of
the various agreements, while also ignoring the efforts
of the Security Council and the United Nations. The
aim is to seize the ports and the city of Al-Hudaydah,
contrary to the letter and spirit of the Stockholm
Agreement and the relevant Council resolutions,
in particular resolution 2216 (2015). As the United
Nations strives to implement the Hudaydah agreement,
the Government of Yemen stresses the importance of
implementing all aspects of the Stockholm Agreement,
specifically with regard to prisoners, detainees and
forcibly kidnapped or disappeared persons, as well as
those still under house arrest, in addition to lifting the
blockade on the city of Taiz.

Since the beginning of the talks, the Government
of Yemen has extended all possible assistance to the
Special Envoys of the Secretary-General, with the goal
of allowing them to succeed in their efforts towards
reaching a comprehensive political solution. We have
sought to cooperate with and fully support Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths in his efforts to make headway on all
tracks regarding the implementation of the Hudaydah
agreement and the Stockholm Agreement. We continue
to do so despite the intransigence of the rebellious
Houthi militias, which disregard the provisions of the
Stockholm Agreement and whose actions, including
their feigned withdrawals, clearly contravene the spirit
and letter of the various agreements and the statements
of understanding, including the Stockholm Agreement.

The Yemeni Government once again underlines
its commitment to peace and its determination to end
the conflict in Yemen, based on the agreed terms of
reference, despite all the obstacles put in our way by
the armed Houthi militias. It is essential that we comply
with the agreed terms of reference, agreements and
the implementation of the concept of operations that
governs the redeployment phases, while promoting
the tripartite Verification and Inspection Mechanism,
as emphasized by His Excellency Abdrabuh Mansour
Hadi Mansour, the President of the Republic, in order to
address security issues. That has been welcomed by the
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Lieutenant General
Michael Lollesgaard, Chair of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee (RCC). The aim is to verify
and monitor the levels of redeployment by all parties.
Any step that ignores this tripartite mechanism does
not help to build confidence or ensure the peace
process, and also fails to respect the legal tracks and
remove all obstacles and impediments to the security
and administrative institutions performing their tasks
in accordance with the Yemeni law, the spirit and letter
of the Stockholm Agreement and the relevant Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolution 2216
(2015), on the situation in Yemen.

We welcome the visit by Ms. DiCarlo, Under-
Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, who met with the President of the Republic
on 10 June. We also welcome the commitment of the
Secretary-General to a political solution in Yemen and
to fully implementing the Stockholm Agreement before
the next consultations. He also underlined the need to
support the work of the tripartite mechanism regarding
all the redeployment operations and to ensure that it
can fully play its role. Any upcoming consultations
will be meaningless and futile unless all provisions of
the Stockholm Agreement are implemented. Therefore,
any upcoming consultation must be linked to the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, which
will help to build confidence.

The unilateral withdrawal of the armed Houthi
militias will be unrealistic if it is not in line with the
spirit and letter of the Stockholm Agreement. Those
militias have affirmed the presence of their forces in
the ports, which is contrary to their claims before the
Security Council's meeting of 15 May (see S/PV.8525).
The militia leaders have strengthened their military
positions in the three ports of Saleef, Ras Isa and
Al-Hudaydah in order to control the ports, deceive the
international community and the Council, undermine
the peace process, gain time and prolong the suffering of
the Yemeni people. Those who work in the ports and the
militia supporters there repeat the Houthi and Iranian
slogans. We underscore the importance of putting
pressure on the Houthi militias to open the city roads
and remove obstacles in order to facilitate the work of
the RCC. Any wrongdoing will lead to a wrong outcome,
and any unilateral action that does not comply with the
tripartite mechanism and include the participation of
the Yemeni Government is not acceptable and will not
lead to peace or build confidence.

Since the Special Envoy's mandate was first
entrusted to him, his priority has always been to build
trust among the parties to the Stockholm Agreement.
However, the Houthis have failed to implement the
Agreement for more than six months. Peace and the
implementation of agreements are not a priority of
the Houthi militias, which seek only to kill or control
Yemenis, achieve their own sectarian agenda and
implement the Iranian plan to destabilize the region.

The Yemeni Government is making every effort
to revitalize the economic situation, improve the
livelihoods of the Yemeni people and provide them
with the necessary support and services, despite the
many obstacles facing it as a result of the coup by the
armed Houthi militias. The Government is committed
to paying the salaries and pensions of all civil servants
across the country, including in Houthi-controlled
areas and in Al-Hudaydah. The Houthi militias refuse
to hand over the income from areas they control to the
Central Bank in Aden or its branch in Al-Hudaydah.

We call on the international community, sisterly
and friendly countries and international organizations
to provide the necessary support to the Yemeni people
in these dire circumstances so that they can rebuild
their State and restore their legitimate institutions.
The insurgent Houthi rebels insist on exploiting the
economic situation and the people's needs in the areas
under their control to destroy the national economy
and to put pressure on all financial institutions and
professional associations by using arms. That has led
to the further depreciation of the national currency and
paved the way for speculative practices, which further
undermine the economy and the currency. They blame
the Government for that while they are responsible
for the suffering of the Yemeni people. They impede
humanitarian workers and humanitarian convoys. We
call on the international community and the Security
Council to put an end to those violations so as to enable
humanitarian organizations to identify and reach
those in need by providing them with the necessary
food assistance. The international community and the
Security Council must also take steps to ensure that
international standards for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance are respected.

The Yemeni Government supports the World Food
Programme, but we are concerned about the painful
message that the Executive Director of the World Food
Programme shared with us earlier this morning, which
speaks volumes about the inhumane practices of the
Houthi militias and the suffering that they inflict. What
can one expect from militias that steal food intended for
women and children? What can one expect from rebels
who are prepared to divert humanitarian assistance,
resulting in the subjugation or death of Yemenis?

Those militias do not believe in dialogue but pursue
their own sectarian agenda. They want to sow division
within Yemeni society. We must send strong and clear
messages calling for an end to such violations and
despicable endeavours. There must be no ambiguous
messages, which are liable to be misinterpreted by the
Houthis and strengthen their practices in violation of
the resolutions of the international community and the
Security Council.

The violations and crimes perpetrated by the
Houthi militias, supported by Iran, continue to target
civilians, including women and children, which is a
blatant breach of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. This is taking place
against the backdrop of silence on the part of the
international community, which is not shouldering its
legal and moral responsibilities to protect civilians.
More robust measures must be taken by the international
community to put an end to the violations and heinous
crimes perpetrated by the Houthi militias against the
Yemeni people.

The Yemeni government renews its call for the
necessary measures to be taken against the practices
of those militias that target residential neighbourhoods
and defenceless civilians, including women and
children. The people of Yemen are suffering not only
from a humanitarian disaster and crisis as a result of the
Houthi's coup, but also from a hidden disaster of which
the international community and the Security Council
may not be aware. That disaster has been caused by the
laying of more than 1 million landmines and explosive
devises by the Houthi militias since the beginning of
their coup d'etat, and has killed and will kill hundreds
of civilians, including women and children, while
thousands of civilians will be permanently disabled.
This disaster will also pose a dangerous threat to the
lives of Yemenis for decades to come before demining
is undertaken, with the cooperation of the international
community. This is a disaster that has not been seen in
any country since Second World War.

With regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker off the
coast of Al-Hudaydah, the Yemeni Government has
sent an urgent letter to the Secretary-General and
to the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, drawing their attention to the decay of that
vessel and the potential risk of a humanitarian and
environmental disaster as a result of an oil leak. The
Yemeni Government has already expressed its full
support and determination to cooperate in assessing the
situation of the tanker and how it can be maintained. It
is the Houthis themselves who are hindering access to
the tanker.

The Houthis continue to target civilian facilities in
the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the latest of which
is Abha International Airport, as well as international
navigation routes. They are doing so with the support
and instruction of the Iranian regime, which reflects
the scale of the threat posed by these extremist militias.
Those terrorist acts constitute a blatant challenge to
the international community and a clear message to the
world that the militias do not believe in peace and have
no interest in peace. The Yemeni Government calls
on the Security Council to take the necessary robust
measures against those militants and the forces that
support them.

In conclusion, it is time for the Security Council
to live up to its responsibilities and implement its
resolutions on the conflict in Yemen. It should compel
the Houthi militias to fully implement the provisions of
these resolutions with the aim of achieving sustained
peace, end the coup and its consequences and alleviate
the suffering inflicted on the Yemeni people as a result
ofthe war waged by those armed and rebellious militias.
The Security Council should also maintain regional and
international security and stability.

