Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Allow me to welcome
you most warmly, Mr. Minister, on behalf of the
Government and people of Jamaica. My delegation is
confident that under your guidance this debate will
prove extremely useful in helping the United Nations
and its Member States to address the increasing
complexities of peacekeeping operations. My
delegation congratulates you and the Singapore
delegation for your foresight in scheduling this
meeting.

Mr. President, your delegation's paper on
strengthening cooperation with troop-contributing
countries has served to focus our discussion. It
underscored the fact that troop-contributing countries
are perhaps the most indispensable element of any
peacekeeping operation and that the relationship
between troop-contributing countries, the Security
Council and the Secretariat is of paramount
importance. As was indicated in your delegation's
paper, the main purpose of this open debate is to
provide all participants in United Nations peacekeeping
with an opportunity to reflect on recent experiences,
with a view to distilling some lessons that can be
learned.

We have had an opportunity to listen to the
concerns and the recommendations of some of the
troop-contributing countries. My delegation thanks
them for sharing their experiences and for contributing
constructive and useful suggestions. Indeed, Jamaica
fully supports any initiative in the Security Council
that is aimed at improving the process of consultations
between the Security Council and troop-contributing
countries. My delegation's contribution in the
examination of the Brahimi report and our subsequent
support for the adoption of the working group's
recommendations on consultations with troop-
contributing countries aptly demonstrate our
commitment to this undertaking. The Council's debate
last November under the presidency of the Netherlands
on issues related to peacekeeping exit strategies was a
further illustration of the seriousness with which the
Security Council views all matters related to United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

The working group on the Brahimi report
examined mechanisms and procedures for
strengthening consultations with both current and
potential troop-contributing countries. It also
considered how that might be done before and after the
establishment of a peacekeeping mission, particularly
on matters affecting the safety and security of
personnel and the implications for a mission's use of
force. As a result of that examination, the working
group made certain specific recommendations to the
Security Council.

By adopting resolution 1327 (2000) on 13
November 2000, and by approving thereby the annexed
decisions and recommendations, the Council has in fact
embraced a new doctrine on peacekeeping operations.
That new doctrine sets specific, unambiguous goals for
United Nations peacekeeping. In that new doctrine the
Council's relationship and the level of consultations
with troop-contributing countries are given full and
unqualified attention.

The decisions set out in the annex to resolution
1327 (2000) are very clear as to the Council's
objectives relating specifically to troop-contributing
countries. They include the importance of an improved
system of consultations among troop-contributing
countries, the Secretariat and the Security Council. The
stated purpose is to foster a common understanding of
the situation on the ground to which peacekeepers are
sent, and that all concerned are cognizant of the
mission's mandate and the requirements for its
implementation.

Most importantly, the Council agreed to
strengthen significantly the existing system of
consultations through the holding of private meetings
with troop-contributing countries in a form and with a
content conducive to making such meetings more
interactive and productive. In that regard, a number of
troop-contributing countries have made important
recommendations during the course of this debate on
how best to achieve optimum results. Their
recommendations merit our serious consideration.

Also of significance is the fact that under its new
doctrine, troop-contributing countries may initiate
those meetings with the Security Council. Furthermore,
after being identified by the Secretary-General,
potential troop contributors may also request a meeting
with the Security Council in the case of a new or
ongoing peacekeeping operation, during the
implementation phase of an operation, and when the
Council is considering a change in, or renewal or
completion of, a peacekeeping mandate. The process of
consultation must be ongoing and must provide troop-
contributing countries with the option to initiate such
meetings, even if meetings are not contemplated by the
Security Council. Most importantly, a troop contributor
must have the opportunity to seek such a meeting with
the Council when a rapid deterioration in the situation
on the ground threatens the safety and security of its
troops.

By resolving to give peacekeeping operations
clear, credible and achievable mandates, the Security
Council has committed itself to removing all doubts as
to what is expected of troop contributors before their
personnel are deployed. When clearly understood, each
mandate must pre-determines the level of training and
equipment required for a peacekeeping operation.
When time is of the essence, there is also an obligation
for those countries participating in the standby
arrangements whose troops are adequately trained and
equipped to be ready to respond at short notice when
needed for peacekeeping operations. The success or
failure of a peacekeeping operation could be
determined by the speed with which peacekeepers are
deployed.

The Security Council's relationship with troop-
contributing countries extends beyond ensuring that we
do it right when going in. We have debated the
imperatives for an appropriate exit strategy for each
mission, and, with the United Nations embarking on
increasingly complex peacekeeping missions, the role
of peacekeepers has taken on new dimensions. Bearing
in mind that the transition from peacekeeping to peace-
building is a process and not an event, let us note that
peacekeepers are uniquely placed to ensure that this
process takes place in a secured environment.

As the Permanent Representative of Japan
emphasized to us this morning, many of these missions
involve large civilian components, and we agree that it
is crucial for the Council to listen to those countries
that make contributions of civilians, logistics and
equipment. This was taken up in S/PRST/ 1996/ 13. We
need to ensure that it is fully implemented.

The Security Council, by adopting resolution
1327 (2000), has clearly stated its intentions with
respect to troop-contributing countries and the process
of consultations during all phases of a peace operation.
It is, however, of far more importance that the actions
taken or contemplated by the Council give effect to this
new doctrine. The Security Council has already acted
to improve the level of consultations. Recent meetings
between the Council and troop-contributing countries
have afforded a greater exchange of views than has
been the case in the recent past. Currently, the Security
Council is considering the establishment of a
committee on peacekeeping operations, to deal
specifically with areas of peacekeeping falling within
the jurisdiction of the Security Council. The President
of the Council, in his wisdom, has asked troop-
contributing countries for their comments on this
initiative during the course of this debate. My
delegation has listened carefully to the comments made
here today, and this will assist us in developing the
terms of reference for the peacekeeping committee, to
ensure its effectiveness in improving the work of the
Security Council.

My delegation fully supports the establishment of
mechanisms and procedures within the Council which
will enhance its ability to carry out peacekeeping
operations, including consultations with troop-
contributing countries. We must work, collectively and
individually, to make the process work better.

Jamaica is determined that the lessons of the past
must teach us the way of the future. Without seeking to
ascribe responsibility for failures or give credit for
successes, we are fully committed to playing our part
in helping the United Nations avoid repeating the
mistakes of the past while preparing ourselves for
future peacekeeping operations based on a cooperative
relationship between the Security Council, troop-
contributing countries and the Secretariat. We must put
our words into action.

