The Secretary-General: Let me say how happy I
am, Mr. Minister, to see you in the Chair and once
again to welcome you to New York and to United
Nations Headquarters.

This meeting signals an important moment of
transition and consolidation in Bosnia. I would like to
begin by paying tribute to the High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, whose
effective leadership helped secure the gains made by
the international community over the last few years. I
know he and my Special Representative, Mr. Jacques
Paul Klein, worked well together, and I want to thank
him for that cooperation as well. I would also like to
salute the tireless efforts of my friend Javier Solana
towards maintaining the momentum for peace and
reconciliation throughout the Balkans. His presence
here today signals the priority that the European Union
attaches to the future of Bosnia.

The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) is well on track to completing
its core mandate by the end of 2002. I believe that the
Council can be very satisfied with the work of
UNMIBH as an advocate of reconciliation and as an
agent of the rule of law - and, of course, with what it
has achieved already. It has improved and integrated
the police, while serving as a voice for coexistence,
tolerance and cooperation at all levels of society.
Through all those efforts, UNMIBH's civilian and
police officers have done much to give the people of
Bosnia faith in a better, peaceful and united future.

Specifically, UNMIBH has transformed and
reduced the police force from a 40,000-strong war-time
militia to a 16,000-strong professional police force. In
addition, each police officer has been trained in human
rights; selected groups have been trained in drug
control, organized crime and crowd control; two multi-
ethnic police academies have been established, in
Sarajevo and in Banja Luka; and, at present, the State
Border Service covers 75 per cent of the country's
borders and has reduced illegal immigration through
Bosnia and Herzegovina by two thirds.
Of course, UNMIBH has not been alone in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but is part of a broader
international effort - including the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the European Union-
which will continue. By the end of 2002, UNMIBH
will have completed the peacekeeping phase of police
restructuring. However, there will still be challenges to
face for the Bosnians themselves and for the
international community committed to helping them.
Among these, in the area of the police, are low salaries
and poor housing conditions, lack of funds and
continued political interference in the work of law
enforcement agencies.

There will undoubtedly continue to be a need for
international monitoring and assistance in order to
sustain the progress that has been made. I therefore
welcome a recent decision by the European Union to
establish a post-UNMIBH follow-on police mission to
commence on 1 January 2003. The next phase of
capacity-building in law enforcement, including
improving judicial and penal systems, will therefore be
carried out in the context of the European Union. The
United Nations stands ready to cooperate closely with
the European Union, the Office of the High
Representative and others concerned to ensure timely
planning and a smooth transition.

Ultimately, it is the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina who must take control of their own
destiny and build a peaceful, prosperous future as a
successful multi-ethnic State. It is my hope that they
will find support and inspiration in the many countries
around the world which have made their diversity their
greatest asset, with opportunities for all in a climate of
tolerance and mutual respect.

