Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): At the outset, let
me thank the Special Representative Ambassador Qazi
for his briefing and for introducing the Secretary-
General's report. We also wish to thank Ambassador
Jackie Wolcott Sanders of the United States for her
briefing on behalf of the Multinational Force.

We have noted that the United Nations, as co-
chair of the International Compact for Iraq, continued
to provide support to the Government of Iraq in the
development of the Compact process, which is an
important framework for mobilizing national, regional
and international actors in support of the transition in
Iraq. We commend the Secretary-General for
convening a high-level meeting, which reviewed
progress made in the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1546 (2004), and also provided an
opportunity for the mobilization of greater and broader
international support and engagement with the
Government of Iraq.

In addition, we welcome the United Nations as
co-chair of the first and second International Compact
meetings with the Iraq preparatory group in Abu-Dhabi
and Kuwait City, respectively, which recognized the
need to complete expeditiously the development of the
Compact through a broad consultative process at the
national, regional and international levels, and progress
made in the drafting of the Compact document, in
particular, the inclusion of the political and security
sections, as well as the presentation of specific bench
marks. We acknowledge the Secretary-General's
assertion that the success of the Compact would
depend on the ability of the Government of Iraq and
the international community to deliver on their mutual
commitments. We are hopeful that the Compact will be
formally launched sooner, rather than later.

We support the continuous efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to engage key
political, civil society, tribal and religious leaders with
a view to promoting genuine dialogue and addressing
the volatile security situation. He should be encouraged
to continue with the strengthening of the legal and
institutional foundation of the country and assisting in
the promotion of the implementation of the
Government's National Reconciliation Plan.

We have also noted that the Office of
Constitutional Support of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) continued
extending its assistance to the Council of
Representatives in developing the required legislation
for advancing the implementation of the constitution.
We note that UNAMI intends to provide strong support
to the constitutional review process drawing on best
practices from around the world.

We urge the UNAMI Office of Electoral
Assistance to continue providing support for the
process of the transition from the Independent
Electoral Commission to the future Independent High
Electoral Commission of Iraq and for the planning and
updating of the voter rolls in preparation for future
electoral events.

My delegation remains concerned about the
increase in the number of displaced Iraqis due to
violence by various elements. The Secretary-General's
report informs us that the total number of displaced
persons in Iraq is over 1.6 million, while about an
equal number of Iraqis have become refugees outside
the country since 2003.
We commend the United Nations agencies and
their partners for providing food, shelter and non-food
items to as many displaced Iraqis as resources permit,
and we add our voice to the Secretary-General's appeal
for the international community to identify additional
means for supporting United Nations agencies in their
work with displaced Iraqis.

Given the environment of insecurity and the
consequent high level of human rights violations, the
Government of Iraq has obviously not been able to
honour its promise to promote the protection of human
rights and the rule of law. We are, however, encouraged
to note that the UNAMI Human Rights Office
continues to work closely with Iraqi institutions to
strengthen the rule of law and create a strong and
effective national human rights system, and we hope
that the draft law on the establishment of a national
human rights commission will be enacted soon.

We are deeply worried at the continued violence
and numerous deaths occurring daily in Iraq. We hope
that the appropriate authorities will leave no stone
unturned to improve the general security situation in
the country, so as to enable the people of Iraq to
achieve lasting peace and security. We therefore look
forward to the deliberations of the national
reconciliation conference to be held on 16 December
and to its promulgation of a national hydrocarbon law.
We also welcome the decision of the Iraqi Government
to send envoys east and west to enlist their support in
the quest for peace, because we agree with the
observation made by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General that an exclusionary approach,
whether internal or external, will not result in progress
towards peace and stability.

Finally, the deteriorating security situation in Iraq
has put severe constraints on the ability of the United
Nations to carry out its activities, and its staff
continues to be exposed to considerable risks. We hope
for an improvement in the security situation that will
lessen the risks to which United Nations personnel are
exposed, so that the viability of maintaining a
significant United Nations presence in Iraq will not be
called into question. Indeed, the effective and
commendable role being played by UNAMI in
developing Iraqi national institutions and in providing
for persons in distress may require it to assume greater
responsibilities in the collective quest for a united and
peaceful Iraq.

