Mr. Biarn Lian (Norway): Allow me first to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. I am convinced that the skill you display in the
performance of your duties will enable the Council to
deal with the important matters before it in a businesslike
and expeditious manner.

Norway joins others in welcoming the Secretary-
General's position paper at the opening of the United
Nations fiftieth anniversary year. The Supplement to "An
Agenda for Peace" is an important and valuable
contribution to the ongoing process of strengthening the
United Nations activities in the field of peace and
security. The Secretary-General has concisely drawn our

 

attention to the most urgent issues facing the United
Nations, drawing on the experience gained since his report
"An Agenda for Peace" was issued in June 1992.

I would like, as others have done, to comment in a
preliminary manner on some of the issues that are of
particular importance to my authorities.

We believe preventive diplomacy and peacemaking are
challenging tasks in which the United Nations is well
placed to play an important role through a variety of
instruments, such as mediation, conflict resolution and the
Secretary-General's good offices. We should all do our
utmost to allow future United Nations activities for peace
and security increasingly to be focused on efforts that can
solve problems before they are allowed to deepen into crisis
or conflict. At a time when a multitude of demands are
being put on the Organization and resources are scarce,
focused preventive action will be the most efficient way in
which the United Nations can seek to meet tomorrow's
challenges to collective security.

Effective preventive action requires early action. Our
experience is that international assistance can preserve
peace, save lives and protect human rights and democracy
if it reaches vulnerable communities in time. We have too
often been passive observers of unique opportunities being
lost, because we, as individual nations or as United Nations
Members, did not mobilize resources in time. Too often our
response mechanisms have proved to be inadequate for the
early needs of embattled democracies, peace initiatives or
disaster-prone and vulnerable communities.

Norway has tried to meet these challenges by
establishing the Norwegian Emergency Preparedness
System and the Norwegian Resource Bank for Democracy
and Human Rights. At the request of United Nations
agencies, newborn democracies and parties to armed
conflicts, more than 500 relief workers, human rights
advisers and peace mediators and observers were dispatched
last year to more than 30 countries in Africa, Asia, Latin
America, Europe and the Middle East.

These stand-by arrangements have made it possible for
us to play an active role as facilitator in relation to four
separate peace processes: in the Middle East, in Guatemala,
in the former Yugoslavia and, most recently, in Sri Lanka.
In all of these peace efforts, our role is either supportive of,
complementary to or preparatory for, the United Nations.

As pointed out by the Secretary-General, solutions
need to be found to the practical problems of finding
persons with the necessary qualifications and seniority to
act as special representative or special envoy of the
Secretary-General, and of providing the resources needed
for establishing small field missions for preventive
diplomacy and peacemaking.

In this connection, I would like to point to the
instrument of preventive deployment. The deployment of
forces with a clear preventive mandate was for the first
time initiated in The Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia with a joint Nordic force. So far this operation
must be described as successful and it therefore, we feel,
stands out as an example to be followed in other potential
conflict areas.

The first main obstacle to a strategy of preventive
deployment is the lack of resources. Secondly, and
perhaps most important, the formal authorities in conflict-
prone countries often resist United Nations or other
international involvement. The Secretary-General,
therefore, underscores that we must create a climate of
opinion in which the norm would be for Member States
to accept an offer of United Nations good offices or for
themselves to invite such an offer from the United
Nations.
Similar attitudes should be promoted amongst
Member States with regard to preventive deployment.

The concept of peace-keeping operations should be
further developed to meet the new challenges. Norway
has been and still is a staunch supporter of United
Nations peace-keeping operations. We have contributed to
a large number of them and have been active in the
development of their concepts - the creation of training
manuals and the establishment of stand-by forces. In
particular, the strengthening of United Nations command
and control capabilities has been a concern of ours for a
long time. Suffice it to mention the Nordic initiative at
the forty-eighth session of the General Assembly and the
informal working group on command and control that was
set up under the chairmanship of Norway, also as a
follow-up to the informal Ottawa meeting on peace-
keeping operations. The Secretary-General has now issued
a separate report regarding this issue which we will have
the opportunity to discuss in further detail in the Special
Committee on Peace-keeping Operations later this spring.
Let me just emphasize the importance we attach to clear
lines of command and a common understanding of
operational control. We see the principle of unity of
command as a prerequisite for a successful peace-keeping
operation.

 

Norway fully shares the Secretary-General's concern
that a peace-keeping operation should not be asked to use
force when its existing composition, armament, logistics
support and deployment deny it the capacity to do so. The
viability of the operation and the danger to the personnel
must be the main priorities.

We furthermore support the Secretary-General's call
that before the Security Council takes a decision on a new
or expanded peace-keeping operation the United Nations
should be assured that the necessary personnel and
equipment will be forthcoming.

In this connection, Norway welcomes the improvement
we have witnessed in the procedures for consultations
between troop-contributing countries, members of the
Security Council and the Secretary-General. We firmly
believe that an enhanced dialogue with the Security Council
and increased transparency in these matters will be of
crucial importance for maintaining broad political support
for United Nations peace-keeping operations in the Member
States. The consultations with troop-contributing countries
should be structured, focused on areas of particular concern
and take place on a regular basis as well as when
extensions and/or modifications of existing mandates are
being considered. The Security Council should, whenever
possible, consult with potential troop-contributing countries
also before a decision is taken by the Security Council to
launch a new peace-keeping operation.

The new tasks of the United Nations peace-keeping
operations are manifold. What is now needed is
consideration of new proposals in relation to the new tasks
of peace-keeping operations. The Secretary-General's
forward-looking ideas regarding a rapid reaction force, a
reserve stock of standard peace-keeping equipment, and
partnerships between Governments that need equipment and
those Governments ready to provide it all merit further
study and deliberation. These proposals are intended to
respond to present and future requirements that can already
now be foreseen, and therefore deserve our full attention.

We share many of the Secretary-General's comments
in the area of post-conflict peace building. The transition
from a peace-keeping operation to longer-term humanitarian
and development efforts needs careful management, and the
question of coordination and responsibility needs to be
closely considered in each individual case.

With regard to the issue of anti-personnel mines, my
delegation believes that we are off to a good start, thanks
to initiatives by the European Union and the United States,
both of which were firmly supported by my Government.
We will continue to be actively engaged in these issues
and in follow-up activities.

Sanctions will continue to be an important
instrument in United Nations efforts to foster peace and
security. The Security Council should, in connection with
the imposition and use of sanctions, assess the
consequences of sanctions on third countries and explore
ways of assisting third countries that are adversely
affected by sanctions. In fact, similar proposals were
presented by the Nordic countries in their document
"Shaping the peace: the United Nations in the 1990s",
which was circulated in October 1991. It is important that
the instrument of sanctions not be weakened in any way.

The Secretary-General voices his concern regarding
the consequences of using force, other than for self-
defence, in a peace-keeping context. While we agree with
those who point out that the use of coercive measures
cannot be ruled out, we feel that the issue of the use of
force or peace enforcement should be approached with
caution. Recent experience shows that it is difficult to
foresee the full consequences of peace enforcement
operations. Few crises lend themselves readily to this type
of approach, and many countries tend to be reluctant to
put their soldiers under United Nations command for
operations that are perceived as risky or uncertain. The
limited resources of the United Nations impede peace-
enforcement actions. In the cases where the Security
Council mandates such actions, they may have to be
delegated to Member States or other arrangements which
have the necessary capacity to implement them.

The issue of coordination is crucial, be it within the
Secretariat, between the various United Nations agencies
and bodies or between Headquarters and the field, and
also in Governments' positions in various bodies. The
objective must be to solve the tasks at the right level and
by the relevant organs in close cooperation. We believe
that more work is required in order to improve the
practical coordination of all aspects of a comprehensive
peace-keeping operation, including humanitarian efforts,
particularly in the field. Here again, the role of the special
representative of the Secretary-General, the role of the
force commander and the chain of command need to be
absolutely clear.

In conclusion, I should like to point to the critical
financial situation of the United Nations with respect to
peace-keeping. The resources of the United Nations are
stretched to the limit, as are those of many troop-

 

contributing countries. The United Nations is faced with a
serious financial situation, which is adversely affecting
peace-keeping operations. These problems need urgently to
be solved on a permanent basis.

As the Secretary-General himself has said, the ability
of the United Nations to perform the tasks for which it was
created is in peril, and this is no longer simply a financial
question but an urgent political question. Norway fully
agrees with this analysis and fully supports the introduction
of the financial incentives, sanctions and reforms that the
Secretary-General has suggested, as a political measure to
meet the threats we perceive to the Organization. In our
View, reforms are necessary to maintain and renew
multilateralism.

