Mr. Li Kexin (China) (spoke in Chinese): In a
historic decision, the Security Council mandated a full
inspection and verification of weapons of mass
destruction in the possession of Iraq and their complete
destruction. Both the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
made painstaking efforts to that end. Their dedication
and professionalism in conditions of extreme hardship
and danger are highly impressive.

Mr. Hans Blix, former Chairman of UNMOVIC;
Mr. ElBaradei, Director General of IAEA; and
Mr. Demetrius Perricos, Acting Executive Chairman of
UNMOVIC all led their teams with strict discipline,
impartiality, transparency and professionalism. We
express our profound appreciation and admiration to
them for their devotion to finding the truths that will
stand the test of history.

In its resolutions 687 (1991) and 1284 (1999), the
Security Council demanded that Iraq destroy all its
weapons of mass destruction. Convinced that the
disarmament of Iraq would be achieved by peaceful
means, China supported the United Nations inspection
and verification activities in Iraq, which not only were
in the interests of Iraq's security and stability, but
would also contribute to peace and tranquillity in the
Gulf region and the Middle East as a whole. With that
in mind, China recommended numerous experts to
UNMOVIC, one of whom gave his life in the line of
duty.

The situation in Iraq has undergone tremendous
changes since the establishment of UNMOVIC. The
Iraqi people have elected a new Government that is
devoted to the post-war political and economic

reconstruction of the country and its reintegration into
regional and international affairs. In his letter of
24 April 2007, Foreign Minister Zebari of Iraq
informed the President of the Security Council that

"the Permanent Constitution of the Government
of Iraq states that: 'The Iraqi Government shall
respect and implement Iraq's international
obligations regarding the non-proliferation, non-
development, non-production and non-utilization
of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, and
shall prohibit associated equipment, materiel,
technologies and communication systems for use
in the development, manufacture, production and
utilization of such weapons' (S/2007/236, para. 2).

Iraq has also created relevant bodies to ensure that its
international obligations in disarmament and non-
proliferation are honoured.

China appreciates and acknowledges the
aforementioned efforts of the Government of Iraq.
China understands and consents to Iraq's urgent
request that UNMOVIC be dissolved. We hope that
Iraq will take the termination of the mandates of
UNMOVIC and the IAEA Iraq Nuclear Verification
Office as a new starting point and live up to the
expectations of the international community by
honouring its commitments and effectively meeting its
obligations in disarmament and non-proliferation, thus
restoring its position in the international community as
07-40467

a responsible member that contributes to the
maintenance of security and stability in the Middle
East.

The establishment of a region free of weapons of
mass destruction in the Middle East is the common
aspiration and objective of the international
community, as well as a requirement of resolution 687
(1991). In the current circumstances, it assumes special
significance because it would facilitate the building of
mutual trust and contribute to easing tensions in the
Middle East. China supports all efforts aimed at
establishing a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East and hopes that it can be
achieved at an early date.

