Mr. Dangue Rewaka (Gabon)(spoke in French):
Mr. President, this morning's debate attests to the concern
that your country has always shown for the problems
affecting Africa, as well as the Security Council's concern
to enhance the quality of its interventions in crisis situations
in Africa. Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter, on
regional agreements and arrangements, establishes the legal
framework for cooperation involving the United Nations
and its agencies. The areas of cooperation being considered
here are those that fall within the purview of the Security
Council, as they are related to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Since the adoption of the Agreement of 15 November
1965 between the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), which was updated in October 1990
by the Secretaries-General of the two organizations, a
number of other agreements have been added to strengthen
that cooperation.

The diagnosis of the ills besetting Africa is familiar to
all of us. What we need to seek are the solutions. We wish
to pay a tribute to the United Nations Secretariat, which has
spared no effort to translate its cooperation agreements with
the OAU into practical action. This is attested to by the
holding of various meetings between the United Nations
and African regional organizations, the exchange of
personnel and training programmes to facilitate African
countries' participation in peacekeeping operations.

Security Council resolution 1197 (1998) of 18
September 1998 and the presidential statement issued by the
Security Council as document S/PRST/ 1998/28 set forth
specific measures that, if wisely implemented, would have
a real impact on conflict prevention and conflict resolution
in Africa, and would considerably enhance the level of
cooperation between the United Nations and the African
organizations.

Those two documents emphasize, inter alia, the need
for the appointment of joint envoys of the OAU and the
United Nations, the need to strengthen and use the United
Nations Trust Fund for Improving Preparedness for
Conflict Prevention and Peacekeeping in Africa, the need
to develop OAU early warning systems and the OAU
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution and the need to support regional organizations
to help them acquire the logistics and financing necessary
for peacekeeping operations.

This issue remains critical to Africa. Given the
hesitation of the Security Council to commit itself quickly
to help extinguish hot spots in Africa, African countries
are increasingly driven to undertake many peacekeeping
missions that are very costly. They need more material,
financial and logistical support to effectively carry out
their tasks.

The Economic Community of West African States
Monitoring Group faced enormous difficulties in Sierra
Leone due not to a shortage of troops, which were
supplied by the ECOWAS countries, but to a shortage of
logistics and financing.

The Security Council must end the practice of
procrastination in the implementation of peacekeeping
missions in Africa.

The imperatives of peace and stability should prevail
over all other considerations. It would therefore be
beneficial to avoid creating a gap between the signing of
a peace agreement and the implementation of a
peacekeeping mission so as not to allow the parties an
opportunity to resume hostilities. We have in mind the
case of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As
Ambassador Holbrooke mentioned earlier, we will be
having a meeting on the issue of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo tomorrow.

We have spoken of support for the development of
early warning mechanisms that the African regional and
subregional organizations have established. These systems
are effective means of conflict prevention provided that
they are endowed with the necessary financial means and
that the cooperation of all and rapid response are ensured,
particularly regarding the exchange of information on the
risks of potential conflicts.

Conflict prevention also means ensuring respect for
arms embargoes, mainly with regard to light weapons. A
number of studies and resolutions, including Security
Council resolution 1196 (1998), already exist. It would be
beneficial to implement them and to act vigorously in
case their provisions are violated.

 

Dispatching Security Council missions to Africa
should be considered on a case-by-case basis. The general
use of that practice could undermine the rapid response
expected of the Security Council to help end these conflicts.
The East Timor model cannot be indiscriminately applied
in African situations.

In conclusion, what is important today is to implement
already existing measures by providing the necessary
resources and logistical support.
We welcome the recent appointment of Ambassador
Ibrahim Gambari to assist the Secretary-General, which, as
the Ambassador of Malaysia has rightly pointed out, is a
good initiative that should serve to give a new impetus to
our consideration of African questions.

