Mr. Giirber (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Madam President, I thank you for organizing this
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
John Holmes for his work during the past three and a
half years as head of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and as United Nations
Emergency Relief Coordinator. In a climate
characterized by the ever-diminishing application of
international humanitarian law, OCHA's role as
advocate for the protection of civilians has never been
more necessary.

Last year's tenth anniversary of the Security
Council debate on the protection of civilians was
notable for the adoption of resolution 1894 (2009). The
resolution reiterated the fundamental aspects on which
the action of States must focus to ensure the effective
protection of civilians in situations of armed conflict. It
should be implemented without reserve.

I would like to focus my remarks on the follow-
up to three key aspects of the resolution: the links to
the questions of children in armed conflict and of
gender; the need to focus more attention on the
protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations; and
the question of respect for international law by
non-State actors.

First, concerning children in armed conflicts and
the gender aspects, Switzerland considers the adoption
of resolution 1882 (2009) to have been an important
step forward. It is now necessary to consolidate efforts
to ensure the effectiveness of the new provisions and to
ensure the effective implementation of resolutions
1612 (2005) and 1882 (2009). In this context,
Switzerland would like to recall the importance of
strengthening the operational response, which it
considers to be essential for ensuring the effective
protection and care of children who have fallen victim
to serious violations, as well as for preventing further
violations.
Moreover, we cannot discuss the protection of
civilians without taking into consideration resolution
1325 (2000) on women, peace and security and the
resolutions that have succeeded it. These point to the
need to strengthen the participation of women in
peacebuilding activities, the prevention of gender-
based violence, and the protection of the rights of
women and girls in conflict and post-conflict
situations. The principles reflected in these resolutions
are relevant to the establishment of effective global
strategies to protect civilians. As a general rule, the
Security Council should consider the question of the
protection of civilians in situations of armed conflict
through systematic referral to the resolutions on
women, peace and security and on children in
situations of armed conflict.

Secondly, I would like to draw the Council's
attention to the growing recognition within the United
Nations system of the challenges posed by the
protection of civilians. Of particular note is the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, whose efforts
produced a number of concrete recommendations last
spring for improving the operational implementation of
the mandates for the protection of civilians. I invite the
members of the Council and the group of experts on
the protection of civilians to bear these
recommendations in mind in their work.

Thirdly, Switzerland wishes to underline the
importance of the Security Council's appeals on all
conflict parties to respect the provisions of
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law with regard to civilians in armed conflict. Non-
State armed groups are very present in most of the
conflicts on the Council's agenda. We must therefore
continue to support efforts to ensure that non-State
armed groups commit themselves to better respecting
civilians in conflict zones, as well as to initiatives to
record such cases. In this way, we will be able to
identify new measures to ensure that non-State armed
groups adhere to the existing norms. In this context,
Switzerland welcomes the initiative of Geneva Call to
organize, in collaboration with OCHA, a debate on this
subject at the International Peace Institute in New York
on 20 July.

Last but not least, combating impunity is an
essential part of efforts to improve respect for the
rights and needs of civilian populations. It is essential
that investigations be undertaken into all alleged
violations of international humanitarian law, whatever
the context and whoever the alleged perpetrator. To this
end, Switzerland would like to raise the possibility of

calling upon the International Humanitarian Fact-
Finding Commission, created under the First
Additional Protocol to the Geneva Conventions.

