Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for giving us
the opportunity today to address the Council and to
clarify the Egyptian position at this important stage
in the Syrian crisis. I would also like to express our
appreciation to Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and
thank him for his comprehensive briefing.

Since the early days ofthe crisis, Egypt has reiterated
what everyone has said today - that there is no military
solution to this crisis and a settlement in Syria will be
achieved only through a political solution that would
uphold Syria's sovereignty over its territories within
one country for all Syrians. Such a solution would at
the same time meet the aspirations of the Syrian people
in all its different factions and components and allow
them to live in prosperity, freedom and democracy.

Egypt has not reaffirmed this position simply
by making statements and slogans; rather we have
translated our words into action at every level. In recent
years, we have communicated with all Syrian parties
in order to facilitate a settlement. We have exerted
great efforts to support the voices of the national
opposition and to make them heard and heeded in order
to counterbalance the voices of extremism that enjoy
the funding and support ofmany other parties. This has
given Syrians the opportunity to establish the Cairo
platform, which has become a main foundation for the
Syrian national opposition.

Egypt has also sponsored many truce agreements
in Syria. Moreover, it has positively used its
non-permanent membership of the Security Council
to contribute to guaranteeing continued humanitarian
access to Syrians throughout the country, including
Idlib, over two full years. We made strenuous efforts
to prevent humanitarian support from being affected
by the polarization witnessed in the Security Council
during that time. Those efforts were crowned by the
adoption of resolution 2393 (2017) concerning cross-
border assistance, based on a draft resolution that we
penned in cooperation with Sweden and Japan.

Furthermore, since the beginning of the crisis,
Egypt has consistently affirmed the need to eradicate
terrorism and extremism in Syria. We have warned of
the dangers of being lenient with terrorist organizations
or politicizing the positions of countries in this regard.
We have warned of the dangers of ignoring or turning
a blind eye to parties that have transformed parts of
Syria into fertile ground for terrorism and extremism.
Certain parts of Syria would not have become safe
havens for terrorist groups had it not been for the
questionable failure of the international community to
uphold its duty in this regard, a failure that requires
further explanation.

I am compelled to reiterate the same call that we have
issued time and time again to all countries, especially
the major Powers, to set aside their differences and
search for an adequate format, to be coordinated among
them, in order to eliminate the presence of terrorist
organizations inside Syria. Whether it be the Al-Nusra
Front or others, and regardless of their nationalities,
those terrorist organizations - in Idlib or elsewhere -
must be stopped from spreading beyond Syria to other
countries of the region, including Libya, with which we
share a border of over 1,000 kilometres. We are not here
to simply substitute one safe haven for terrorists with
another in a region that has been blighted by disputes
and conflicts, external interference and terrorist
organizations and militias.

Today, we reaffirm and underscore that the
brotherly people of Syria will be able to heal from the
damage and the wounds suffered by their country over
the past several years only through a comprehensive
and inclusive political solution, provided that it is based
on international consensus embodied in resolution 2254
(2015) and the United Nations-led Geneva process.
Unfortunately, 10 months have passed since the latest
round of negotiations was held within the framework
of the Geneva process. That is unacceptable. The lack
of progress in the negotiations will simply exacerbate
the crisis and hold it hostage to the situation on the
ground, which will lead to the further deterioration of
the situation and an increase in the number of victims
of the Syrian crisis. We must not remain silent in that
regard. I reaffirm our rejection of allowing the political
process to be held hostage to developments on the
ground or of simply succumbing to the delusion of a
military solution.

In that context, I reaffirm the content of the
statement issued on 27 September at the recent
ministerial meeting of the Small Group in New York,
on the margins of the General Assembly meetings. The
statement called for support for a political solution and
the convening of a constitutional committee to that
end as soon as possible. I would like to remind the
Council that work on the constitutional committee is
aimed primarily at facilitating political negotiations
by moving forward the activation of one of the four
negotiating baskets. Unfortunately, we are witnessing
further delays on the political track, which threaten
to create additional complications in the crisis and to
increase the suffering of our brother people of Syria.

Let me underscore the need for Special Envoy
De Mistura to exercise his authority and call for the
convening of the first meeting of the constitutional
committee without delay, as he indicated earlier that
he would, while keeping in mind that the lists for the
committee have been drawn up. We also hope that the
Special Envoy will brief the Security Council and keep
it updated on the progress made, especially following
his visit to Damascus.

In conclusion, I underline that Egypt will remain
committed to supporting the brotherly people of Syria.
Egypt stands ready to provide all forms of support to
our Syrian brothers in the next phase of the process,
including by providing them with constitutional
expertise that could be useful in the coming days.
We also express our readiness to work constructively
to bring together the various views among Syrian
national factions so as to firmly establish the country's
sovereignty and ensure the integrity of Syrian territories
and the safety of the Syrian people.

