Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): Mali is pleased
to see you, Sir, presiding over the Security Council for the
month of February. You may rely on my delegation's full
cooperation. I would like to thank you for having convened
today's meeting, which has provided us with an opportunity
to hear Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Transitional
Administrator in East Timor, explain the situation there to
us with his customary rigour. This is a positive working
method that we should continue to use, as it is a means of
providing useful information to members and non-members
of the Council, thereby contributing to the transparency of
the Council's activity.

I had several questions in mind, but taking the floor at
this stage of the discussion, I find that some of them have
already been dealt with by Mr. Vieira de Mello in his
introductory statement and that others have already been
raised by my colleagues. I shall not, therefore, repeat them,
but confine myself simply to making a few brief
observations.
First of all, I should like to express satisfaction at the
positive evaluation of the relationship between East Timor
and Indonesia. In this context, the report of the Secretary-
General contains very valuable information, especially on
the exchange of visits between the two countries. With
regard to governance and public administration, I should
like to welcome the considerable efforts that have been
made in many fields since the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) was established
to achieve progress towards creating a solid foundation for
East Timor as an independent state.

As for the economic and social prospects for East
Timor, I should like to stress the need for the pledges made
during the donors' meeting in Tokyo to be released as soon
as possible so that UNTAET and its East Timorese partners
can work more effectively and better meet the needs of the
population of East Timor. From this perspective, we believe
that it is important to maintain the excellent links of
cooperation that have been established between the
agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations, the
Bretton Woods institutions, non-govemmental organizations
and donors.

With regard to human rights issues, I should like to
express my delegation's concern about the human rights
violations that are taking place in the country. At the
same time, we are gratified to see that the Indonesian
authorities have taken positive steps and we urge them to
persevere in this area. We believe that those who are
committing such crimes must be identified, pursued and
punished. My delegation will be studying in depth the two
reports relating to this question.

In conclusion, I should like to express our gratitude
to the Secretary-General, his Special Representative,
Mr. Vieira de Mello, and all those who are working to
restore peace and promote reconciliation in East Timor.

