Mr. Christian (Ghana): At the outset, the Ghana
delegation wishes to congratulate Nigeria on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July and for the remarkable skill with
which its delegation has guided the work of the
Council since the beginning of the month. We are
particularly pleased to see you, Your Excellency, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of
Nigeria, personally chair today's meeting. My
delegation also Wishes to commend Mexico for ably
presiding over the Council last month.

Mr. President, the valuable concept paper your
delegation prepared for this debate (S/2010/371, annex) highlights a variety of pertinent issues and
dimensions of the important question of preventive
diplomacy, with particular reference to Africa. My
delegation will attempt to address some of them.

Today, the ebbing - if not the resolution - of
the many violent conflicts that have afflicted the
African continent presents an opportunity for its people
and Governments, acting in partnership with the United
Nations, to pay greater attention to preventive
diplomacy as a strategy to prevent conflicts from
breaking out in the first place and to prevent those
countries emerging from conflicts of crises from
experiencing a relapse or escalation, as the case may
be.

For the people of Africa, the prevention of
conflicts is no longer only a matter of peace and
security, but also a development imperative. This
paradigm shift is underscored in the Constitutive Act of
the African Union (AU) and the protocol on the
establishment of the AU Peace and Security Council,
as well as in legal instruments and regional
organizations such as the revised Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Treaty
and the ECWOAS Protocol relating to the Mechanism
for Conflict Mediation, Management and Resolution.

The international community, including Africa's
development partners and the United Nations, needs to
sustain and intensify engagement with Africa for the
more effective implementation of the various African
initiatives aimed at strengthening preventive diplomacy
and enhancing the prospects for preventing conflicts on
the continent. Those initiatives include the New
Partnership for Africa's Development, the African Peer
Review Mechanism and the AU Framework for Post-
Conflict Reconstruction and Development, as well as
the various African declarations against coups d'e'tat
and other unconstitutional changes in government.

These African initiatives are intended to prevent
conflicts by tackling their root causes. In that way, our
commitment to preventive diplomacy should find
expression in our relentless resolve and action to
promote constitutional democracy underpinned by
good political and economic governance, the
promotion of the rule of law, respect for human rights,
free and fair elections, social justice, including the
equitable distribution of national resources in a
non-discriminatory manner, the deepening of national
integration and harmonious inter-ethnic relations. We
must also commit ourselves to addressing other causes
of conflict, including terrorism, corruption and
transnational organized crimes such as illicit
trafficking in drugs, arms and persons.

The role of women and that of civil society in this
regard should not only be tolerated but encouraged to
ensure that no section of society is left behind in our
national, regional and international efforts to prevent
conflicts.

Equally deserving of the more serious support of
the international community are African initiatives and
practical arrangements such as the African standby
forces arrangement, intended to make Africans ready to
undertake more effective preventive deployment of
personnel or to intervene in conflicts in a timely and
effective manner.

To redeem the promise of the Charter to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which
plagued the peoples of the world in the last century,
there is an urgent need for the international community
to grant priority attention to the prevention of conflicts
around the world, and in Africa in particular, which
features in the overwhelming majority of the situations
on the agenda of this Council.

It is time we saw the value of preventive
diplomacy in terms of the incalculable cost of waiting
until conflicts have erupted and the fact that when they
do they occur, it takes a long time, and sometimes the
sacrifices of a generation of youth, before it is finally
resolved or simply brought under control. Simply put,
we should value preventive diplomacy on the basis of
the cost of doing little or nothing to prevent conflicts.
When conflicts do occur, they destroy investments,
retard social progress and undermine overall
development in any given country or region.

To succeed in placing preventive diplomacy at
the top of our agenda, we must also embrace a shift in
thinking and new concepts such as the responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, crimes
against humanity, ethnic cleansing and the incitement
of such acts. This was recognized by world leaders in
their adoption of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1) and also
finds a place as a treaty principle in article 4 of the AU
Constitutive Act.

In conclusion, I wish to stress that preventive
diplomacy will be taken more seriously if States and
other international actors endeavour to strike an
appropriate balance between the competing values and
principles of sovereignty and solidarity,
non-interference and non-indifference and sovereign
independence and global interdependence.

I wish to recall the proposal made by Ghana in
the Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations calling for ways to strengthen cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in areas of preventive
diplomacy, including peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
under the Charter, which has been generally welcomed
favourably for further consideration in that Committee.

In this context, Ghana supports the presidential
statement adopted today and looks forward to giving
input on how to optimize the use of preventive
diplomacy tools within the United Nations system and
in cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations and other actors.

