Mr. Mendez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): As this is the first time I
am taking the floor in a public meeting of the Security
Council this month, I congratulate Spain on assuming
the presidency of the Council for October. You can rely
on our full support, Sir, in contributing to the successful
discharge of your important responsibilities. I also
congratulate the Russian Federation on its outstanding
presidency of the Security Council in September.

Like previous speakers, we extend our condolences
to the people and Government of Brazil on the
passing of Lieutenant General Jaborandy, the late
Force Commander of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

We thank you, Sir, for convening this debate to
address the situation in the Republic of Haiti. We also
welcome the introduction of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2015/677) by his Special Representative and
the Head of MINUSTAH, Ms. Sandra Honore, to whom

we reiterate our congratulations on her active role in
supporting the authorities of the Haitian Government
on their path to peace, stability, democracy and
development.

Venezuela is committed through deep historical,
political and cultural links to the independent,
political sovereignty and strengthened democratic
institutionality in Haiti. We therefore appreciate the
successful holding of the first round of parliamentary
elections on 9 August. The Haitian people and
authorities demonstrated their democratic commitment
and political maturity once again, as well as their
ability to take control of their own destiny. At this
key moment for peace and political stability in that
brotherly Caribbean country, combating poverty and
social injustice requires everyone to contribute.

We are pleased to recognize the outstanding work
of President Michel Martelly over the past five years
towards achieving these goals. We also acknowledge
the efforts of the United Nations, through MINUSTAH,
which continues to play a critical role in ensuring
political stability in Haiti. We also commend the
countries contributing troops and police to MINUSTAH.

This year is vitally important to the strengthening
of Haitian institutions. The United Nations system and
the international community as a whole should continue
to support the work of the Haitian Government and
the electoral authorities of Haiti through appropriate
technical and logistical support and the provision of
adequate financial resources, in order to encourage the
successful completion of the upcoming elections.

We believe that a positive indicator of political
stability will be the peaceful unfolding of the
elections that will begin the political transition to a
new Government in 2016. It is therefore essential that
all political factors in Haiti work together to promote
greater voter participation of Haitians in the election of
their authorities, strengthening the trust of the citizens
in the institutions of the country, and so that the new
authorities feel that they are fully supported by their
people and the international community.

Concerning the future of MINUSTAH, we
welcome the recommendations in the report of the
Secretary-General with regard to carrying out a
strategic assessment of the situation in Haiti, after the
establishment of a new Government. Such a review
must take into account the level of political stability
and security throughout the country. We must avoid
making hasty decisions that could set back the progress
that has been achieved in the political, economic and
social fields.

For that reason, any decision on the future of
MINUSTAH should be taken in coordination with the
Government and in line with the security and stability
conditions on the ground, taking into account the
response capacity of the of the Haitians in managing
their internal and security affairs. That is why we
consider it a priority to reinforce the capacities and
increase the number of officers of the Haitian National
Police, in accordance with the 2012-2016 development
plan.

We should appraise the proposal made by President
Martelly in his address to the General Assembly (see A/70/PV.22), in which he reiterated what had been
said last March in his letter to the Secretary-General
(S/2015/191, annex) on the need to resume, in a gradual
and organized manner, the MINUSTAH reconfiguration
plan, in line with a consensual timetable agreed upon
with the new Government, starting in 2016. That should
be done without jeopardizing the progress already
made, or the country's internal and external security.

Despite the progress that has been made, there are
still major challenges to be overcome in addressing the
root and structural causes of poverty and exclusion that
the Haitian people have suffered from for decades. We
are troubled by the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation and by the reduction in financing for assistance
programmes, which have limited the ability of the
United Nations system and the Haitian Government to
adequately address the problems affecting the social
and economic development of that country.

We believe the efforts to support the actions of
the health authorities in Haiti should be redoubled, in
order to set up mechanisms for controling cholera. That
epidemic has taken the lives of hundreds of Haitians in
recent years. The creation of the High-level Committee
for the eradication of the epidemic and the campaign
for its prevention and elimination should be reinforced
with the support of the international community.

Our country is committed to maintaining and
strengthening its cooperation with Haiti. In the last
decade, together with the countries of the Bolivarian
Alliance for the Peoples ofOur America, we have created
various initiatives, projects and funds for projects
considered priorities by the Haitian Government. Those
have had a positive impact in that nation. We have
actively contributed in the fields of social development,
humanitarian assistance, construction, rehabilitation,
maintenance of infrastructure, and education, through
the PetroCaribe Energy Cooperation Agreement.

Our country will continue to support this sister
nation in the Caribbean, joining with regional efforts
and with those of the United Nations, with a view to
contributing to overcoming the enormous challenges
of consolidate peace, stability and democracy on the
basis of respect for Haiti's sovereignty and political
independence.

