Mr. Serrano: Mr. President, I thank you for
giving the floor to the European Union. The candidate
countries Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Turkey, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, the European Free Trade
Association country Norway, as well as Armenia, the
Republic of Moldova and Ukraine align themselves
with this statement.

At the outset I join others in greeting the Deputy
Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, Mr. J ose' Luis Guterres,
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Ameerah Haq, and thanking them for
their important briefings on the progress and remaining
challenges in Timor-Leste.

The European Union firmly supports the central
and coordinating role of the United Nations in Timor-
Leste and the overall recommendations of the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/85), which
have incorporated the findings of the recent technical
assessment mission to the country.

The European Union joins the Secretary-General
and other speakers today in commending the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste for their
efforts to achieve long-term stability and ensure
sustainable development in all spheres of public life.

As the Council is aware, the European Union is a
major contributor of assistance to Timor-Leste, with a
focus on peace and security, rule of law and democratic
governance, as well as long-term economic and social
development of the country, including attainment of the
Millennium Development Goals.

The European Union welcomes recent
improvements in the security situation, which has
remained relatively stable over the last months. Good
progress has been made in addressing the situation of
the internally displaced persons (IDPs). The European
Union has contributed to that progress through its
support to the closure of the Metinaro camp and the
reintegration of IDPs.

Yet we share the Secretary-General's assessment
that some fragility remains. Therefore, the European
Union encourages the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to continue to provide the good
offices of the United Nations to foster the promotion of
a political culture that favours the bridging of divides,
cooperation and reconciliation.

The European Union also calls on the
Government of Timor-Leste to make further efforts to
develop the national security policy. Reforms in the
security sector, with strong ownership by the Timorese
Government, are key to consolidating peace and
stability in the country. The European Union
commends the recent process on handing over policing
responsibilities that started in May 2009. It urges the
parties to continue to uphold the agreed criteria and to
complete the certification process so as to allow for a
proper handover.

The European Union welcomes positive
developments in democratic governance, the rule of
law and human rights, notably the successful conduct
of "suco" elections on 9 October, and the setting up of
an Anti-Corruption Commission, including the recent
nomination of its Commissioner, as well as efforts to
adopt enhanced measures to address the needs of
women and the high incidence of gender-based
violence.
The European Union also underlines the
importance of a coordinated approach to the justice
sector, taking into account the recommendations of the
independent comprehensive needs assessment - the
Justice Rapoza Report - and through the
implementation of the Timorese Government's Justice
Sector Strategic Plan.

Accountability for past human rights violations
plays a critical part in building more sustainable peace
and cannot be ignored. The European Union welcomes

10-2486]
the Parliament's resolution of 14 December on the
work of the commissions on truth and reconciliation.
The European Union calls for the expeditious
establishment of an institution charged with
implementing measures recommended by those
commissions that would be credible in the eyes of
victims. The European Union already offers support to
the national Parliament of Timor-Leste on this matter.

A critical challenge will be to ensure the
sustainable social and economic development of the
country. The European Union is a committed long-term
partner for Timor-Leste in this endeavour and, for the
period 2007 to 2013, provides assistance amounting to
about €200 million. The European Union welcomes
efforts to develop a revised national development plan
that should enable international partners to align better
with Timor-Leste's development ambitions. In our
View, priority should be given to long-term rural
development, improving social services, notably health
and education, and reducing unemployment. As
measures in development and security must go hand in
hand, we look forward to an upcoming international
dialogue on peace and State-building in Timor-Leste,
to be conducted under the umbrella of the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development.

A key issue for Timor-Leste is how to manage the
revenue generated by its substantial extractive
industries in a sustainable manner while also
stimulating non-oil-sector growth. The European
Union supports the improved governance in the
petroleum sector resulting from Timor-Leste's strong
engagement in the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative.

The European Union, in view of its own positive
experience with regional integration, supports Timor-
Leste's aspirations to become a member of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
In conclusion, I would like to reconfirm the
European Union's commitment to assist Timor-Leste in
achieving further positive results on the path to
stabilization as a basic requirement for sustainable
development. In view of the important contributions
made by the United Nations, the European Union looks
forward to the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste for a further
12 months, as recommended by the Secretary-General.

