I would like to start by thanking the Prosecutor for her thirty-second report on the situation in Darfur, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). The continued work of the Prosecutor and her team is an important part of the efforts towards ensuring accountability for the most serious crimes committed in Darfur. The International Criminal Court (ICC) also has an important role to play in global efforts to end impunity for those crimes of international concern and the United Kingdom fully supports its efforts to hold perpetrators to account and achieve justice for victims in Darfur. Since the Council was last briefed on the situation in Darfur, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005), we have continued to see the Government of the Sudan make welcome progress in implementing key reforms to ensure that justice and accountability are delivered across the country. Those include the repeal of criminal law provisions that had prevented cooperation with the ICC, as well as legal reforms on women's and children's rights. Here, I would like to draw particular attention to the first visit of the ICC's Chief Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, to Khartoum - a historic moment for the new Sudan. The cooperation between the Court and the Sudanese authorities is a clear demonstration of the importance that the transitional Government has placed on the pursuit of justice for victims of atrocity crimes in Darfur, as is the recent Juba Peace Agreement, which pledges the signatories' preparedness for full and unlimited cooperation with the ICC concerning persons for whom arrest warrants have been issued. While it is right that we recognize and applaud the progress that has been made, the United Kingdom acknowledges that this is one of many steps in the process of ensuring justice and accountability are served and that issues of concern remain. As the Prosecutor details in her report, the security situation in Darfur deteriorated during this period, with spikes in violence resulting in the deaths, injury and further displacements of civilians. The continued persistence of human rights violations and incidents of sexual violence, particularly against children, is concerning and unacceptable. I echo the statement to the Council by my country's Permanent Representative on Tuesday (see S/2020/1183), and I call on the Government of the Sudan to build on the progress already made and intensify its efforts to improve judicial systems and rule-of-law institutions as part of the implementation of the national plan of the Sudan for protecting civilians after the exit of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) (see S/2020/429, annex). Finally, I would like to thank the Prosecutor and her team for their continued dedication and work with regard to the situation in Darfur during this reporting period. The United Kingdom welcomes the work of the Office of the Prosecutor since the surrender of Ali Kushayb to continue its investigative activities to strengthen and reinforce that case. We urge the Government of the Sudan to continue its work with the ICC and swiftly facilitate the Office's request for support for such efforts, including access to Darfur. In conclusion, let me reiterate the United Kingdom's support for the welcome commitments that the Government of the Sudan has made to ensuring justice and accountability for the historic crimes committed not only in Darfur but also across the Sudan. We urge the Sudan to build on that progress as it continues to implement the goals of the transition. We stand ready to assist as part of our wider commitment to supporting the people of the Sudan.
