Lieutenant General Ahmed: I wish to thank
the Security Council and all its members for their
statements and very pertinent questions. I will tackle
some of the broader questions that have been raised
concerning the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the missions in general, and leave some of the areas
to be answered by the respective Force Commanders
on subjects that they are tackling in their particular
missions.

Let me begin by saying that this should, in my
understanding, be a great day for the Force Commanders
present in the Chamber. Most of them are new. That
is why we are holding this meeting this month - it
is usually held in June or July. Today's discussion will
give them enormous confidence because of the
Security Council's understanding of the complexity of
the challenges with which they are confronted and the
Council's commitment to supporting the missions on the
ground. I think that the Force Commanders will leave
the Council reassured, and that they will be prepared to
complete their task with more zeal and commitment, as
expected by the Security Council. It is a great day for
me and for my Force Commanders.

Let me touch broadly on two of the broader
issues under discussion. The two issues deal, from
a military perspective, with the fundamental tasks
of the peacekeepers in the various missions. In my
understanding that there are two tasks at hand when
we talk about military peacekeepers. One involves the
physical protection of the peacekeepers themselves
and of United Nations personnel and assets. The
second task, which is mandated by the Council, is the
protection of civilians. That also falls into the domain
of physical protection, because protection has a broader
connotation.

The problems relating to those two fundamental
tasks are linked to the understanding of the troop-
contributing countries (TCCs). I want to re-emphasize
that point, because my interactions over the past
year with a number of military commanders and the
leadership of the various TCCs, police-contributing
countries and troop/police-contributing countries has
revealed a real gap in understanding. Some TCCs and
their capitals, including political decision-makers,
think that peacekeeping involves the same, decades-
old conventional missions, where peacekeepers are
respected by all actors on the ground and no harm is
done to them. They are there just to absorb the tension
and to report to the Security Council in order for
diplomatic pressure to be applied.

What has been said today has shown that we
understand that such an environment no longer exists,
even in traditional peacekeeping missions. But that
understanding has not been communicated to the home
capitals. IfI may say, and most military commanders in
the respective capitals share this View with me, the fact
is that we find it very difficult to convince our Cabinets
and our political leadership that peacekeepers are
being deployed under very challenging environments.
Peacekeepers find it very hard to obtain the kind of
support from the political leadership that we all seek.
There is therefore one gap.

The second gap is between expectations and
responsibilities. When peacekeepers are deployed, the
host nation, the public and the population have very
high expectations. We can cite a number of missions as
cases in point. There are also the responsibilities that lie
mainly with the Security Council, the Secretariat, the
Force Commanders and the TCCs. The Council and the
Secretariat, and to some extent the Force Commanders,

understand the responsibilities, but they have to get the
job done by the TCCs. Therein lies the problem, the
source of the pressure coming from the capitals pulling
on the peacekeepers.

I will cite another example. Take any country
contingent. In its own country environment, the same
contingent will perform in one way. If that same
contingent is put in a regional environment, it will
perform differently. When the same contingent is
re-hatted into Blue Helmets, it will perform differently
again. That means that there is a gap in understanding.
We need to bridge that gap. I am grateful to the United
States and the Secretary-General that a great initiative
has been taken to move in that direction. The high-level
peacekeeping summit held recently on 26 September
(see S/PV.7272) was a first step in that direction,
where the critical leadership has started to develop an
understanding as to the kind of environment facing
peacekeepers. That will greatly help us to bring that
mindset back to its original position.

The second issue will probably be taken up when we
have regional conferences and have more time to focus
on that. As the Secretary-General has highlighted, the
final segment will probably be about interaction with
the chiefs of the defence forces staffs, where we go into
the essentials of the details and the capability gaps.
That concern will probably be cemented at that time.

If that gap in the understanding is bridged, most of
the job will be done, because the peacekeepers receive
instructions from their capitals as to how to behave,
what to do and as to whether they should be more
robust or not. If we get their support, then the critical
leadership will line up enough resources to train them
and enough material to motivate them and establish the
direction of how they should perform on the ground. I
think that we need to focus more on that.

Let me move on to the next issue, which is training.
That is an absolute must. With the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and with its Office ofMilitary
Affairs in the lead, we are working on 11 manuals that
lay down United Nations standards. I am certain that,
by the end of this year or early next year, we will have
completed all 11 manuals. They will be available to the
TCCs to prepare their contingents in accordance with the
expectations set out in United Nations standards. I want
to thank all TCCs for their support in the preparation
of the manuals, both their financial and their physical
contributions. They have done a wonderful job. We are
now at the final stage of finalizing the manuals.

The third area that I want to touch upon is the
capability gap. As most of our missions are in African
countries, with some African country contingents also
there, the Council is aware that we also have major
contributions from various Asian countries as well

as from African countries. Some of those TCCs lack
capabilities. They can have battalions on the ground,
but the contingents are not equal in their equipment and
the armoured personnel carriers needed to enable what
we want on the ground. There we have been requesting,
and I will again request, that where other countries
have not been contributing actively, they should help
the TCCs to build those capability gaps. With regard
to Mali, the representative of Rwanda asked a similar
question: Why we are not able to deploy peacekeepers
on the ground and why are they not up to the required
mark? There is that same capability gap. The troops are
there on the ground, but they do not have the necessary
equipment, and we are looking for that equipment to be
provided as soon as possible. Hopefully, by the end of
this year, we will have that capability gap bridged to a
great extent. That effort will continue.

I would also like to talk about technology. That is
a very Vital initiative, not only in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo but also in other contingents.
That is helping us considerably. It helps in two ways.
I always say that technology gives us lead time,
whether it provides a kind of surveillance capability,
signal intelligence, or whatever. It gives us lead time to
pre-empt or stop some atrocities from happening, or if
we are unable to do that, to react quickly, compared with
the old means whereby the information used to travel
from one end to the other end, taking days. Now we are
receiving real-time intelligence. That is helping a lot and
should be repeated. That is my recommendation - also
in the other missions, because it is a great enabler under
the environment and we should benefit from it.

Having said that, the All Sources Information
Fusion Unit and the other technologies we are putting
in place are still not being utilized at full capacity, let
me admit that. Introducing a technology is one thing,
but absorbing it within the system is another. We have
to train our Headquarters and staff officers to make
full use of the technologies and derive greater benefit
from them. That is where NATO and the European
countries are helping in a big way. I want to take this
opportunity to thank them. They are helping us to build
that capacity. I am very sure that within a very short
period we will be utilizing those capacities to their full
potential. There are also some other challenges, but I
will leave it to the Force Commanders to respond.

Let me touch upon my final point. The point was
raised about the principles ofpeacekeeping. I think that,
yes, we can look at those. But, to my understanding,
the principles of peacekeeping hold good even in a
challenging environment.

We talk about the use of force and about the
robustness of peacekeeping operations. The use of
force, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, is authorized by the Security Council under
only two conditions. The first is the protection of United
Nations assets and self-protection, and the second is the
protection of civilians. That is where the use of force is
appropriate. When we say "protection of the mandate",
the protection of civilians falls under the mandate: we
are thereby protecting the mandate. For self-protection
and the protection of the mandate, the use of force is
allowed. That principle was valid a decade ago; it is still
valid now. We can still look at that if it needs reviewing.

Finally, I think the strategic review initiative of the
Secretary-General provides a great opportunity to look
into systems and procedures in the United Nations. The
systems relate to rapid deployment and quick response,
flexibility in operations, and the rules of engagement.
All of those issues will enter the discussion, and
hopefully we will find some answers.

With your permission, Madam President, the Force
Commanders will answer the respective questions.

