Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I welcome
the opportunity to discuss this important and often
overlooked aspect of the Council's work: the work of
our subsidiary bodies.

As an elected member for the past two years, New
Zealand has been an active participant in the subsidiary
bodies ofthe Council, including as Chair ofthe Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011). I have been honoured to chair
those sanctions committees. I have been frank about
my experiences as Chair, and I will continue in that
spirit today, focusing on two working methods areas:
the effectiveness of our sanctions committees, and the
preparation of and process for appointing Chairs.

But as a first order of business, I record my thanks
and appreciation to the Committee's Monitoring Team,
the Ombudsperson and the Secretariat staff for their
hard work and support.

On effectiveness, one thing that has struck me
is how little consideration or priority the Council
gives to ensuring that its sanctions committees are
effective. Sanctions are one of the few tools we have,
short of force, to respond to situations that threaten
international peace and security. Yet the way these
committees are established and the procedures under
which they operate mean they struggle to discharge
their mandates effectively.

First, we silo those bodies away from the Council's
work and from each other. It would seem logical that
when there is a country-specific item in our programme
of work regarding a country where there is also a
sanctions regime, we should discuss the two together,
and indeed we did that this morning. It would seem
sensible that where there is a field mission operating
where there is also a sanctions regime, the two would
be reinforcing and we should discuss them as such.
It would also seem reasonable that when the Council
discusses items like the threat from the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, we could have the coordinator
of the Monitoring Team in the room to brief us and
field questions. Yet, making any suggestions for
improvement in that area very often encounters active
resistance, usually from a permanent member.

Secondly, we have allowed the process of those
Committees to get in the way of their outcomes. Process
is important, but it should not obstruct our primary goal
as a Council or the discharge of our obligations under
Chapter VII resolutions. That is most clearly illustrated
by the requirement - I hesitate to call it a rule because
it has no basis in the Charter - that any Committee
decision, no matter how minor, must be taken by
consensus. My colleague Ambassador Ramirez Carrefio
also referred to that point in his remarks.

What we have done, in fact, has been to confer
the right of veto on all Council members, and that
right extends to all decisions - procedural and
substantive - no matter how minor. In my opinion,
that is the single biggest inhibitor to Committee
effectiveness. Around this table, we can share endless
examples of that, but I will highlight just a few that
have arisen in the Committees that I have chaired,
where the consensus rule has prevented what I consider
to be obviously sensible decisions.

First, we have been unable to update the details of
the deceased former Taliban leader on our sanctions list
so that we can stop his considerable assets ending up in
the hands of the Taliban. Today, I am deeply concerned
after learning that the compromise proposal we have
worked on for so many weeks has not been accepted.
We have been unable to take practical steps to put the
Office of the Ombudsperson on a more secure and
independent footing, despite the clear directions in
resolution 2253 (2015), adopted last year. So far, we
have been unable to update our Committee's guidelines
to help serve our effective functioning.

In the course of the past year, we have seen attempts
to extend the no-objection procedure - in other words,
the 15-country veto - to even more minor matters
including, incredibly, my ability as Chair to invite
Committee members to an informal meeting in my own
Mission. I am yet to hear any convincing reason for
the Council's subsidiary bodies operating under a far
more restrictive set of rules than those that apply to the
Council itself under the Charter or under its provisional
rules of procedure. That is particularly true in View
of the reality that it is almost invariably a permanent
member that uses the no-objection procedure to block
a decision.

I am not cavilling because New Zealand is an elected
member, while others are permanent. My objection
is that that procedure allows members - usually
permanent members - to play politics, either on
their own account or on behalf of others, to obstruct
the effective functioning of a regime that all United
Nations Members are required to comply with. That
erodes confidence in the sanctions regime and in the
Council itself.

On how the Council appoints its chairs, I am
pleased that the elected members have worked together
to secure improvements to the process this year. No
longer is that an intra-permanent five decision; it is now
a process facilitated by two Council members, including
an elected member. No longer will elected members be
told which Committee they can chair just a few days
before they start their Council term. They will now
have time to prepare for the significant responsibilities
of being a subsidiary body Chair. That said, there is
still room for further improvement in our view. In
closing, I would like to offer five recommendations to
the Council:

First, I would urge Council members to think about
how we do our business and the small, practical steps
we can take to be more efficient, avoid duplication
and maximize the tools we have. That includes more
coherent scheduling of our Council programmes of
work and requesting that the Secretary-General report
on sanctions in his reports, where applicable.

Secondly, when Chairs do brief in closed
consultations, we should reconsider the use of formulaic
statements approved by the Committee. The substance
and utility of our conversations would improve vastly if
Chairs were instead able to come with a couple ofpoints
for discussion that they had formulated themselves.

Thirdly, we must have a serious conversation about
the decision-making of our Committees, with a view to
reform.

Fourthly, the burden of chairing subsidiary bodies
should be spread to all Council members. We are a
Council not of 5 or 10, but of 15, and chairing should
reflect that.

Fifthly, the elected members must continue to
support each other as Chairs. New Zealand established
an informal group of chairing experts that meets
semi-regularly, and last week we hosted a workshop on
the practicalities of chairing for incoming members. We
hope elected members will keep those alive next year.

None of these recommendations require a new
resolution or presidential statement; they require
courage and behavioural change, and I believe that the
whole Council would be better for it.

