Mr. Elaraby: It is indeed a privilege and a great
honour to be invited, under rule 39, to participate in
this special event. I would like to thank you, Mr.
President, and the Mission of Pakistan for taking the
important and timely initiative of convening this
meeting.

Due to the constraints of time, I am obliged to
limit my modest contribution to some reflections on the
Charter design with regard to the pacific settlement of
disputes, with special emphasis on the legal dimension.
But I would like, at the outset, to make it clear that I
am participating in this special event in my own
personal capacity and not as a judge of the
International Court of Justice. The views I express do
not therefore necessarily reflect the position of the
Court.

As a point of departure, it may be appropriate to
recall that the international community is living
through an era of momentous change and is undergoing
profound and drastic transformations and
modifications. Human values and priorities are
constantly evolving. The new realities that at present
characterize our contemporary international system are
bound to affect the United Nations.

The need to adapt has been considered since the
1950s. As far back as 1959, the late Secretary-General,
Dag Hammarskjold, recognized the need to cope with
the dilemma confronting the United Nations. I have a
quotation - which I am not going to read - just to
underline that he recognized that it is not necessary to
regard the working methods indicated in the Charter as
limitative in purpose: they may be supplemented by
others under the pressure of circumstances. The
working methods set out in the Charter have taken
many turns. I will touch upon some of them.

I now turn to the Security Council and its role.
The Charter assigned the awesome responsibility of
resolving disputes to three principal organs - the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the
International Court of Justice - and it had a role for
the Secretary-General. Each organ had its
responsibilities clarified in the Charter. The Security
Council, as the organ vested with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, enjoys a central position. It has,
under Chapter VII, unparalleled power.

Experience, however, has shown that the highly
advertised Chapter VII measures do not constitute a
panacea for all situations all the time. As Secretary-
General U Thant pertinently remarked in 1969,

"The Chapter VII arrangements had been
designed for situations where aggressors could
be easily identified and where the 'good guys' of
the international world would have no moral
doubts about collectively fighting the 'bad guys'.
But the situation that has prevailed since the
Second World War defied such simplifications."

That was written some 35 years ago. It is perhaps more
valid today.

The Security Council's responsibilities extend to
all walks of life in our contemporary world. The
Council holds the mantle of legitimacy for common
efforts to ensure peace and security. It is the
enforcement agency for the international community.
The Council is vested with the power to adopt binding
decisions. The latter responsibility is exercised through
enforcing the judgements of the International Court of
Justice and ensuring compliance with various
multilateral treaties, whether in the disarmament or
human rights fields.

However, the Security Council's decisions are
reached on the basis of power politics and
accommodation, and not necessarily through the strict
application of legal norms. It is therefore of primordial
importance that the Security Council and the
International Court of Justice, the two principal organs
vested with the power to adopt binding decisions, act in
tandem. The clarification of legal issues will always be
conducive to resolving disputes.

The equation devised by the Charter to ensure the
pacific settlement of disputes, in the final analysis,
hinges on the ability and willingness of every organ to
perform its responsibilities in conformity with the
purposes and principles of the Charter and the
principles ofjustice and international law.

To encourage States to submit disputes to the
Council, the Council's expected reactions have to be
credible, predictable and reliable. The Council's
shortcomings in those areas are a matter of record.
Criticism, rightly or wrongly, has been levelled against
the Council. An analysis of this criticism would reveal
that, first, on the conceptual level, the Council does not
act in a consistent manner as a norm-setting organ on
the basis of a unified - albeit by necessity flexible -
yardstick. This explains the many accusations of
double standards, even in identical situations, which
tend to tarnish the image and prestige of the Council
and erode the essence of its authority.

Secondly, on the institutional level, the Council
sometimes acts as if it enjoys absolute and
unchallengeable power to interpret the rule of law and
the rights and obligations of States and resists
accountability to any other political or judicial organ.

Thirdly, on the operational level, the Council has
been carrying out its responsibilities without the
benefit of clearly defined rules. The scope of the veto
has never been defined. Parties to a dispute are not
enjoined to abstain from participating in decision-
making. Rules of procedure are still, after all these
years, provisional, never having been finalized. And
the practices of the informal consultations have never
been, as far as I know, institutionalized.

In that context, and basing myself on my modest
experience in the Council itself and in several United
Nations committees dealing with this same subject, I
would like to offer the following proposals regarding
the work of the Security Council.

The first step is to provide the Council with
impartial and accurate up-to-date information. That
requires strengthening the early warning information-
gathering capabilities of the Secretariat and its fact-
finding mechanisms in order to engage more actively in
preventive diplomacy. To be effective in this area, the
Council's resolutions have to be credible and
sustainable. Hence, consideration has to be devoted to
ensuring that resolutions authorizing the verification of
facts be beyond the scope of the veto.

The Council should consider the strict and
faithful application of Article 27, paragraph 3, which
provides that "in decisions under Chapter VI a party
to a dispute shall abstain from voting". A State should
not be allowed to be party, judge and jury at the same
time.

The Security Council could also consider strict
application of the provision of Article 36, paragraph 3:
"that legal disputes should, as a general rule, be
referred to the International Court of Justice". That
provision has been used only once, in 1947, in the
Corfu Channel case - one resolution out of almost
1,500 resolutions adopted by the Council since its
inception.

The Council could also consider, whenever
necessary, requesting an advisory opinion from the
International Court of Justice to clarify legal questions.
This has occurred only once, in 1970, with respect to
Namibia.

It is high time for the Council to initiate a process
such as the one it is considering right now, which is
similar to the proposal that appeared in a letter dated
22 December 1997 (A/53/47), which was submitted by
10 non-permanent members of the Security Council.
Due to time constraints, I will not read it.

It is important to point out that the Council is not
a free agent acting according to a private agenda
outside the scope of international law. It is true that the
question of judicial review or accountability of the
Council is sensitive and controversial. The Charter
does not contain a direct reference to be used for
guidance. Yet, in the light of the gravity of the
consequences of some decisions, the matter should be
addressed. As Columbia University Professor Oliver
Lissitzyn said some time ago,

"The long-range purposes and policies laid
down in the Charter must be given some
protection against the possible short-range
aberrations of the political organs. Power without
law is despotism."

At this juncture, before concluding my comments
on the Charter, I would like to say a word about
Security Council enlargement. The matter has been
under consideration throughout the last decade. It has
various aspects; I will refer to only two.

Mathematically, an increase of the non-permanent
category is long overdue. It must be considered.
However, politically, the topic of permanent
membership is fraught with unforeseen consequences
and unanswered questions. Let me touch on two of
these.

First, which criteria should be followed in
selecting permanent members? Size, population,
military might, nuclear capabilities, or wealth?
Secondly, how can the United Nations membership be
required to sign off on a plan to increase the number of
permanent members while the rights and obligations of
the existing five are not defined and clarified?

The matter must be addressed. Any enlargement
of the permanent category is, in fact, a restructuring of
the fabric and nature of international relations as a
whole.

I will now turn briefly to the International Court
of Justice. As the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations, it bears a heavy responsibility for legality in
the whole world. It is considered the guardian of
legality. The first point to be made is that, at the
present stage of the evolution of the contemporary
international legal system, the role of international
tribunals in general, and notably that of the Court, is
dependent on the consent of States. The jurisdiction of
the Court is anchored in the acceptance of States.

The consensual nature ofjurisdiction no doubt is
completely different in nature and scope than the role
of courts of law in municipal systems, in which an
individual can take another to court without the consent
of the other party. Under the international system, a
State must accept the jurisdiction of the Court. The
Court has been handling many cases, but its
jurisdiction is, unfortunately, accepted by only 63
States. Many other States, however, have entered into
compromissory clauses in multilateral treaties, which
allow a State to refer a dispute to the Court on the basis
of the prior acceptance of its jurisdiction. To date the
court has delivered 76 judgements and rendered 24
Advisory Opinions. Only in a handful of cases were
there any problems, and they were resolved at the end.

It would therefore indeed be desirable to increase
the acceptance by States of the compulsory jurisdiction
of the Court.

The Agenda for Peace contained three important
proposals aimed at enhancing the role of the
International. Court: first, that all States should accept
the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court; secondly,
that, when submission of a dispute to the full Court is
not practical, the Chambers could be used; and thirdly,
that authority should be conferred on the Secretary-
General to request Advisory Opinions from the
International Court of Justice.

The Assembly established a Working Group of
the whole to work towards their implementation; I
presided over for that exercise for four years.
Regrettably, in the end, all that could be agreed upon,
in resolution 47/120 B, was to keep under examination
all the recommendations of the Secretary-General
concerning the International Court of Justice.

I have some comments on the Office of the
Secretary-General that are extremely important, but I
will conclude, due to time constraints, by saying that
the real challenge which the Council has to meet is
how to adapt a 1945 design to the realities of the
twenty-first century. The world faces a long road
ahead, with many challenges which necessitate
constant review and modification of practices and
priorities, as well as flexible and innovative responses
to new situations. Regrettably, our contemporary world
is a far cry from being relaxed or balanced. States,
therefore, have to be satisfied with a slow process of
evolution, and not revolution.

The purpose of this special event is to enhance
the role of the Security Council in the pacific
settlement of disputes. This is a tall order. It is to be
hoped that the outcome will trigger a genuine process
of evolution worthy of the magnitude of the challenges
facing the international community.

