Mr. Hoscheit (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU). The candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania, Turkey and Croatia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and
Montenegro, Albania and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia; and the European Free Trade
Association (EFTA) countries, Iceland and Norway,
members of the European Economic Area, align
themselves with this statement.

The European Union thanks you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important debate. We thank the
Secretary-General for his progress report on ways to
combat subregional and cross-border problems in West
Africa (S/2005/86), and we commend Mr. Ahmedou
Ould-Abdallah, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his efforts in that context. The
report describes the steps taken or envisaged to
develop an integrated regional approach to conflict
prevention in West Africa - the only viable approach,
in our view.

The European Union, which attaches great
importance to its partnership with Africa and its
people, is resolved to continuously strengthen our ties
with the African Union and with subregional
organizations. We believe that the promotion of lasting
peace - without which there can be no sustainable
socio-economic development - is one of the major
challenges facing the international community.

The European Union deplores the fact that West
Africa is still racked by armed conflict, which
jeopardizes the long-term development of the whole
region, not to speak of the unspeakable suffering that
afflicts the population.

The European Union is following with great
concern the recent developments in the political
situation in Togo. We call for full respect for civil
liberties and demand an immediate return to
constitutional and legal order to open the way for free
and transparent presidential elections. In that context,
we fully support the actions by the African Union and
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) with a view to re-establishing
constitutional order and the democratic process.

The prospects for the future in Cote d'Ivoire are
also a source of concern for the European Union. Once
again, we call on the parties to make progress towards
the full implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis and
Acra III agreements.

I should like to stress three aspects that are
particularly important to us in the context of
developing an integrated and coordinated approach to
conflict prevention in West Africa.

First, we need to unite our efforts to address post-
conflict situations. The report states clearly that the
various United Nations missions need to collaborate
and that a constructive partnership must be established
among the United Nations system, development
partners and ECOWAS. In that connection, the
European Union welcomes the fact that the
representatives of the five United Nations
peacekeeping and political missions in West Africa are
meeting periodically.

Together with ECOWAS and the African Union,
the United Nations and the European Union have
essential roles to play in West Africa in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding, and they must establish
a more effective partnership. The European Union
notes with satisfaction that the establishment of truly
collaborative mechanisms to address cross-border
problems has begun, with respect for the principle of
African ownership. We look forward with interest to
the plan of action to be submitted in June 2005 by the
joint working group of the European Union, ECOWAS
and the United Nations Office for West Africa
(UNOWA). Another positive example is the collective
effort to be undertaken this year to facilitate the cross-
border movement of persons and goods. Our common
goal should now be to enhance the functioning of our
dialogue and to unite the various initiatives, including
through the efforts of the special representative of the
European Union presidency to the Mano River Union
countries.

Secondly, we need to strengthen regional
capacity-building. In November 2004, the European
Union adopted an action plan on supporting peace and
security in Africa, which deals primarily with capacity-
building. The action plan identifies practical ways in
which to meaningfully assist African organizations in
building autonomous conflict prevention and
management capacities, supplementing the initiatives
undertaken in the context of the Cotonou Agreement
and the Africa Peace Facility. The European Union
invites those organizations to put forth proposals for
long-term capacity-building. A comprehensive €10-
million programme to enhance conflict prevention and
management capacities is now being developed by
ECOWAS, with the participation of the United Nations.

ECOWAS, which has already proved itself in the
area of conflict prevention and management, has
become a stabilizing force in the region. The challenge
for ECOWAS remains to integrate short-term crisis
management activities into a longer-term prevention
strategy. The European Union will intensify its
political dialogue with ECOWAS and its member
States, particularly with regard to policies designed to
address the structural root causes of conflict with a
View to a lasting solution and the role of regional
economic integration in promoting peace and security.

Thirdly, we need to urgently address a number of
specific cross-border issues. In his report, the
Secretary-General assesses efforts to deal with a
number of major cross-border problems. Although
some progress has been made, much remains to be
done, and more collaboration and better-targeted
efforts are needed in many areas.

Two days ago, the Council considered, under
your presidency, Sir, the extremely important issue of
children affected by armed conflict (see S/PV.5129).

The proliferation of small arms remains a
significant factor of instability and conflict in the
region. Resolute and coordinated action is needed.
During the open debate on small arms that was held
last week (see S/PV.5127), the European Union had the
opportunity to express its willingness to help put an
end to the scourge of the uncontrolled accumulation of
small arms. While the European Union welcomes the
recent three-year renewal of the moratorium on the
importation, exportation and manufacture of small
arms in West Africa, we also encourage efforts in the
framework of the ECOWAS Small Arms Control
Programme to transform the moratorium into a legally
binding instrument.

In addition, the European Union supports the
Secretary-General's recommendation that the Security
Council consider giving peacekeeping missions the
authority and the resources needed to monitor and
enforce arms embargoes, as well as the idea of marking
and tracing small arms used in peacekeeping missions.
We should consider publishing a "naming and
shaming" list of individuals and entities violating arms
embargoes and the ECOWAS moratorium, and
bringing before the International Criminal Court those
responsible for criminal activities related to the
trafficking of persons and of natural resources.

With regard to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR), we welcome the ongoing efforts
of the various United Nations presences in West Africa
to find ways in which to harmonize programmes and to
eliminate inconsistencies with a view to reducing the
cross-border movement of combatants and weapons.
The European Union also believes that the
reintegration phase is of key importance for the success
of DDR programmes. We call for increased
international assistance - including financial
assistance - for such activities in countries emerging
from conflict, such as Liberia and Sierra Leone.
Moreover, particular attention should be devoted to
programmes for child soldiers and women combatants
and to job creation.

The importance of security sector reform as a
means to improve national governance and enhance
security through institutional change is clear at both
the national and regional levels. ECOWAS projects in
the area of security sector reform can be financed
through the Africa Peace Facility created by the
European Union, and we encourage the West African
region to undertake initiatives in that area.
Accordingly, the European Union welcomes UNOWA's
intention to establish regionally integrated programmes
by the end of 2005.

The European Union's support for peace and
security in West Africa is part of a coherent European
Union policy towards Africa. The European Union has
earmarked €235 million for West Africa under the
current regional indicative programme, mainly in the
sectors of regional economic integration and transport.
The European Union's integrated long-term strategy
for West Africa seeks to establish lasting peace and
sustainable development, particularly through
economic integration, and to create a customs union
among ECOWAS countries. It includes constant
attention to the vulnerable position of women and
children and the increased risk of HIV/AIDS in armed
conflict.

While the primary responsibility for progress in
West Africa rests with its leaders and communities, let
me conclude by reaffirming again that the work of the
European Union will be based on the principle of
unreserved cooperation and coordination with all
actors in the field, including civil society
organizations.

