Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Mr. President, you
have asked us to speak on behalf of the African Group.
But due to the late notification, it has not been possible
for us to coordinate the statement that I am going to
make. Principally, I will be making a statement in my
national capacity, although I am sure that many of the
views that I express are shared by my African
colleagues.

We are very pleased that the Council is holding a
public meeting devoted to Africa after quite some time.
It is taking place in this format, a wrap-up session, at a
time when two important Security Council missions are
going to be travelling to Africa. We wish that we had
had a chance to hold such a meeting well ahead of time
so that some of the suggestions that we could have
made could have been taken on board in the terms of
reference.

We very much welcome the decision of the
Security Council to undertake these missions. We think
that they are extremely useful; they are always very
beneficial. They are helpful to the Council members
themselves because they give members an opportunity
to meet with the political and military leaders, as Sir
Jeremy Greenstock has said, as well as to meet with
civil society, both individuals and the non-
governmental organizations. More importantly, it is an
opportunity to impress upon the political leadership
and the people in those countries the message of the
Security Council.

But we believe that it is also important that the
missions come back to New York with some message
that the people of those countries have for the Security
Council and that action is taken on those requests from
the people, who are the most concerned in the matter.

Sir Jeremy Greenstock mentioned that the
Security Council is going to have its fourth mission to
the Great Lakes. Four missions have taken place in
four years. We believe that each mission should build
upon the previous one and should make progress on the
basis on what has taken place before. Unfortunately,
we have not seen that. We have not seen that from the
point of view of the Security Council. We believe that
any mission organized in the future should try to see
what has happened in the past - the failings of past
missions and how to improve upon them.

For example, we believe that the mission to the
Great Lakes -Burundi, for example - should have
something new to it. In Burundi, there has been a
peaceful transition. Peace has now more or less been
established. We think that that country now deserves to
receive greater attention from the Economic and Social
Council. Perhaps this would have been a great
opportunity for a joint mission between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council. That
would have sent the signal that, yes, we have now
passed the conflict stage; we are in the post-conflict
stage, and it is now time for post-conflict peace-
building and development. It would also have sent the
message that the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council are working together to try to
establish firmly the grounds for peace. We therefore
believe that the terms of reference should be prepared
accordingly.

We also believe that in preparing for such
missions, especially to Africa, it is extremely important
that there be proper coordination and consultation with
the African Union. We have felt that this is lacking. We
have felt that we can very often be at cross-purposes
with the African Union. The African Union is also
concerned about the conflicts in Africa, and it has been
involved in some of the peacekeeping efforts there. It is
important that the Council should try to consult and to
coordinate its activities with what the African Union is
doing or has been doing. We remember that last year,
when the Security Council set up the Ad Hoc Working
Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa,
we did a lot of work to try to bring about better
coordination between the Security Council and the
African Union. It was even proposed that there could
be joint missions between the Security Council and
officials of the African Union. Of course, that is a long
shot, and something that is not going to happen
tomorrow. But I think we should start to consider these
issues; we should at least start with some better
coordination.

We also believe that the missions to both the
Great Lakes and Western Africa should consider the
desirability of setting up a comprehensive
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme for the whole of the continent. Generally
speaking, we believe that quite a bit of progress has
been achieved in terms of peace in the continent, but
such peace cannot be sustained until, and unless, we
address the problem of DDR. That was even
recognized last year at the level of the G-8, when in
their communique the ministers agreed that there could
not be sustainable peace unless there were proper
DDR. Such a DDR programme must be comprehensive
and must enable former combatants to be reintegrated
into normal day-to-day life and economic activities.
Otherwise, those people will soon be employed
elsewhere to continue the work that they are
accustomed to doing.

We therefore think that the mission, while in the
field and upon its return, should try to look into what
more should be done in order that we may make
progress in the area of DDR. We recall that many DDR
camps have been built - for example, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - to supposedly
receive combatants who were going to disarm
themselves. However, very few of them have gone to
those camps. In fact, no more than 200 to 300 people
have actually gone. Last year when the Security
Council visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
there was a big show of weapons being destroyed after
having been collected through the DDR programme. I
do not think that was enough to really address the
problem of DDR. The Council will need to address the
problem of how we should move from this attitude of
voluntary disarmament to one with more incentives
given, if not a kind of aggressive disarmament of
combatants. Unless we do that, we feel that we will not
be able to achieve long-term, sustainable peace.
With regard to the mission to West Africa, the
African Group regrets that it was abruptly postponed
for other important matters. We have of course been
told that Africa is still important, but that other urgent
matters had arisen that had to take priority over the
mission. We believe that urgency and importance are
matters of perception. We believe that what is
important to someone also becomes urgent.

We had been concerned that the mission's travel
to Guinea-Bissau was in question. I am very pleased
with the reassurances given by Sir Jeremy Greenstock
that Guinea-Bissau is going to be included in the trip to
West Africa. We also feel that it is important that the
full mission team be in Guinea-Bissau. Anything less
than that would send a very wrong signal. We believe
that Guinea-Bissau is at a crossroads. We have said in
the past that Guinea-Bissau is at what we would call
the post-conflict stage, but it is also at the pre-conflict
stage. In the paper circulated by the President, the
President wrote about the role of the Security Council
in trying to engage in activities geared towards the
prevention of conflict. This is precisely one situation in
which the Council can be very effective in trying to
prevent the possibility of a full-fledged conflict in a
country.

We are also pleased to note that some members of
the Economic and Social Council will also be
travelling to Guinea-Bissau around the same time as
the Security Council mission. As we have said, we feel
that there should be more joint missions to countries
like Guinea-Bissau and Burundi.

In conclusion, I would like to make two brief
comments regarding the terms of reference that have
been circulated. We agree fully with the terms of
reference that have been circulated with regard to
Burundi. We think that the Security Council should
impress upon that country the need for security and
military reform. This is an important aspect of peace
there.

With regard to Liberia, we believe that, in
addition to what has been indicated in the terms of
reference, the Security Council should try to find ways
to have some kind of constructive engagement with the
authorities in that country. It is important that, in the
run-up to elections, the Security Council and the
international community accompany the country and its
people towards free and fair elections. Apart from what
has been included in the terms of reference, we feel
that there is very much a need for engagement. That
would also be very much in line with what the African
Union has been recommending.

I would like to conclude by thanking you once
again, Mr. President, for the opportunity given to us to
revisit the problems of Africa. We would like to convey
our best wishes to the two leaders and to all the
members of the Security Council who will undertake
the mission. We wish them every success.

