Mr. Angelo (spoke in French): I take the floor to
clarify two or three points, but before I do I wish to
show the Council a number of photographs.

The first photograph is of Birao, the capital of
Vakaga, at least 60 per cent of which was destroyed by
the two attacks in June. Until late May, the town was
an important commercial centre; life had started up
there again. Since then, the town has been almost
completely abandoned; it is a ghost town. The
population has fled to the bush and, despite our
deployment, they are not confident enough to return.

The second photograph is an example of a
Detachement integre de securite (DIS) police station in
our area of operations in eastern Chad. The men and
women in blue are from contingents of the
Gendarmerie and the Chadian National Police that we
have trained as DIS officers and deployed on the
ground. These photographs are women of the DIS.

This photograph is of the Iriba prison in eastern
Chad. I did not want to show conditions inside because
I do not wish to shock the Council. I am just showing
the outside walls, and leaving the rest to the
imagination. We will revisit the subject of prisons
tomorrow at a meeting on our programme activities in
eastern Chad.

This is photograph shows a conflict resolution
meeting on among the communities. I will speak of
that shortly, but this is to show a specific example of
people of different ethnic groups meeting together and
spending an entire day - in this case - discussing
ways to resolve their conflicts.

(spoke in English)

I would now like to say two or three things. First,
I thank members for the kind words that have been said
by all of the delegations concerning the work of the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad. We have staff throughout the
country, in some cases in extremely difficult
conditions. Very often we receive complaints - from,
for instance, the Detachement inte'gre de securite -
that their living conditions are not good at all. That is
tme, but then I take them to see the living conditions of
our own staff, and in many cases those conditions are
not better. I therefore thank Council members for their
kind words. We can pledge that we will maintain our
engagement and commitment, and at the same time we
will try to improve the working and living conditions
not only of the staff, but of the Detachement integre de
securite and their elements.

When it comes to conflict resolution at the
community level, I would like to mention two things. I
think it is a very important activity because very often
these conflicts are a first source of combatants for the
rebellions if they are not addressed. Very often, some
of those combatants join the rebellions because there
have been a number of conflicts between different
groups at the community level. Those conflicts have
not been properly addressed or properly mediated, and
one of the sides decides to take the road to the desert
and join one of the rebellions.

The second thing to mention that is important in
the context of community dialogue and community
conflict resolution is that, with conflict resolution, we
create conditions for the return of the displaced, and
that is very important as well.

As far as the Dakar process is concerned, we
believe that the conditions are there for the border
monitoring mechanism to be put in place. We need a
meeting as soon as possible of all of the members of
the Dakar group, and preferably that meeting should
take place in Khartoum. The most recent meeting took
place in N'Djamena. As a confidence-building
measure, the next meeting should take place in
Khartoum, and during that meeting Chad, the Sudan
and all of the other members of the Dakar process
should agree on the immediate implementation of the
border monitoring mechanism.
As I said, I believe the conditions are there. The
point is to make sure that, on both sides of the border, a
number of confidence-building measures are taken
prior to the next meeting of the Dakar process. I am
very much counting on the different countries that are
part of the process to be able to create those
confidence-building measures and hold that meeting.

With respect to DIS, there was a reference to
discipline. I have to say that we and the Government of
Chad have taken questions of discipline very seriously.
All of those who have misbehaved have now been
expelled from the force. I must also note that the
percentage of cases of serious indiscipline stands at
around 3 per cent. That is well within accepted
standards, because very often these types of forces
have an indiscipline rate of about 5 per cent. We have
discipline problems, but not only have we been able to
deal with them, but in percentage terms they are not
outside the usual range for these types of forces.

The DIS approach is an extremely innovative one
that combines international security mechanisms with
strengthened national security mechanisms. We must
make sure that the DIS is a successful experience. We
need resources and we also need to be sure that
everyone understands that one of the key criteria of our
successful presence in Chad is the successful
implementation of the DIS concept.

Like all Council members, we, too, are concerned
about the deployment delays. We urge all those who
have pledged to contribute to the force to make those
contributions as soon as possible. We also urge those
already there to envisage an extension of their presence
if they are planning to leave within the near future. We
truly need the presence of everyone. I can assure the
Council that, if we are fully deployed, we will make a
difference in eastern Chad. The Council can note my
words as I speak, and we can talk about that at one of
the Council's future meetings. We will make a
difference; we only need to make sure that we are fully
deployed there. We also need, of course, the military
enablers.
We are certainly very concerned by the situation
in the north-eastern Central African Republic. Since
early May, there has been a very serious deterioration
of the situation. There has been a proliferation of
ethnic-based militias and weapons. Recently, we have
seen also some of the militias crossing the border into
Darfur and looking for support from their kith and kin
there in their fight against other groups. We are very
concerned about that.

We are trying to make sure that the resources that
we have available in Birao are maximized. We are not
asking for additional resources. We are trying to make
full use of the limited resources that we have in the
area, and we are creating the security conditions for the
political work that the Government of the Central
African Republic is supposed to do in the area. We are
providing not only the security environment that it
needs to do the mediation and the political work, but
also some logistical support, taking into consideration
the extremely limited means of the Government in
Bangui.

Allow me to say a final word on benchmarks and
the workplan. The United Kingdom delegation asked
for some concrete figures and analysis of the question
of recruitment in the camps. We will certainly do that
in the next report. That is a very serious matter. We are
looking at different approaches and strategies to deal
with it. It is ongoing, and we will come back to the
Council with not only an analysis, but also with
concrete measures that we intend to implement, or
might already be implementing at that stage, depending
very much on our capacity on the ground, particularly
in terms of the force strength.

