Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): I should
like first of all to thank you, Mr. President, for having
taken the initiative to convene this important public
meeting of the Security Council to consider the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I
should also like to welcome the participation in this
meeting of Major General Joseph Kabila, President of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to whom I
renew the heartfelt condolences of the people and the
Government of Mali for the tragic death of President
Laurent-Desire Kabila. I should also like to thank
President Kabila for the important statement that he
made. Finally, I should like to welcome the Secretary-
General to this meeting and thank him for the message
of hope that he has just conveyed to us regarding the
situation in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

With regard to that situation, I should like, in the
context of today's debate, to make several points.

First, Mali supports the search for a peaceful
settlement to the conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. In this regard, my delegation welcomes the
renewed commitment of President Joseph Kabila to
work for a solution that gives priority to dialogue and
reconciliation. The continuation of the inter-Congolese
dialogue and the Libreville process will, in the view of
my delegation, be an effective means of achieving
national reconciliation and arriving at a stable external
environment. It is a fact that peace processes and
reconciliation go hand in hand. That is why we support
the appeal made to all political players, including civil
society, and to neighbouring countries aimed at
achieving a peaceful settlement ofthe conflict.

Secondly, we believe that it is of fundamental
importance to create the conditions for a lasting peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on the basis
ofthe full implementation of the Lusaka Agreement. In
this context, we believe the relaunching of the Lusaka
process to be a vital necessity. We encourage the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
consider the ways and means of relaunching the
process in order to achieve an effective ceasefire and to
contribute to the restoration of peace in the Great
Lakes region.

In the same context, we welcome the efforts made
by the Chairman-in-Office of the Organization of
African Unity and by President Frederick Chiluba, who
is presiding over the regional initiative, and we
encourage them to persevere in their efforts.

Thirdly, my delegation believes that the rapid
implementation of the second stage of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) is essential for
ensuring that the conflict in that country is resolved. In
this connection, we support the appeal made to the
signatories of the Lusaka Agreement to reaffirm their
commitment to the implementation of that Agreement
and comply with its provisions, particularly those
relating to the implementation of the plan and the
subplans for the redeployment of forces in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the deployment
of MONUC. It is also important that Security Council
resolution 1332 (2000) of December 2000 be fully
implemented.

That is why we also look forward to the next
report of the Secretary-General on the new concept of
operations of MONUC. We also look forward to
contributing usefully to the Security Council's meeting
with the members of the Political Committee
established under the Lusaka Agreement, scheduled to
take place on 21 and 22 February.

In conclusion, I wish to stress that, given the
gravity of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and all that is at stake, the international
community must act speedily and practically. The
Security Council in particular must shoulder all its
responsibilities and firmly uphold the peace process in
the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo. Mali will do its
full share in that necessary and urgent process.

