I wish to thank Germany and the Dominican Republic for convening today's important meeting and for making it as open and inclusive as possible under the current circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I also thank the Secretary-General for his thoughtful remarks and for his reports on women and peace and security, including his most recent report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2020/487), as well as the briefers for sharing their perspectives and bringing the voices of women to us from across the globe. Hungary aligns itself with the statement submitted by the representative of the European Union (annex 25) and with the message conveyed on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 20). We wish to add some remarks in our national capacity. This year, as we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the resolution 1325 (2000), Hungary reaffirms its commitment to the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. We strongly believe that sexual violence in conflict is an impediment to international peace and security, a serious violation of human rights and an attack on women's empowerment. In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have an even greater responsibility than ever to take all measures to prevent these crimes, support survivors, ensure accountability for perpetrators and put an end to the shame and stigma related to sexual violence. We are appalled by the ongoing systematic and widespread conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence that is often used as a tactic of war and terrorism and can constitute war crimes, crimes against humanity and even genocide. Accountability and justice have been painfully lagging behind and must be provided accordingly, irrespective of the affiliation of the perpetrator. We also call for the international community to better uphold the rights and address the needs of women and girls belonging to religious and ethnic minorities persecuted and displaced by conflict or terrorism. Tragically, the pandemic has not swept away existing challenges, conflicts and inequalities; on the contrary, it has amplified and exacerbated them. Now more than ever, we need to invest in, involve and ignite action for girls and women in order to accelerate progress on the women and peace and security agenda. Survivors of conflict-related sexual violence require not only immediate medical care, but also shelter, comprehensive psychosocial support, legal services and long-term assistance, including legal and socioeconomic support to survivors and their children. All actions should be human rights-based and gender-responsive. In order to successfully implement the women and peace and security agenda, action needs to be taken already in peacetime, on the one hand, by addressing the root causes of conflicts and preventing militarization and arms proliferation, and, on the other hand, protecting and promoting the human rights of all women and girls and eliminating all forms of violence and harmful practices against them. A long- term victory over this scourge is not possible without ensuring gender equality and women's empowerment, including through equal recognition before the law, access to economic and financial resources and full participation of women in all aspects of life. More than ever, we see the power of girls and women shining through the insecurity caused by the COVID-19 pandemic worldwide. More than ever, all around the globe, we see women stepping up, using creative means and new technologies to gather and disseminate information, inspire and guide action and create a narrative of common responsibility. More than ever, women are leading on interconnectedness, flexibility and readiness to take action. We need to involve women in decision-making processes and give them a leadership role, including in institutionalized mechanisms. Participation is all the more important when a nation is fighting for its future and for peace. Revolutions and ceasefires can be washed away; only inclusive peace can be sustainable. Women need to participate meaningfully and inclusively in mediation, peace processes and wider decision-making structures and in implementing ceasefires and peace agreements. Through its resolutions, the Security Council should give a clear mandate to ensuring the inclusion of women. Women do have a voice; we just need to give them the space and attention they need to raise it. We must support women-led and women-focused organizations by building capacity and agency and by ensuring safe and ample civic space, including for women peacebuilders and human rights defenders, who are often at the forefront of peace efforts. What this health crisis teaches us is that it is not always possible to predict breakdowns, or even prevent them. Success therefore lies in building robustness and resilience against them. More than ever, it is time to join together and take action to protect women and put an end to conflict-related sexual violence, achieve gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls, and foster their participation in all aspects of life. Overall, there is a pressing need for change in the culture of impunity and mentality and for a strong political will to achieve it. The world is looking to the Security Council to lead on these matters.
