Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): First of all I want to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and to thank you for convening this
open debate on the situation in Somalia. I also thank
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Ambassador Mahiga, for their statements.

Italy fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
would like to add few remarks in its national capacity.

Today's open debate is taking place just a few days
after the London conference on Somalia, which was
attended by a large representation of Somali leaders
and by the major stakeholders on the Somali issue. We
are focusing international attention once again on a dire
situation that affects millions of Somalis and threatens
peace and stability in the Horn of Africa and worldwide.
The announced partnership between Al-Shabaab and
Al-Qaida was also a troubling development affecting
us all and requiring urgent action.

Italy will continue to play an advocacy role for
the Somali cause and to support the Somali peace
process through concrete initiatives that fully respect
Somali ownership and sovereignty. We will host the
next meeting of the International Contact Group on
Somalia in Rome and ensure an Italian diplomatic
presence in Mogadishu. In the field of security, Italy
continues to provide funds for the payment of the
salaries of over 3,000 Somali security personnel.

Indeed, we believe that the Somalis have the
primary responsibility for achieving peace and security
in their country. Concrete opportunities exist for the
Somalis to reconstruct a viable State at peace with its
neighbours. Seizing them requires a strong political will
and commitment on the part of the central Government
and of regional entities that are committed to achieving
successful reconciliation. Italy deems it important to
include in the process those Somali groups that clearly
renounce violence and terrorism and allow unhindered
humanitarian access. The Djibouti peace process
provides a framework that is open to all potential
Somali stakeholders and continues to be our reference.
5
The current status quo is not an option, and
neither are further extensions of the transition. The
road map and the Garowe Principles are positive steps
in the peace process. Their full and timely
implementation will in due course grant Somalia a
new, inclusive and stable governance. To maximize
their positive effects and improve the living conditions
of the local population, the political strategy should go
hand in hand with the military and civilian initiatives.

We welcome the adoption of resolution 2036
(2012), which expands mandate of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and raises the troop
ceiling in order to counter Al-Shabaab and other armed
opposition groups and establish conditions for effective
and legitimate governance across Somalia. We
encourage partners, especially new donors, to contribute
to funding for AMISOM. We underline once again the
importance of strengthening the Somali security forces,
which is vital to ensuring Somalia's long-term security
and stability. We therefore invite the international
community to provide support to the Somali authorities
in that critical sector as well.

Security, stability and effective governance will
foster Somali development and thereby attack the root
causes of terrorism and the scourge of piracy off the
coast of Somalia. As we have stated in the past, Italy
believes that terrorism and piracy cannot be solved by
military means alone. They require a comprehensive
and coordinated strategy that combines deterrence,
prosecution and the rule of law, capacity-building and
development.

Piracy off the coast of Somalia and in the wider
Indian Ocean affects the interests both of the people of
Somalia and of the international community. We
therefore expect a renewed commitment from the Somali
authorities. It should complement the international
counter-piracy efforts, including the European Union's
Operation Atalanta and NATO's Operation Ocean
Shield, and the work of the Contact Group on Piracy
off the Coast of Somalia. My country, which is a victim
of the phenomenon, is deeply committed to these efforts.
Hence we encourage our partners, traditional and new,
to continue to support all the activities and various
initiatives aimed at eradicating terrorism and piracy.

Only a collective, coordinated and continuous
effort can produce effective results and help our Somali
friends tackle the challenging tasks ahead. We therefore
encourage better coordination among the various
6

stakeholders. We expect the United Nations and the
African Union to play a more decisive leadership role
in promoting peace in Somalia in order to ensure
greater consistency between the political process and
the ongoing military operations. The enhancement of
the coherence, quality and impact of international
efforts in reconstructing a viable sovereignty depend
on their cooperation. We welcome the recent relocation
of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia to
Mogadishu as an important step in that direction. We
equally support a restructuring of the International
Contact Group on Somalia.

Somalia's instability represents a threat to its
people, its region and the entire world, since it fosters a
multitude of problems. It needs a full sense of
responsibility on the part of Somali institutions and a
stronger response from the international community,
together with our ability to act in a united manner.

