Mr. Tiirk: The Security Council has considered
this item many times over the past seven years, most
recently on 7 April 2005. Today I am pleased to report,
on behalf of the Secretary-General, that the mandate of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Bougainville
(UNOMB), Papua New Guinea, has been fully
implemented. The parties have now made a critical -
perhaps the most significant - step in the
implementation of the Bougainville Peace Agreement.
All of us at the United Nations should feel proud that
we have been able to help. In my briefing today, I will
summarize the main developments that have taken
place since 7 April 2005 and will highlight the
challenges facing the Autonomous Bougainville
Government, which was inaugurated on 15 June 2005.

Let me begin with the subject of weapons
disposal. By its letter of 19 May, UNOMB informed
the parties to the Bougainville Peace Agreement that
the weapons disposal plan incorporated into the
Agreement had been implemented. Of a total of 2,016
weapons kept in containers, 1,896 were destroyed.
UNOMB collected and destroyed an additional 155
weapons, bringing the total to 2,051 weapons.
UNOMB made the determination that a substantial
level of compliance by the parties with the
implementation of the plan had been achieved and that,
consequently, the security situation on the ground was
conducive to holding the elections as planned. The
parties agreed that it would be up to the Autonomous
Bougainville Government to address the issue of the
remaining weapons that had not been placed in
containers or that had been stolen out of them during
the implementation of phases II and III of the plan.

I should now like to say a few words about the
election. The national Government of Papua New
Guinea, in concurrence with the Bougainville leaders,
requested the United Nations to coordinate the work of
the international electoral observers invited by the
Papa New Guinea Government. The United Nations
election coordination unit set up in response to that
request gave extensive briefings to the observers prior
to their deployment in Bougainville and, in close
cooperation with the United Nations Observer Mission,
facilitated their movement by helicopter to 29 of the 33
constituencies throughout the three regions of
Bougainville - north, central and south. United
Nations support in airlifting polling boxes, electoral
officers and observers proved to be crucial to the
election, ensuring its timely and orderly conduct. The
Australian Federal Police programme in Bougainville
also contributed to the process through the provision of
additional helicopter hours to the Bougainville election
manager.

International observers from Australia, Fiji,
Japan, New Zealand, Samoa, Trinidad and Tobago and
Vanuatu, as well as representatives of the
Commonwealth and Pacific Islands Forum secretariats,
concluded that the elections had been conducted in
accordance with the electoral laws. They were
impartially and professionally managed, thereby
ensuring the overall integrity of the electoral process.
Despite some minor reported incidents, all eligible
Bougainvilleans were given the opportunity to exercise
their right to vote in a calm and peaceful environment.
As declared by the international observers, the
outcome of the elections accurately reflects the will of
the people of Bougainville.

The elections last month were conducted by a
non-preferential single-vote system. In subsequent
elections, in accordance with the Bougainville
Constitution, a preferential voting system will be used.

Of the 112,000 voters enlisted on the common
roll, 69,343 cast their ballots. That constitutes 62 per
cent of the whole electorate. The presidential campaign
was convincingly won by Mr. Joseph C. Kabui, former
President of the Bougainville People's Congress. He
received close to 15,000 more votes than the runner-up,
former Governor John Momis.

Many elected members of the House of
Representatives are relatively young and new to
politics. They have come with a strong mandate for
change towards a more locally oriented approach that
recognizes human rights and focuses on meeting basic
needs at the grass-roots level.

On 14 June 2005, the parties to the Peace
Agreement convened the final meeting of the Peace
Process Consultative Committee. The Committee
resolved that its objectives under the Lincoln and
Bougainville peace agreements had been achieved. The
parties agreed to dissolve the Committee and, in doing
so, expressed their sincere appreciation for the
chairmanship, guidance and support of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Bougainville. Following
the establishment of the Autonomous Bougainville
Government, the relations between the national and
Bougainville Governments will now be managed
through the permanent Joint Supervisory Body.

With the dissolution of the Peace Process
Consultative Committee and the closing down of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Bougainville, the
Autonomous Bougainville Government and the Papua
New Guinea national Government will deal with
matters related to the implementation of the Peace
Agreement and the relevant provisions of the National
Constitution through already established procedures.
Mechanisms are in place - including the Joint
Supervisory Body, which will supervise and check on
the implementation of the autonomy arrangements -
to resolve any disputes that might emerge between the
parties.

Although it is up to the Autonomous
Bougainville Government to decide and plan its
priorities, the national and Autonomous Governments
intend to work together to address the challenges ahead
through consultation and cooperation at the appropriate
levels.

Following the completion of the weapons
disposal plan and the current implementation of the
autonomous arrangements, there remains the third main
pillar of the Peace Agreement - the holding of a
referendum on Bougainville's future political status in
another 10 to 15 years. Responsibility for the conduct
of the referendum will be shared between the
Bougainville and national Governments. Included in
the referendum will be the choice of separate
independence for Bougainville. In accordance with the
Agreement and the Papua New Guinea Constitution,
the final decision on the outcome of the referendum
will be left to the Papua New Guinea Parliament and to
subsequent consultations with the Autonomous
Bougainville Government.

The Autonomous Bougainville Government has a
unique opportunity to redesign the administration and
the region's laws, to improve service delivery and to
allow economic development to occur in the newly
established Autonomous Region of Bougainville. The
success of the elections and the current unity of the
newly formed Government provide a strong base. The
challenges of meeting the high expectations of the
people, reforming the administration, improving
revenue collection, improving infrastructure and
dealing with the dynamic relationship with the national
Government - among other matters - require
continued support from the United Nations and other
international actors.

The Bougainville administration is aware of the
complexity of the challenges it is facing. It is in the
process of developing a coherent development plan for
the whole region. The plan needs to be realistic and
based on available resources. The Bougainville
Economic Development Task Force is already working
on it. The administration expects that the plan will
change the current situation when policies and
decision-making on development and implementation
are donor-driven.

One third of the administration's income comes
from donors, and the remainder comes from the
national Government and aid schemes. The
administration is collecting only about 1.5 per cent of
its total revenue. The Autonomous Bougainville
Government is presently running a deficit. Overall,
about 50 per cent of the budget is used for salaries.
One of the immediate priorities for the Government is
to retrench public-service costs by eliminating 154
posts, which retrenchment depends on 1.3 million
kina -the local currency - equal to approximately
$450,000, for redundancy pay.

In building its capacity, the Government is going
to pay more attention to traditional authority and
customary ways at the grassroots level, especially
through invigorating the role of the councils of elders.
The small-group structure of Bougainville society
lends itself to local institutions that can maintain law
and order and promote human rights. Reliance on local
government institutions will maintain the peace and
reconciliation process among Bougainvilleans.

The economy of Bougainville is currently
subsistence-based, with some primary agricultural and
marine exports. Without major mining operations, there
is little prospect of meeting the high expectations of
the people regarding better government services and
improved living standards. In his inauguration speech,
President Kabui indicated the intention of his
Government to start negotiations with the national
Government and the Bougainville Copper Limited
mining company on the transfer of the company's
assets and prospecting authority to the Autonomous
Bougainville Government as soon as practical. Given
the sensitivity of the involvement of Bougainville
Copper Limited in Bougainville, the Government may
in the future hold wide consultations with the people
on the potential resumption of exploration and mining
operations. For the time being, agriculture - mainly
cocoa and copra production and forestry - offers the
best option for immediate sustainable gains in
employment.

I should now like to say a few words about donor
coordination and United Nations programmes in
Bougainville for the future.

The United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) is now taking the lead to help the
administration develop a donor coordination system.
The system would aim at avoiding duplication and
making assistance more efficient. Any new effort
would have to complement existing assistance. The
forthcoming donors dialogue on Bougainville, which is
to be held in Papua New Guinea this fall, should lay a
good basis for closer cooperation between donors and
the Bougainville administration in meeting its
economic priorities.

UNDP, in cooperation with the Australian
Agency for International Development, plans to
provide training for the offices of the Clerk and the
Speaker, so that practices and procedures are
understood and followed in accordance with
constitutional, legal and other requirements.
Bougainvillean members of Parliament will be offered
awareness programmes on the importance of the House
of Representatives as an institution of accountability.
Technical assistance will also be provided in setting up
a parliamentary committee system.

Another UNDP project will deal with planning
and community support. The project will address local
governance and leadership issues by working with the
councils of elders, young people, women and other
local institutions. Emphasis will be placed on the
sustainability of local institutions and their integration
with the administration. Direct support will also be
given to key community institutions that are
responsible for maintaining law and order. UNDP will
assist small farmers with organization, extension,
market access and policy formulation. It will also be
expanding e-mail communications, using existing
radios for connections rather than phone lines. Similar
systems have already been effectively introduced in
Solomon Islands.

UNICEF has begun to implement basic
education, child protection and health and nutrition
programmes with strong HIV/AIDS components.
Projects will be developed to contribute to increasing
access to schooling, especially for women. UNICEF
will facilitate community-based efforts to reduce child
abuse and HIV/AIDS discrimination. In addition, a
range of sanitation, nutrition, malaria, maternity-care
and immunization projects will be developed in
communities where leaders request such assistance.

Another United Nations agency, the United
Nations Population Fund, is working through the
National Planning and Rural Development Department
to assist the Government's planning department to
analyse population trends, while the United Nations
Development Fund for Women will be training female
delegates on leadership and other skills.

I have given a brief outline of the activities that I
expect in the future. But before concluding, I would
like to express our appreciation to the members of the
Council for the support given to the United Nations
Political Office and its successor, the United Nations
Observer Mission in Bougainville, in the
implementation of its mandate. It has been a successful
cooperative effort at the international, regional,
national and local levels. The Secretary-General stands
ready to provide further assistance to the parties in the
post-conflict peacebuilding phase in Bougainville.

Today is also a good moment to reflect briefly
upon the entire United Nations experience in
Bougainville. The war in Bougainville was little
noticed but brutal. About 15,000 people lost their lives
in the conflict in 1980s and 1990s - a heavy toll on a
population of about 160,000 at that time. The conflict
started over the use of natural resources but developed
features seen in many parts of the world in that period:
violence against citizens, lack of respect for
humanitarian law, a mixture of military and criminal
objectives and, above all, suffering of innocent people.

The current process towards peace, which started
with the Burnham process of 1997, the Lincoln
Agreement of 1998 and the Bougainville Peace
Agreement of 2001, offered an opportunity for healing.
In conformity with Bougainvillean traditions,
reconciliation and restorative justice have been
essential. For the United Nations this was a learning
experience, one which taught us a great deal about
post-conflict peacebuilding and the need to fully
respect and incorporate local cultures and traditions.
The United Nations became part of the process of what
was termed "breaking spears and mending hearts", the
description of peacebuilding offered by Pat Howley, an
eminent author and educator well known to
Bougainvilleans, as well as in other parts of the South
Pacific.

Now, at the beginning of a new period of
peacebuilding, the United Nations system has
developed additional elements, some of which were
suggested in my briefing today as well as in my
previous briefings. The foundations established thus far
give us reason to believe that, at this new stage, the
United Nations system, with the support of donor
countries, will again be able to help.

