Mr. Ferrarin (Italy) (interpretation from French):
Allow me first, Sir, to convey to you heartfelt
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for July. I have no doubt that your experience and
great diplomatic skills will provide firm, effective guidance
in our work. To that end, you can count on the full
cooperation of the Italian delegation.

I should also like very warmly to thank Ambassador
Nabil Elaraby and the entire delegation of Egypt for their
excellent and very effective guidance of the Council's work
during the month of June.

(spoke in English)

The most recent report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Angola confirms a number of positive
developments. Albeit with persisting hesitations, the Lusaka
Protocol is being implemented, and, in this connection, it is
particularly important that a framework agreement on
military matters has been achieved; that the quartering of
the UNITA troops, although not complete, is under way;
and that the process of their incorporation into the
Angolan Armed Forces has begun. Over the last few days
new information has reached the Security Council
concerning the speeding up of the quartering process for
the remaining UNITA contingents also. It is our hope that
after far too many unwarranted delays, the UN ITA
leadership will make good on the commitment undertaken
with the signing of the Lusaka Protocol.

The progress achieved so far is still very fragile. The
draft resolution on which the Council is about to vote
clearly indicates areas in which further steps have to be
taken quickly by the parties to consolidate a peace
process which, as emphasized by the Secretary-General,
has reached a critical juncture. On the political level,
substantial progress has yet to be achieved. It is high time
for a coalition Government to be formed and for the
UNITA members of Parliament to take their seats in the
National Assembly. Such a development would not only
mark a turning point in the crisis, but would also allow
the depleted energies of the country to be focused on the
crucial emergency of the looming economic disaster.

The disquieting information provided in this respect
by the Secretary-General's report shows quite clearly that
the prospects for peace in Angola might be disrupted if an
upturn in the economic and social situation is not quickly
achieved. International assistance to Angola, though
insufficient, is already under way, and all the relevant
entities of the United Nations system are also active in
the country. Let me here recall that for the period 1990-
1995, the Italian Government provided assistance in
various forms to a total of $109 million. For the year
1996 additional funds totalling approximately $12.5
million have been allotted. Moreover, Italy is participating
with a team of instructors in the demining activities being
conducted by the parties with the assistance of the United
Nations and the international community.

Mine clearance and road rehabilitation are essential
for the safety of the population, as well as for the
economic recovery of Angola. Progress in both areas is
being reported as a result of the good work carried out by
specialized units of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) and by
non-governmental organizations. We note that, after
extensive delays, UNITA is also showing greater
cooperation in the demining activities.

To maximize the impact of the assistance provided
and to allow a resumption in earnest of economic activity,

 

a more effective handling of the situation in Luanda and the
extension of State administration throughout the country are
absolutely necessary. The post-conflict peace-building phase
which Angola is now entering will require a determined
effort by all, inside and outside the country, to recreate
conditions allowing the population to benefit from the rich
natural resources of the country.

Although the peace process now seems to be well
established, the enduring commitment of the parties remains
of critical importance. Both parties - but in particular
UNITA - should show an even stronger determination to
pursue in good faith the full implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol. Let us not forget that the many delays of the last
few months have resulted in new and even more unjustified
suffering for the people of Angola.

Finally, let me express once again our heartfelt thanks
to all those who have contributed to this peace-keeping
operation: the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye, the
UNAVEM. III personnel and the troika of observer nations.

For the reasons explained above, Italy will vote in
favour of the draft resolution before the Council.

