Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I shall
begin by thanking Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) for her briefing
today and for presenting the twentieth report to the
Council pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).

Jordan reiterates its continued support for the
ICC, based on its belief in the principles on which it
was founded. The ICC is a cornerstone of efforts to
promote international criminal justice, end impunity
for the perpetrators of the most serious crimes,
maintain international peace and security and promote
the rule of law. The Rome Statute has provided
effective mechanisms to combat such crimes and
ensure international criminal justice. It also allowed
the court proceedings to take place with integrity and
impartiality, and in a manner in which the rights of the
accused, including their human rights, were respected.

Darfur was the first case referred by the Security
Council to the ICC, which broke ground in applying
international criminal law, fighting impunity and
giving victims a sense ofjustice - all through the close
cooperation between the ICC and the Security Council.
However, the relationship between the Council and the
ICC must not be limited to the referral of cases, the
holding of debates or receiving public briefings from
the Prosecutor. The Security Council must cooperate
with the ICC in implementing its mandate but without
interfering with its proceedings. In that regard, Jordan
emphasizes the importance of complete cooperation
with the Prosecutor by all nations and parties to
address the shortcomings highlighted in the report of
the Prosecutor.

Jordan feels deeply concerned about the content of
the report of the Prosecutor with respect to allegations
of ongoing serious crimes in Darfur, including aerial
bombing and other attacks affecting civilians, sexual
crimes, gender-based violence, crimes against human
rights activists, members of civil society and local
community leaders, as well as attacks against aid
workers and peacekeepers. Jordan reiterates the need
for the Office of the Prosecutor to continue working
to collect evidence on the new allegations of crimes
in Darfur, despite the obstacles that the Prosecutor
mentioned in her briefing.
Working for justice and accountability for crimes
committed in Darfur is not only an ethical duty but a
cornerstone and pillar for the restoration of stability and
security in the region and the achievement of lasting
peace there.

