Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): Let me thank Under-
Secretary-General Stephen O'Brien for his briefing and
continued leadership in addressing the humanitarian
crisis in Syria and other places, including in our
region. We would like to express our gratitude to the
United Nations and its partners for the courageous
humanitarian services they provide to millions of
Syrians under extremely challenging circumstances.

We remain seriously concerned about the
humanitarian conditions in Syria. The continued
fighting in multiple areas around the country and the
increased militarization on the ground, as the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/339) demonstrates, is
deeply troubling. The continued fighting has resulted
in civilian death, injuries and displacement, as well
as the destruction of civilian infrastructure, including
schools and medical facilities. We also condemned all
terrorist attacks, including the heinous terrorist attack
in Al-Rashidin on 15 April, which took the lives ofmore
than 126 people many of them children and injured
dozens. Unfortunately, it is civilians who continue to
bear the brunt of the armed conflict. Hence the protection
of civilians remains of paramount importance.

Despite the continued humanitarian deliveries in
the first two months of the inter-agency plan, reaching
out to those in need for urgent humanitarian assistance
remains a critical challenge owing to insecurity and
administrative impediments. In that regard, ensuring
safe, unimpeded and sustained humanitarian access
is indispensable to providing the much-needed
humanitarian relief to all Syrians throughout the country.
In that connection, we encourage the United Nations to
continue its engagement with the Syrian Government to
facilitate and improve the approval process.

More than 13 million Syrians require humanitarian
assistance every day. Without achieving a Syrian-led
political settlement, the tragedy of the Syrian people
will continue with adverse human, political, economic
and social consequences. As we have been consistently
saying, and we reiterate, that the only lasting solution
to put an end to the daily miseries of Syrians is a
comprehensive political dialogue based on resolution
2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) under the auspices of the United Nations.
While it is the Syrians themselves who have the
responsibility to ensure sustainable and inclusive
peace, the international community, particularly the
Security Council, has an essential role to support
them in achieving a political solution in stabilizing
and reconstructing Syria. In that regard, the Brussels
conference, which pledged financial support for the
humanitarian work in Syria, is an important initiative,
which contributes to addressing the conflict and its
regional impact.

We also believe that strengthening the ceasefire
guaranteed by Russia, Turkey and Iran, and ensuring
its full compliance, is important for the creation
of a supporting environment for the next round
of intra-Syrian political negotiations, which should
take place as quickly as possible with constructive and
serious engagements of all parties.

In conclusion, it is an undeniable fact that the armed
conflict has caused a long-term humanitarian crisis that
will continue to have a damaging impact on Syrians
for years to come. The continued worrying situation on
the ground and the scale of the suffering of the Syrians
makes the search for a political solution more urgent
than ever.

