Mr. Vote-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation welcomes the fact that the Security
Council is today considering the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission. We highlight the
participation in this debate by the President of the
Economic and Social Council, the Chairman of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the delegations in charge of following
up on the cases of Sierra Leone and Burundi, as well as
representatives of the major international financial
institutions, whose statements will enrich this debate.

The Peacebuilding Commission is one of the
outcomes of the 25 Summit, which reaffirmed our
confidence in multilateralism as a way to face the new
challenges arising in the transition from the

maintenance of international peace and security to
stability and development. If it is to carry out that
mandate, this new organ must be as useful and
effective as possible. That is undoubtedly the spirit
that, we are sure, we all share as we take part in this
debate.

Peru supports the efforts to sustain the
peacemaking and reconstruction processes in countries
emerging from violent armed conflict, and it
participates in peacekeeping operations dealing with
such cases. We are aware that recent history has
demonstrated that the premature withdrawal of peace
operations puts countries back into a situation of crisis
and violence, which no one wants; that conflicts
seemingly overcome have re-emerged; and that the
populations involved lose faith in the effectiveness of
these peacemaking processes.

Prolonged conflicts create a perverse dynamic of
force and destruction as permanent instruments of
power and even of survival. To counteract that, we
must reconstruct the social fabric, establish a culture of
peace and convey the notion that the best security and
the most benefits are to be found in peace, thus
enhancing its social value.

That requires a comprehensive approach that
includes the military and police component that
restores the security environment; the rebuilding of
public institutions, the rule of law and the promotion of
human rights; and attention to the structural economic
and social elements, the poverty, marginalization and
exclusion that are at the root of many of these
conflicts.

A fundamental component of peacebuilding is
development. There will always be a greater risk of
relapse into conflict to the extent that people feel
vulnerable and see no improvement in their situation.
We must lay the foundations for development in the
form of institution-building, justice and respect for
human rights, but also in the provision of services such
as health, education, security and opportunities for
economic inclusion.
In order to build a viable and sustainable peace
process, it is essential that the local actors in these
conflicts be committed to that process and carry it out
responsibly. That element must underlie peacebuilding
initiatives and is ultimately the only guarantee that
armed violence will not destroy the progress that has
been made. In that connection, inclusive processes are
necessary to create links of interdependence and
mutual commitments and obligations among the parties
involved. Thus, through the path of participation, we
create common spaces for aspirations and objectives,
and national identity and a feeling of belonging are
affirmed.

That is why reconstruction programmes must not
repeat the events that made the States fail in the first
place. We must build democratic societies with viable
economies - that is, States that emerge from disorder
and backwardness and take charge of their own destiny.
These processes must be adapted to each specific
situation, in which the Peacebuilding Commission must
promote the development of national capacities and
institutions capable of developing organic plans and
projects that provide continuity and consistency to the
national effort and attract international cooperation.

It is important to appropriately define areas of
work and, when possible, to establish suitable
indicators that let us know about progress in the
management capacity of a country emerging from
conflict. Likewise, such indicators will make it
possible to assess progress and the relevance of the
recommendations and assistance of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

We also believe that the Commission must help to
improve the coordination between the United Nations
and the system's agencies so that there will be
appropriate leadership on the ground and a clear
mandate for the tasks of peacebuilding. Moreover,
reconstruction is a process that must arouse the interest
of national and international private enterprise. That is
why we need to formulate programmes capable of
attracting such business participation. It also means
that we must redouble our efforts to strengthen State
institutions so as to ensure that special interests
coincide with the general interest, that reconstruction
programmes are transparent and that the resources
generated - including those derived from the
exploitation of natural resources - have increased
benefits among the population. This should also be a
requirement in programmes of the international
financial institutions.

Let me conclude by noting that we are closely
following the way in which the cases of Sierra Leone
and Burundi are currently being addressed by the
Peacebuilding Commission. Without doubt, it is a
challenge to all of us to enable those countries are able
to make a successful transition to stability and
development.

