Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this public meeting
concerning the situation in Timor-Leste. I also wish to
offer my thanks to Assistant Secretary-General Mr.
Annabi for his comprehensive briefing.

At the last open meeting on this issue, I expressed
Japan's view that if Timor-Leste is to be considered a
genuine peacekeeping operation success story, the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) must complete its activities and achieve
its goals within this final one-year period. It is thus
essential to conclude during this period the transition
from the phase of peacekeeping operations for
resolution of the conflict to the next phase of
development activities conducted through bilateral
channels and the relevant international institutions.
From that point of view, my Government
appreciates the progress described in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2004/669). Timor-Leste has made
further steady advances in the area of administration
and the justice sector, while in the security sector, law
enforcement agencies and the armed forces have
continued to develop and mature. It is crucial that
Timor-Leste maintain its momentum towards achieving
sustainable independence, and Japan will continue to
offer its utmost support for that purpose.

We are, at the same time, concerned by the
observation contained in the report that work on the
delineation of the land border between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia is not proceeding expeditiously. Japan
expects that both countries will continue to make their
best effort to resolve that matter.

The veterans' demonstration in Dili in July and
the political dialogue held last Saturday between
Government leaders and representatives of several
groups of ex-combatants, veterans and bereaved
orphans and widows underscored the importance of the
reintegration of those groups into society at large. For
that reason, the Recovery, Employment and Stability
Programme for Ex-Combatants and Communities in
Timor-Leste, administered by the United Nations
Development Programme, to which Japan has
contributed substantially, should be given highest
priority. We also call for the support of the Member
States in similar activities.

Japan has been playing a major role in the
building of a sustainable Timor-Leste. My Government
has pledged and has been steadily implementing
assistance of up to $60 million over the first three years
following independence, with the focus on peace-
building and on reconstruction in the three key areas of
agriculture, infrastructure and human resources
development. We have already invested $57 million in
infrastructure projects such as roads, electricity and
water supply in the Dili district. The engineer group
and headquarters personnel of our Self-Defence Forces
recently completed its tasks and returned to Japan. At
the same time, at the request of the Government of
Timor-Leste, Japan handed over the equipment of the
engineer group, including various types of vehicles
which can be utilized for road building, to the
Government of Timor-Leste in the hope that it would
help to meet the needs on the ground.

My Government is also making efforts, through
the dispatch of what are called civil power groups,
composed of engineer group veterans and non-military
engineering specialists, to transfer technology by
educating Timor-Leste Government staff in the
operation, maintenance and management of the donated
equipment and material. We believe such support will
not only offer a new challenge for Japan's international
peace cooperation but also help improve the life of the
people, which constitutes the basis of the nation-
building now under way in Timor-Leste.

Finally, I wish to underscore once again how
important this final one-year period will be for Timor-
Leste. The Government of Japan is convinced that,
through the efforts of UNMISET and the people of
Timor-Leste and with the guidance of their wise
leaders, stability and the foundations for development
in Timor-Leste will be strengthened and the United
Nations peacekeeping operation will successfully
complete its mission.

