At the outset, I wish to extend my sincere gratitude to the French presidency for convening today's important open debate. We would also like to thank the distinguished briefers for their comprehensive overview. While the findings of the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525) on children and armed conflict contain some encouraging elements, the rest of the account remains a cause for alarm. Particularly deplorable is the continuing practice of grave violations, including sexual violence against children, attacks against schools or hospitals and denial of humanitarian access to children. We have to move towards the implementation of the legal corpus that, throughout the past decades, has been neatly crafted by the international community, including in the Security Council. That is especially relevant against the backdrop of the fifteenth anniversaries of milestone resolution 1612 (2005) and the landmark principle of the responsibility to protect (General Assembly resolution 60/1), which we mark this year. Georgia, as a party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict, is committed to upholding the norms for the prohibition of the recruitment and use of child soldiers. We have endorsed vital documents in recent years, including the Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. Yet, notwithstanding our efforts, the fundamental rights of the conflict-affected children in Russia-occupied regions of Georgia - Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia - continue to be violated by the occupying power, which exercises effective control on the ground. The major concerns include, inter alia, the restrictions on freedom of movement, access to health care and the prohibition of education in the native language, as well as the various other forms of discrimination that children regularly face and that each year deprive up to 5,000 of them of the right to an education in their mother tongue and other basic rights. That dire humanitarian and human rights situation on the ground has been aggravated by the coronavirus disease pandemic. In these difficult times, when it is critically important to support the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and show care for conflict-affected children, Russia continuous the illegal process of erecting the so-called border signs and other artificial barriers along the occupation line. To make matters worse, due to the irresponsible and inhuman approach of closing the so-called crossing points along the Russian occupation line, the population residing in the occupied regions, including children, remain stripped of access to urgent care and medical evacuation. Thus, owing to the Russian occupation regime's denial of medical evacuation to those in need, the death toll of ethnic Georgians has risen to 14 since the closure of the occupation line in the Tskhinvali/South Ossetia in September 2019. Against that background, while we reiterate our commitment to the protection of children's rights, we call on the international community to urge Russia to cease its provocative and destructive actions in the occupied regions of Georgia and start fulfilling its international obligations, first and foremost the European Union- mediated ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008.
