The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning
Western Sahara, document S/1997/166. I should like to
draw the attention of the members of the Council to
document S/1997/208, which contains the text of a letter
dated 10 March 1997 from the Permanent Representative of
Morocco to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council.

Members of the Council have received photocopies of
a letter dated 19 March 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, transmitting the
text of a letter dated 11 March 1997 from the Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of Morocco addressed to the Secretary-General, which will
be issued under the symbol S/1997/234.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the interim
report of the Secretary-General of 27 February 1997
on the situation concerning Western Sahara
(S/1997/166). It is disappointed at the lack of
progress on the implementation of the plan for the
settlement of the question of Western Sahara noted
in the report. It concurs with the Secretary-General's
assessment that it is essential to maintain the
ceasefire, a breach of which could seriously threaten
regional stability, and that it is also essential to
move the process forward. It believes that the
presence of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) has
been essential in helping the parties to maintain their
commitment to the ceasefire. It looks forward to
receiving the Secretary-General's assessment of the
future tasks and configuration of MINURSO.

"The Security Council expresses its strong
support for the Secretary-General's efforts to
overcome the current stalemate in implementing the
settlement plan. In this context, it welcomes the
appointment by the Secretary-General of a Personal
Envoy to the region and urges the parties to
cooperate fully with him."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/16.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.30 pm.
