The Secretary-General: Let me begin by welcoming
the presence of Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and
Ms. Joanne Liu, International President of Medecins
Sans Frontieres (MSF). The ICRC and MSF are our
good partners, playing unique and vital roles in conflict
and disaster areas. Through their leaders here today, I
want to thank and commend all of their personnel for
their professionalism and dedication in serving people
in danger and distress across the world.
Last week, MSF's head of mission in Aleppo
underscored the urgency and importance of efforts such
as resolution 2286 (2016), which has been adopted today.
"No corner is being spared", he said. And he added:
"Aleppo is already a shell of what it once was; this most
recent assault appears determined to eliminate even
that". He was reacting to an air strike, by all accounts
by the Government of Syria, that destroyed a hospital,
killing at least 20 people, including three children and
the area's one and only pediatrician, Dr. Mohammed
Wassim Maas.

Yet this appalling act was only the latest wartime
assault on health care in Syria. Since the beginning
of the conflict, Physicians for Human Rights has
documented more than 360 attacks on some 250 medical
facilities. More than 730 medical personnel have been
killed. Today, almost half of all medical facilities in
Syria are closed or only partially functioning. Millions
of Syrians lack life-saving health care.

A similarly pattern of systematic destruction of
health facilities is evident in Yemen. More than 600
medical facilities have closed because of damage
sustained in the conflict and shortages of supplies and
medical workers. Last year, the United Nations verified
59 attacks against 34 hospitals. In January this year,
coalition air strikes hit the Shiara hospital, which
serves around 120,000 people in Sa'dah governorate.
Following the attack, pregnant women were reportedly
forced to give birth in caves rather than risk travelling to
the hospital. And last October in Kunduz, Afghanistan,
a bombing by United States military destroyed another
MSF hospital and killed dozens as patients were
burned alive in their beds. These patterns are repeated
in other conflicts, including in Iraq and South Sudan,
where violence against health care is multiplying the
difficulties of already fragile health systems.

Such attacks must end. When so-called surgical
strikes end up hitting surgical wards, something is
deeply wrong. Explanations ring hollow to parents
burying their children and communities pushed closer
to collapse. All too often, there is no respect for the
sick and no sanctity for those who provide care. All too
often, attacks on health facilities and medical workers
are notjust isolated or incidental battlefield fallout, but
rather the intended objective of the combatants. This
is shameful and inexcusable. In Syria, Government
forces systematically remove medical supplies from
humanitarian convoys. In Syria and elsewhere,
Governments impose cumbersome procedures that
restrict access to health care. This is strangulation by
red tape. It is violence by bureaucratic means rather
than force of arms, but it is just as devastating.

Let us be clear. Intentional and direct attacks on
hospitals are war crimes. Denying people access to
essential health care is a serious violation of international
humanitarian law. All State and non-State parties to
conflict are bound by a strict obligation to respect
and protect medical personnel, facilities and vehicles,
as well as the wounded and sick. Parties to conflict
must allow and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded
passage of impartial humanitarian relief, including
medical missions. These obligations are at the very
heart of international humanitarian law. The Council
and all Member States must do more than condemn
such attacks. They must use every ounce of influence
to press parties to respect their obligations. They must
press for perpetrators to be held fully accountable.

The resolution that the Council has just adopted
demonstrates the Council's determination to strengthen
the protection of health care in armed conflict. For the
sake of humanity, I urge all Member States, parties to
conflict and other relevant actors to heed the Council's
demands, facilitate humanitarian access, develop
domestic legal frameworks that protect health facilities
and medical workers, train armed forces so that they
understand their obligations, and prosecute those
responsible for such attacks and other violations.

The growing insecurity of medical services is part
of a broader trend of blatant disregard for international
law in armed conflict. Across the world, parties to
conflict are disregarding the most basic rules of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Every day, civilians are deliberately or indiscriminately
killed or injured. Densely populated towns and cities
are pummelled by air strikes and heavy shelling.
Millions of people have fled their homes into perilous
and uncertain futures. Impunity compounds the crime.

Last October, President Peter Maurer of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and I issued
a joint statement calling on States to take urgent
action to uphold international law and address human
suffering. I repeat that call in the Chamber today. Even
wars have rules; it is time to uphold and enforce them.
No Government should stand by and watch the erosion

of safeguards for the protection of civilians in conflict.
The international community must never become numb
to flagrant abuses.

Affirming our common humanity will be a key
theme at the World Humanitarian Summit to be held
in Istanbul on 23 and 24 May, and it serves to highlight
the importance and timeliness of that first-of-its-
kind event. I encourage Member States to seize the
opportunity of the Summit to take concrete action to
uphold the norms that safeguard humankind. Our world
confronts disasters of staggering size and complexity.
One hundred and twenty-five million people need
humanitarian assistance, and at least 60 million people
have been forced to flee their homes or countries. The
World Humanitarian Summit is the moment to come
together to renew our commitment to preventing
and ending crisis and to show that we are steadfast
in reducing suffering and vulnerability. We need the
full engagement and commitment of all partners,
Governments and non-governmental organizations. We
can strengthen humanitarian response and fulfil that
duty to the world's most vulnerable only by working
together. The success of the Summit is in your hands.

Finally, I appeal to Member States to work with
greater intensity to find political solutions to end
bloodshed and suffering. As the skies over Aleppo and
other parts of Syria continue to be filled with barrel
bombs and artillery fire, we must all work relentlessly
to rescue the cessation of hostilities. That is crucial
for saving lives and for the credibility of the political
process and, indeed, once again, that of the Council.

