Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): First
of all, like others before me, I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by the representative of Slovenia on behalf
of the European Union.

The situation in the Gaza Strip and the south of
Israel is indissociable from the question of Israel and
Palestine as a whole and we cannot, of course, remain
indifferent. Like the European Union, Belgium has, on
many occasions, expressed its deep concern at the
explosion of violence over the last few days. Belgium
condemns the repeated rocket fire from Gaza into
Israel. While we recognize Israel's right to see to its
security and that of its citizens, Belgium nevertheless
believes that any Israeli response must respect the
principles of proportionality and distinction that lie at
the heart of humanitarian law. Belgium deplores the
excessive number of civilians on both sides that have
been victims of uncontrolled violence and calls upon
the two parties to exercise maximum restraint.

The humanitarian situation of the Palestinian
population in the Gaza Strip is very serious and is a
direct result of the escalating violence. But it would
not be honest to impute the responsibility for this
situation on one party alone. The launching of rockets
against Israeli civilians must be condemned without
reservation, but that in no way justifies a blockade with
the Gaza Strip that holds an entire civilian population
hostage, especially when it is already in a humanitarian
and health crisis.

To protect civilians and assist them is an
obligation that is incumbent upon all members of the
international community. We therefore call upon the
Israeli authorities to completely lift the restrictive
measures in place so that medicine, food and fuel
shipments can resume normally and the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), other United Nations agencies
and other humanitarian actors can continue their work.

As I said just now, the violence in and around the
Gaza Strip is part and parcel of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, which is at the heart of our diplomatic
concerns. The peace process has just been relaunched
in Annapolis and seeks to establish an independent,
sovereign and viable Palestinian State side by side with
the State of Israel, within secure and internationally
recognized borders. The parties to the conflict, both the
Israelis and the Palestinians, have invested in this
process, as have the Arab countries. Our duty today, on
an individual basis and as responsible members of the
international community, is to do everything to
preserve the integrity of this process and, in so doing,
to safeguard the hopes that have been raised among the
Israeli and Palestinian populations, who have suffered
far too long from a deadlock that has lasted so many
decades already. This hope for peace cannot be held
hostage by an uncontrolled escalation of violence.

The worrying events of the last few days have
brought us into a situation with which the Middle East
peace process has only made us too familiar. Two
months after the Annapolis meeting and one month
after the Paris conference, my delegation refuses to
believe, however, that the dichotomy that has arisen
between the diplomatic process and the situation on the
ground can jeopardize the hopes legitimately born of
the joint commitment of the parties and of the
international community.

The urgent attention required by the situation in
the Gaza Strip and the south of Israel should not make
us forget the concrete signs of the ongoing
commitment of President Abbas and Prime Minister
Olmert. Apart from their regular meetings and the
negotiations of experts, we were happy last week to see
the beginning of a dialogue between Minister Livni and
the Head Negotiator Ahmed Korei on the issues that
are at the heart of the final status.

The time has come for an effective
implementation of commitments entered into, starting
with those of the Road Map, both on the Palestinian
side, in terms of security, and on the Israeli side, which
means, in particular, total cessation of settlement
activities, including in East Jerusalem. More than ever,
the international community must look to the future
and commit itself decisively together with the parties.
This approach is the path that Belgium has taken
together with its European partners and the members of
the Quartet. In the light of the Arab Peace Initiative
and the support expressed for the Annapolis peace
process, we trust that the Arab countries will do the
same.

