Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I too would like to thank Mr. Alain Le Roy for his
presentation and to welcome the presence of
Mr. Margelov in the Council.

I would like to make a few comments on various
aspects of the issue that we are considering. First of all,
in our View, the political process must remain the
priority. In that regard, we welcome the efforts of the
Chief Joint Mediator, Mr. Bassole, and the Qatari
facilitation, and we hope that the talks suspended last
June will resume as quickly as possible.

The Sudanese Government and the Justice and
Equality Movement must fulfil the commitments made
during the signing of the declaration of intent of
17 February 2009. We hope that the talks are inclusive,
and we support the efforts made by Libya with respect
to other rebel movements.
We have noted the establishment by the African
Union of a High-Level Panel headed by President
Mbeki, and we will closely study its forthcoming
conclusions.

We think that the humanitarian situation remains
of concern. We welcome the efforts of United Nations
to work with the Government of the Sudan to prevent
the decision to expel 13 non-governmental
organizations last March from having too serious
consequences. However, as the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2009/352) notes, the fall in the number of
humanitarian workers in Darfur has harmed the quality
of the aid. In the rainy season, the health situation
could deteriorate very quickly. We therefore remain
very concerned, and we call on the Sudanese
authorities to quickly restore an environment
conducive to humanitarian activities.

Moreover, the security risks for the civilian
population must not be underestimated. We are pleased
that the violence has diminished since the
establishment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), but it must be
noted that we have moved from a situation of conflict
to less intense but generalized violence. The tension in
relations between Chad and the Sudan is also of great
concern, and we call on those two countries to
implement their commitments and to refrain from any
provocation.

On the deployment of UNAMID, we have noted
the information given by Alain Le Roy. The Secretary-
General underscores in his report the improved
cooperation with the Sudanese authorities for the
deployment of the operation. We welcome that, and we
hope that the objective set in the report for the
deployment of 92 per cent of the force by December
can be achieved.

However, we note that, despite the progress
brought about by the Tripartite Mechanism, the
Sudanese authorities continue to pose significant
obstacles. I am thinking in particular of the issue of
visas already mentioned by a number of delegations,
which Khartoum is slow to issue. More than 100
European personnel in particular, and others from other
regions, are waiting for visas, and that situation is
unacceptable.

More than ever, the population in Darfur needs a
credible force that can contribute to its security. The
year 2009 should see the full deployment of UNAMID
and also of the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad, which to some extent is its
counterpart in the regions of Chad and the Central
African Republic bordering on Darfur. We call on the
Secretariat and troop-contributing countries to increase
their efforts in that regard.

We are preparing to renew UNAMID's mandate.
We hope that the negotiations held under the auspices
of our British colleagues will soon conclude. The
discussion on UNAMID's mandate should not be held
hostage to other difficult issues, such as those of the
fight against impunity and of the International Criminal
Court. We believe, and everyone knows, that a lasting
peace cannot be established without justice, and we
note the absence of real efforts of the Sudanese
authorities in that area.

In any case, differences of views on this issue
should not prevent us from acting collectively and with
determination on the other aspects of resolving the
crisis in Darfur. We hope that UNAMID will fully
carry out its mandate, in particular the tasks entrusted
to it as a priority, namely, protecting civilians and
providing security for humanitarian assistance.

Finally, we would conclude with a word on the
implementation of the comprehensive political
agreement as a follow-up to our consultations last
week on the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS). At this stage, we are very satisfied that the
two parties have indicated their wish to respect the
decision by the Permanent Court of Arbitration on
Abyei. We hope that the follow-up to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement will continue to be
implemented in this manner, in a spirit of cooperation
and goodwill on both sides.

