Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea fears
that today is a sad day for the relationship between
the Organization and the African continent. The text
that has been proposed and draft resolution S/2018/69l,
which will be voted on, is a step backwards in the
many efforts that are being made on both sides to build
a sound relationship based on mutual trust and on the
pursuit of common goals.

Our position is well known. The Council's
imposition of sanctions at this time would involve
not just a counterproductive interference in the
undeniable positive progress that has been made
on the ground, but also reflect a clear lack of
consideration for the States and regional organizations
involved. We deeply regret that our colleagues in the
Council have decided to take that course of action.
Equatorial Guinea believes that the message that
should go out from this Chamber is one of recognition,
support and encouragement for the efforts that both the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
African Union, in particular President Al-Bashir of the
Sudan and President Museveni of Uganda, have been
making and which, in recent weeks, have produced
tangible results.

Clearly, one cannot expect the signed agreements
to change the situation radically overnight. That would
be naive, and I do not believe that anyone sitting in this
Chamber is naive. It takes time for the compromises
reached to take effect and all the more so in a conflict
like this one, in South Sudan, that involves many
actors and different situations. Time - that is what we
have been asking for - a little more time. A prudent
time frame is required to evaluate and monitor the
implementation and viability of those agreements and,
where necessary, to take appropriate action against
those who breach them or obstruct peace. Meanwhile,
none of us has the moral authority or legitimacy to rule
out such efforts a priori.

We all agree that the parties must be pressured to
establish a secure and lasting peace in South Sudan,
but we urge that such pressure be exerted, as it is now,
by regional actors, with the support and faith of the
Council, and without any lack of consideration or the
disregard that is being shown. However, like every
other member of the Council, we wish the best for the
young people of South Sudan who have already suffered
more than enough. Similarly, we express our support
for the country's leaders so that they can rise to the
occasion and take advantage of this new opportunity
to achieve peace. For that reason, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea will abstain in the voting on draft
resolution S/2018/691 so as provide the political actors
and institutions of the region with the opportunity to
consolidate their efforts under way to achieve definitive
peace in South Sudan.

