Ms. Sanders (United States of America): My
delegation warmly welcomes you, Sir, and the other
ministers here to New York and to the United States. I
join others in commending you on this useful initiative
of exchanging ideas in the Council on the topic of
peace consolidation in West Africa.

I also wish to add my thanks to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ould-Abdallah
and Executive Secretary Ibn Chambas for sharing their
thoughts on this complicated issue.

West Africa has come a long way from the social
chaos and civil war experienced throughout much of
the subregion not very long ago, as others here have
pointed out. The positive developments in West Africa
during the past few years have been remarkable. It is,
for many, many West Africans, a better and safer place.

The United States applauds the contributions
made by the United Nations in West African countries,
including Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau and Liberia.
United Nations efforts in those countries - both its
carrots and its sticks - have been essential to the
resolution of conflict and subsequent developments
that have taken place. We also commend the United
Nations continuing efforts to support the peace process
in Cote d'Ivoire and urge the Ivorian parties to take all
necessary steps to move that process forward.

Many in the international community have
contributed money, troops and other means to
international efforts supporting the transition to
stability and democratic rule in the region. For our
part, the United States will continue to support that
critical work.

We have taken note of and agree with many of
the points that have been made about how to sustain
the peace. We would underscore as well that now is not
the time for complacency. While there have been some
substantial improvements in West Africa, there is
important work to be done. International support is still
essential for those nations in a variety of areas,
including security sector reform, governance,
development and financial stability, and in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes.

We believe that lasting stability and development
in West Africa are most likely to be achieved through
the link of democracy and economic freedom.
International aid, of course, is a part of the mix, as is
private investment, but aid works best and investment
will almost certainly follow once freely elected
Governments put in place policies of good governance,
transparency and rule of law. It is for that reason that

we were encouraged by the commitment shown by
Liberian President Johnson-Sirleaf to the Governance
Economic Management Action Plan. We hope that
regional organizations, and especially the Economic
Community of West African States, will find more
ways to promote those values.

As further incentive to good governance,
President Bush proposed in 2002 the Millennium
Challenge Account to serve as a concrete mechanism
for linking development assistance to developing
countries that rule justly, invest wisely in their people,
and encourage economic freedom. The growing
number of countries in Africa, including West Africa,
that are demonstrating their resolve to meet those
conditions is heartening. Ghana is a prime example.
Just last week, in a signing ceremony in Washington,
DC, witnessed by President John Kufuor and
Secretary of State Rice, the Millennium Challenge
Corporation signed its largest grant to date - more
than half a billion dollars - for anti-poverty
programmes in Ghana.

We also believe that a commitment to human
rights will help to consolidate peace. Continued efforts
throughout the region to develop more democratic and
professional security forces are needed. Individuals
must be held accountable for their crimes. The
commendable efforts of West African leaders to bring
Charles Taylor to justice were an important step in that
direction.

The United States will remain actively engaged in
the spectrum of efforts to consolidate peace in West
Africa. We are pleased with the decision of the
Peacebuilding Commission to include Sierra Leone in
its initial efforts, and we look forward to its
recommendations.

