Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this
emergency meeting of the Security Council on North
Korea's sixth nuclear test, which was conducted this
past Saturday. I am also grateful to be invited to take
part in this important discussion.

It is with a deep sense ofdisappointment, frustration
and even anger that I address the Council today. One
year ago, when North Korea conducted its fifth nuclear
test, the Security Council issued a stern warning
that North Korea's continued nuclear and missile
provocation would not be tolerated (see S/PV.7821).
Despite that warning, however, North Korea has since
fired 20 ballistic missiles, on more than 15 occasions,
in flagrant violation of multiple Security Council
resolutions. While spending considerable amounts of
time and energy in responding to such reckless ballistic
missile provocations by North Korea, we held on to one
last ray of hope that North Korea might, at least, refrain
from additional nuclear tests.

Regrettably, yet again, the country has chosen a
dangerous path in defiance of the stern warning of the
international community. The nuclear test conducted
by North Korea two days ago has proven to be its
most powerful thus far. Since the two intercontinental
ballistic missile launches in July, which led to the
adoption of resolution 2371 (2017) on 5 August, North
Korea has been maximizing the level of threat and
now claims that the purpose of the most recent test
is to develop nuclear warheads to install on top of its
intercontinental ballistic missiles.
North Korea's do-or-die behaviour has invited a
very harsh and scathing reaction from the international
community. Indeed, over the past two days, numerous
States from around the world have spoken in a unified
voice by issuing statements strongly condemning North
Korea's nuclear test. Even those countries that have
been trying to be as sympathetic as possible vis-a-vis
North Korea's security concerns have added their own
voice to such condemnations without exception this
time. That is clear evidence that North Korea's recent
nuclear test is an immense challenge that threatens
peace and security not only on the Korean peninsula or
in North-East Asia, but in the entire world.
Therefore, the Security Council must respond to
this serious provocation with the adoption of a new
draft resolution including much tougher measures
corresponding to the magnitude and gravity of the
test. Now is the time to take measures that are strong
and robust enough to compel North Korea to seriously
engage in dialogue. The new draft resolution must
include not only additional measures to further block
funds that could possibly flow into North Korea's
illegal weapons of mass destruction programme, but
also truly biting and robust ones that Pyongyang would
find very painful.

Just five days ago, we celebrated the International
Day against Nuclear Tests in an informal meeting of
the General Assembly. A number of Member States
gathered together to commemorate that special day and
engaged in a very serious discussion. Virtually all the
representatives of the participating Member States who
took the floor during the meeting strongly condemned
North Korea - the only country that has conducted
nuclear tests in the twenty-first century - and called
on the country to immediately halt further nuclear tests.
But just a couple of days later, North Korea conducted
yet another nuclear test. A voluntary moratorium on
nuclear tests has become today a de facto international
norm. Regrettably, however, the world has yet to be
free from nuclear tests owing to a single country that
continues to stubbornly pursue a retrogressive and
destabilizing path. North Korea's delusional aspiration
of becoming a nuclear-weapon State is the sole reason
for the existence of the International Day against
Nuclear Tests.

We must end that immediately, and I call upon all
Member States, including the members of the Council,
to take firm and decisive actions to that end. I also
call on North Korea to stop pursuing the path of self-
destruction and make a strategic decision without further
delay to choose the path of denuclearization - the only
option and right way to insure its survival. Whether to
stick to its current path of self-destruction or redirect
itself towards the path of survival is entirely the choice
of North Korea.

