Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank and
welcome you, Sir. We are grateful to have you here to
chair a meeting on such critically important issues and
we are appreciative of Chile's leadership every day.

We thank Assistant Secretary-General ad interim
Toyberg-Frandzen for his informative briefing.

Today I will speak on three topics: Syria, Lebanon
and the Middle East peace.

On Syria, we welcome the efforts of United
Nations Special Envoy de Mistura to establish a freeze
in the city of Aleppo. Any freeze must be consistent
with humanitarian principles and include measures
to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
It should also reduce violence, not provide cover for
any side to advance military aims, such as redeploying
forces, and we welcome serious efforts to advance a
political dialogue consistent with the second Geneva
communique, including those led by Special Envoy de
Mistura. There is no military solution to this devastating
conflict, only a political solution.

In meeting after meeting before the Council, we
have presented mounting evidence of the unspeakable
atrocities perpetrated by the Al-Assad regime. This
meeting is no exception. Since we last met to discuss
Syria, the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) released its third report, with further
evidence indicating that the regime has repeatedly
use chlorine as a weapon against civilians, directly
violating international norms and Syria's international
legal obligations. Investigators concluded "with a
high degree of confidence" that chlorine gas was used
against three opposition-controlled villages and Syria
last year. In one affected village, 32 of the 37 people
interviewed by OPCW investigators "saw or heard the
sound of a helicopter over the village at the time of the
attack with barrel bombs containing toxic chemicals".
Of the forces fighting in Syria, only the Al-Assad
regime uses helicopters and only the Al-Assad regime
drops barrel bombs.
The Council must stop the Al-Assad regime's
use of chemical weapons and ensure that it has fully
declared and verifiably eliminated its chemical weapons
programme, as required by resolution 2118 (2013) and
by the Chemical Weapons Convention. We vigorously
condemn the use of chemical weapons by any party
anywhere.

The use of chemical weapons is far from the
regime's only deplorable act. As Under-Secretary-
General Amos informed the Council one month ago
today (see S/PV.7342), the use of barrel bombs against
civilians has been particularly acute in Aleppo, Hama,
Idlib, rural Damascus, Deir ez-Zor, Raqqa and Dar'a,
and the regime continues to systematically use torture
as a means of inflicting suffering and extracting
information. According to the Syrian Observatory for
Human Rights, at least 2,100 people died in Syrian
prisons last year, and the bodies of many showed signs
of torture. Because the Observatory only counts cases
in which families have received a corpse or a death
certificate, they believe the actual number to be much
higher. This is consistent with the abhorrent practices
of the Al-Assad regime brought to light by the Syrian
defector Caesar.

Al-Assad, those around him and any individuals
overseeing or complicit in the commission of serious
crimes in Syria must know that they will ultimately
be held accountable. That is why the United States is
actively supporting the collection and preservation of
evidence to support future justice processes in a variety
of jurisdictions for war crimes and other human rights
violations, including those involving sexual and gender-
based violence. Those overseeing or complicit in these
crimes must be aware that the international community
is building case files on its abuses, and the files are
growing. In the meantime, the immense suffering and
insecurity caused by the regime's brutality and by the
extremist groups, like the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) and the Al-Nusra Front, continue
to deepen the most severe humanitarian catastrophe
in a generation. Approximately 12.2 million people
are in need of humanitarian assistance in Syria; some
5.5 million of them children - 5.5 million children.
Around 7.6 million people have been displaced within
Syria and more than 3 million Syrians have become
refugees.

On 2 January, the Italian Coast Guard intercepted a
crewless ship floating 40 miles of the country's coast.
Approximately 400 people, including many women and
children, were on board, huddled together for warmth
in containers originally built to transport livestock.
Most of them were Syrians fleeing the civil war and
had been abandoned on the ship by their smugglers
and left for dead. People abandoned, freezing and
starving in containers built for animals - that is what
Al-Assad's brutality has done to Syrians. And this
is not an isolated incident: days earlier, Italy's Coast
Guard had intercepted another crewless ship as it
steamed towards a collision with the coast with nearly
800 Syrians packed on board.

In the face of such unprecedented need and
desperation, all countries can and must do more,
including by supporting the countries that are already
hosting the majority of Syrian refugees and making
robust contributions to the United Nations enormous
$8.4 billion humanitarian appeal.

No country has taken in more Syrian refugees
than Lebanon, which is host to more than 1.1 million
Syrians and is facing growing challenges in getting
their basic needs, especially with the onset of winter.
We encourage Lebanon and all receiving countries to
coordinate closely with Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees in the development
of criteria to ensure that those fleeing violence and
persecution are able to enter these countries, just as we
encourage Governments across the region and around
the world to provide refuge for asylum-seekers, in
accordance with international humanitarian principles.

Lebanon deserves the election of a president and
fully empowered Government to help deal with the
considerable challenges the country faces. Electing a
president is, of course, a Lebanese decision, but it is
one that must be taken now for the sake of the Lebanese
people.

The suffering inside Syria is not limited to Syrians.
Some 18,000 civilians are trapped in Yarmouk, the
vast majority of them Palestinian refugees. The United
Nations Reliefand Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East estimates that 400 food parcels are
needed daily to make the population's minimum needs.
Yet over the past month, only 36 parcels in total have
been distributed. That is 36 parcels distributed during a
time when a minimum of 12,000 parcels were needed.

Assad's brutality has helped fuel the rise of violent
extremist groups like ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front,
which are spreading terror and instability across the
region. The United States and partner nations are
committed to continuing to degrade and ultimately
defeat ISIL through operations in Syria, as well as in
Iraq at the request of the Iraqi Government. Together
with our partners, we are committed to rooting out
ISIL's safe havens in the region. We commend Iraqi
Prime Minister Al Abadi for his outreach in the region
and to all of Iraq's communities, an effort that has
consolidated his broad-based support. We urge his
Government to continue along the path towards genuine
inclusion of all groups in the political, economic and
security future of the country.

The spread of ISIL, the Al-Nusra Front and other
extremist groups also threatens a security of Iraq and
Syria's neighbours, most directly Lebanon. Hizbullah's
involvement in the conflict in Syria violates Lebanon's
policy of disassociation and has made Lebanon a target
for violent extremist attacks. On 10 January, extremists
staged a double suicide bombing in a cafe in the Jabal
Mohsen neighbourhood of Tripoli, Lebanon, in which
9 people were killed and dozens more injured. Yet if
the attackers' aim was to divide Lebanon, they failed.
A full range of Sunni, Shia and Christian Lebanese
leaders firmly the condemned the attack as did a broad
swathe of Lebanese society, who rallied behind the
Lebanese armed forces in pursuing those responsible.
The Lebanese people also vigorously condemned
the attack. In the days following it, the Twitter hash-
tag #JesuisJabalMohsen was a top-trending tweet in
Lebanon.

Lastly let me turn to the Middle East. For decades,
the United States has worked to try to help achieve a
comprehensive end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Immense though the challenges may be, we firmly
believe that they can and must be overcome because the
status quo is unsustainable. We remain committed to
achieving the peace that both Palestinians and Israelis
deserve: two States for two peoples, with a sovereign,
viable and independent Palestine, living side by side in
peace and security with a Jewish and democratic Israel.

As the Council is aware, on 30 December (see S/PV.7354) the United States voted against a Security
Council draft resolution (S/2014/916). We made our
position clear. The draft resolution, which was hastily
put to a vote, would have taken us farther from and
not closer to an atmosphere that makes it possible to
achieve two States for two peoples. Since that vote, the
United States, represented in particular by Secretary
Kerry, has reached out to both parties in an effort to try
to reduce tensions and find a path forward. The Quartet
envoys will meet at the end of this month to discuss the
way ahead.

We continue to oppose unilateral actions by both
sides that we view as detrimental to the cause of peace.
Palestinian efforts to join the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and to accede to a number
of international treaties are counter-productive and will
not advance the aspirations of the Palestinian people
for a sovereign and independent State. We urge both
parties to exercise maximum restraint and avoid steps
that threaten to push Israeli-Palestinian relations into a
cycle of further escalation.

As we continue to work towards Israeli-Palestinian
peace, we share the deep concern of the United Nations
regarding the situation in Gaza. All sides must work
together to accelerate efforts and increase support for
rebuilding through the Gaza reconstruction mechanism.
The humanitarian needs are considerable, particularly
in the harsh winter months. In December, the United
States announced an initial $100 million contribution
to the 2015 needs of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
including in Gaza. We encourage other States to make
pledges and to promptly deliver the funds that they have
already promised to fully meet those urgent needs.

