At the outset, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines thanks the briefers for their remarks, and we commend the Niger for convening this debate. Regional and subregional organizations occupy a critical space in our multilateral system. They serve as intermediaries that link the international community to the local and contextual realities found within States, and provide their constituents with much-needed insulation against global turmoil. In the case of the International Organization of la Francophonie, the international reach and geographically dispersed membership of this institution reinforces its strategic value to the multilateral system, which is manifested through technical cooperation, solidarity, capacity-building and the advancement of democracy and human rights among its members. At a time when the international community is faced with many threats including the interlocking health, socioeconomic, political, and security challenges of the coronavirus disease pandemic, the adverse impacts of climate change, and the heightened risks of violent conflict precipitated by divisions along ethnic, communal and political lines, the crucial role of regional and subregional groupings cannot be overstated. More pressingly, given the current geopolitical tensions and fragmentation across the multilateral system, groups like la Francophonie - which places solidarity at the core of its mandate - are essential for ensuring that countries are able to confront their development challenges, and to build peaceful, prosperous and inclusive societies in accordance with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In this regard, we applaud la Francophonie's efforts in advancing multilateral cooperation, promoting sustainable development, improving access to quality education, addressing climate change, strengthening the rule of law and encouraging the active social, economic and political participation of women, girls, and youth in Francophonie societies. More than 50 per cent of French-speaking persons live on the African continent. We therefore encourage the International Organization of la Francophonie to further advance its capacity-building and development-assistance activities in African countries, especially those in vulnerable contexts, such as in the Sahel region; strengthen the institutional relationships with regional and subregional organizations, such as the African Union, the Economic Community of West African States, and the Group of Five for the Sahel, which are at the forefront of the international community's efforts to promote lasting peace and security on the continent; and increase cooperation with the Peacebuilding Commission in Francophone countries such as Burundi and the Central African Republic, in order to bolster the United Nations sustaining peace agenda at a time when there is a shortage of predictable and reliable financing for peacebuilding activities. As we continue working towards silencing the guns across Africa to build peaceful and resilient societies, in accordance with the African Union's Agenda 2063, la Francophonie remains an essential partner to the United Nations. In conclusion, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines emphasizes that the challenges of the twenty-first century can only be addressed through partnerships that yield people-centred solutions. We commend la Francophonie for its endeavours in this regard and encourage the continuation of these efforts going forward.
