The Secretary-General: I commend the Council,
and other Member States represented here, for the sense
of urgency they are showing in dealing with this grave
crisis in Sierra Leone. This is entirely appropriate, given
the very serious challenge which that situation now
presents to all of us in the international community.

As of this moment, several hundred United Nations
peacekeepers - the great majority of them Zambians -
are still being detained against their will in various parts
of Sierra Leone. These are soldiers who came to Sierra
Leone not as enemies but as friends and peacemakers,
under the terms of an agreement negotiated and signed by
both parties, including Corporal Foday Sankoh on behalf
of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF). The United
Nations peacekeeping mission was asked, under the
agreement, to manage the disarmament process.

It is deplorable and unacceptable that the same RUF
should now not only interfere with the disarmament
process but arbitrarily detain members of the United
Nations mission. Once again I would remind Mr. Sankoh
that he is responsible for the action of forces under his
command. He will be held accountable for their actions,
and for the safety and well-being of all those who have
been detained.

I demand the immediate and unconditional release of
all United Nations personnel, and I thank all those, in
particular the leaders of neighbouring countries, who are
working to secure that outcome. I am glad to confirm that

 

two United Nations military personnel were released earlier
today.

But it must go without saying that our concern is not
limited to the safety of United Nations peacekeepers. It
must embrace the plight of all those they are there to help,
namely, the people of Sierra Leone, now threatened with
yet another round of fighting and inevitably fearful that the
atrocities of past years will be renewed.

It is vital that the world should not now abandon the
people of Sierra Leone in their hour of greatest need. They
are entitled to expect not only humanitarian assistance -
which United Nations agencies are continuing to provide -
but also some protection.

Let me remind the Council that our mission was
configured as a peacekeeping force. It was neither designed
nor equipped to be an enforcement operation. And it was
attacked by one of the parties that had pledged to cooperate
with it, before it had been properly deployed. Given that
new situation, we have to consolidate and reinforce our
troops so that they can defend themselves and their
mandates effectively, and so that they can help stabilize the
situation.

I am glad to say that additional troops are on their
way, including units with battle experience and with combat
equipment, such as artillery and helicopter gunships. I thank
the troop-contributing countries for making these units and
equipment available more rapidly and in greater numbers
than had been anticipated. In fact, when all these troops
have arrived, the military component of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) is likely to exceed
the maximum authorized by the Council in resolution 1289
(2000). I hope that, in the circumstances, the Council will
be willing to set a new and more generous limit.

That said, the logistical difficulties we face should not
be underestimated. Our logistics staff is working very hard.
They have arranged at very short notice for some 120 to
150 flights into Freetown's Lungi airport, using a variety of
aircraft to bring troops, equipment and supplies from
several different countries.

While most of these flights will use United
Nations-chartered aircraft, we are very grateful to those
Member States that are assisting us with this effort.
Meanwhile, the United Kingdom has made an invaluable
contribution by securing the airport. The presence of British
troops, even for a limited time and with a limited mandate,
is a very important stabilizing factor.

I am also greatly encouraged by the willingness of
subregional leaders, expressed at their meeting in Abuja
on Tuesday, not only to contribute more troops to Sierra
Leone but also to re-engage themselves politically in the
quest for long-term peace and stability. We must
cooperate with them in reassessing the political situation
and in finding ways to reactivate the peace process. The
new troops could perhaps form the nucleus of a rapid
reaction force, which I remain convinced would be the
best way to provide UNAMSIL with the combat
capability it needs.

I know that West African leaders, among others,
have also called for a revision of UNAMSIL's mandate,
to give it a clear enforcement role. I am not necessarily
opposed to that, but whatever mandate is decided, the first
priority for the Council must be to ensure that we have
the capacity to carry out the tasks that its mandate
implies. The Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) offer of troops is very important in
this respect, but it is contingent on financial and logistical
support from other Member States.

I hope - I should like to say, "I trust" - that that
support will now be forthcoming. A degree of regional or
subregional specialization in handling security issues is
quite natural and healthy, but it cannot and must not be
seen as a substitute for the overall responsibility of the
United Nations, and of this Council in particular. It is a
refrain that the Council has heard from me before, but it
has never been more pertinent than it is tonight. Africans
are facing up courageously to the appalling problems of
their continent. They rightly look for help to the rest of
the world, especially to its more powerful and prosperous
States, and most especially to the Council, which began
the year with such a strong reaffirmation of its
commitment to Africa.

This Organization has made a commitment to the
people of Sierra Leone. We now face a test of our resolve
to abide by that commitment. More than that, the plight
of Sierra Leone and its people has become a crucial test
for the fundamental solidarity between peoples, rising
above race and above geography, which is the most basic
guiding principle of this Organization.

Mr. President, I plead with you: let us not fail Sierra
Leone; let us not fail Africa. This time, in this crisis, let
us back words with deeds, and mandates with the
resources needed to make them work.

 

