Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Ivo Petrov, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Tajikistan and
head of the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT), for participating in today's meeting
and, most important, for the work he and his colleagues
are carrying out in Tajikistan.

Today's meeting of the Security Council and the
statement which you, Mr. President, will be making at its
conclusion are unusual events. They will aim at summing
up the many United Nations peacekeeping efforts in
Tajikistan, including the work of the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Tajikistan, and at reaffirming the
international community's unswerving support for the
Tajik people on its difficult path to peace and national
reconciliation.

 

Russia welcomes the success that has been achieved
in the peaceful settlement of the conflict in Tajikistan. The
implementation of the major provisions of the General
Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and National
Accord in Tajikistan, signed on 27 June 1997 at Moscow
under United Nations auspices, is an important achievement
not only by the Tajik people but also by the United
Nations. The success of the peace process was advanced by
the activities of UNMOT, the Contact Group of guarantor
States and international organizations, and donor States,
which have played an extremely positive role at various
stages of the inter-Tajik settlement process.

As Mr. Petrov has said, the basis of success has of
course been the goodwill of the former parties to the
conflict, their political courage, their realism and their
ability to subordinate their own ambitions to the interests of
the people. I wish, through the Permanent Representative of
the Republic of Tajikistan to the United Nations,
Ambassador Rashid Alimov, who is participating in today's
meeting, to congratulate all Tajiks on this important gain,
which will have defined the peaceful, democratic
development of Tajik society.

Russia has played an active role at all stages of the
inter-Tajik settlement process and, along with Iran and its
Central Asian partners, has become one of the key
guarantors of the implementation of the General Agreement.
Russian peacekeepers within the collective peacekeeping
forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS),
in close cooperation with UNMOT, have made a
substantive contribution to stabilizing the situation, to
promoting and ensuring the safety and security of United
Nations and other international personnel in Tajikistan, to
the delivery of humanitarian assistance, and to the
implementation of the General Agreement.

Over the past several years, together with their Tajik
colleagues, Russian border troops have carried out an
important task, helping to stabilize the situation on the
Tajik-Afghan border by raising a barrier to the illegal
traffic in narcotic drugs and in weapons, and by putting an
end to the activities of terrorists, extremists and other
subversive elements from the territory of neighbouring
Afghanistan.

We know that a great deal remains to be done to
consolidate peace and stability in Tajikistan. We note with
satisfaction that the report of the Secretary-General states
that actions laid down in the General Agreement but not yet
carried out in full will in fact be completed by the relevant
Government organs. In that connection, we support such
measures taken by the leadership of Tajikistan as the
integration of former participants in the hostilities into the
country's military structures and the removal from the
population of weapons, ammunition and other illegal
possessions.

Russia also supports recent measures by leaders of
the Republic of Tajikistan to improve the situation in the
country and in the Central Asian region as a whole.
Together with Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and our other CIS
partners, we are ready to strengthen efforts to counter
international terrorism and extremism.
We fully share the Secretary-General's conclusion
that the international community should continue to
provide support to Tajikistan, which has now embarked
upon the enterprise of post-conflict peace-building. Here,
we support the Secretary-General's intention to inform the
Security Council of the objectives of a United Nations
office for Tajikistan, to be established following the
withdrawal of UNMOT upon the expiry of its mandate,
on 15 May 2000. There should be no break in the United
Nations presence in Tajikistan. In addition to the general
aim of promoting the post-conflict social and economic
rehabilitation of Tajikistan, the mandate of the new
United Nations office should include such important
elements as technical and financial assistance for the
process of reintegrating former participants in the
hostilities, completion of their demobilization, creation of
civilian employment for former military personnel,
disarmament of the population and the return of
remaining refugees.

Today, as the Republic of Tajikistan embarks on a
path leading to the ultimate establishment of civil accord
and peace, Russia is ready to offer all possible assistance
for post-conflict peace-building in Tajikistan.

