Mr. Hussain (Pakistan): I must first of all
apologize for the absence of Ambassador Akram, who
is unable to deliver this statement owing to other
engagements.

Mr. President, the Pakistan delegation highly
appreciates your skilful leadership of the Security
Council during this month and welcomes the
opportunity to participate in a discussion on the Middle
East situation. We listened carefully to the briefing
provided by Under-Secretary-General Gambari.

Whatever one's political perspective, it is clear
that the Middle East is a region in flames and on the
edge of chaos. Last month, the world witnessed 30
days of cruel and unjust war which gave rise to a series
of Violations of the basic principles and purposes of the
United Nations Charter.

The first of these was the use of disproportionate
force. No military provocation by irregular forces can
justify a full-scale attack and the destruction of a
country whose national forces or authorities had no
role in that provocation. We do not condone rocket
attacks by Hizbollah which resulted in the loss of
innocent civilian lives in Israel. At the same time, there
can be no justification for bombardments whose
Victims were overwhelmingly innocent Lebanese
civilians, including children and women. There can be
no justification for the wanton destruction of the cities
and infrastructure of a vulnerable country that was in
the process of reconstructing itself from earlier
conflicts and invasions into a peaceful, prosperous and
democratic polity.

Secondly, the war witnessed gross and consistent
violations of international humanitarian law - in
Qana, in Tyre and in Beirut.

Thirdly, it witnessed what clearly appeared to be
deliberate attacks against United Nations peacekeepers,
in which four were killed. We trust that this will be
fully investigated.

The fourth and most serious matter was the
failure by the Security Council to discharge its primary
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security. The world watched helplessly for 30 days as
the bombs and rockets continued to rain down and kill
innocent people.

The laboriously negotiated resolution 1701
(2006) was a better outcome than earlier proposals
presented to the Council. It envisaged Israeli
withdrawal, upheld Lebanon's sovereignty over all its
territory and called for reconstruction. Yet, it was not
the Security Council's finest hour. After 30 days of
war, the Council's resolution could only call for a
cessation of hostilities that was unequal and
incomplete. The peace that has returned is fragile. It
has been violated by one party, taking advantage of the
ambiguity in resolution 1701 (2006). Similar ambiguity
also plagues the plan to reinforce and redeploy the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
One thing is certain: the United Nations should not be
expected to accomplish what could not be imposed by
the resort to war. It is the responsibility of the
Government of Lebanon, and of its armed forces, to
establish its sovereignty over its own territory.

The international community must contribute
actively to providing urgently needed humanitarian
help to the Lebanese people, including food, shelter
and fuel supplies. The naval blockade, combined with
the destruction of Lebanon's land communications
system, is a major impediment to humanitarian relief.
The blockade should be lifted immediately. Lebanon's
reconstruction too must be quickly accomplished, with
the generous support of the international community.
Pakistan will make its due contribution to Lebanon's
reconstruction and revival.

It is also clear that this 30-day war has changed
the strategic and political landscape in the Middle East.
Perhaps the most far-reaching provision of resolution
1701 (2006) is found in its penultimate paragraph,
which calls for a comprehensive peace in the Middle
East.

It is absolutely clear, now more than ever, that
none of the conflicts in the Middle East can be
resolved by recourse to the use of force.
Disproportionate military power cannot ensure the
durability of a peace that is imposed against the will,
aspirations and rights of a people. Even if put down
once, they will rise and rise again in the legitimate
quest for justice.

Clearly, the root cause of the Israeli-Lebanon
conflict, the root cause of the Palestinian resistance and
the root cause of suicide bombings and rocket attacks
is Israel's 38-year occupation of the Palestinian and
other Arab territories. The visible and often brutal
suppression of the Palestinian people is also a principal
root cause of the rise of extremism across the Arab and
Muslim world and of the resort to terrorism. That
political reality, however unpalatable, can no longer be
ignored.

The structure of a durable peace in the Holy Land
is already well known: the vision of two States, Israel
and Palestine, living side by side within secure and
recognized borders. To realize that vision, the Security
Council must secure the non-selective implementation
of its own resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), as well as the provisions of the Arab
peace initiative and the Quartet's road map.

The most urgent task is to halt the violence in
Gaza and the West Bank: both Israeli attacks and
Palestinian rockets. The captured Israeli soldiers
should be released, but Israel must also release the
hundreds of Palestinians and Lebanese it holds,
including the Palestinian ministers and
parliamentarians. We hope the Palestinians will be able
to unify their Government and security forces. We call
on Israel to halt and reverse its settlement activity on
the West Bank, to stop the erection of the separation
wall and to end the economic and humanitarian
blockade of the Palestinians. We urge the resumption
of peace talks, without prejudice to the positions of
either side. Those talks should lead to early agreement
to resume implementation of the agreed peace plan and
the road map.

A parallel peace process should be revived
between Syria and Israel and should lead to Israel's
withdrawal from the Golan Heights and to a peace
agreement.

No one can fail to note that today the problems
affecting the Middle East extend beyond the area of the
old Palestine Mandate. The peaceful resolution of the
sectarian violence and the insurgency in Iraq requires
cooperation on the part of all Iraqis, Iraq's neighbours
and the international community.

It is Pakistan's hope that the peaceful resolution
of the disputes in the Middle East will not be further
hampered by arbitrary deadlines or precipitate action
on other problems in the area. That could throw further
fuel on the fire in this already inflamed region.

