The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Chile.

Chile proposed to the members of the Security
Council the holding of this open debate on post-
conflict national reconciliation and the role of the
United Nations in the conviction that the reconciliation
of societies fractured by conflict is a condition
indispensable for the achievement of lasting peace.
Without it, conflicts can re-emerge and become new
crises for the Council.

After conflicts, societies face many challenges:
demands for justice and accountability, the search for
truth, compensation for victims, the rule of law,
stability and the building of a future without losing
sight of the past. The objective of this debate is to
consider ways in which the United Nations can
systematize experiences that will enable it to identify
elements associated with reconciliation processes in the
context of post-conflict strategies. The traumatic
consequences of a crisis require that a moral,
institutional and socio-economic reconstruction process
be able to build a new order in which there is a sense of
belonging, thereby avoiding a return to the conflict
situation.

Reconciliation is not a utopian objective; it is the
collective response of a society emerging from crisis
whose fabric has been torn asunder. Reconciliation puts
an end to the cycle of violence, laying the foundations
for a new coexistence. Efforts must be focused on
creating conditions that promote reconciliation, which
can in no way be imposed. That is a complex task in
which we need to consider the diversity of the
historical experiences - namely, the political and
socio-cultural realities - of the affected country.

It is in the post-conflict stage that the United
Nations has an opportunity to contribute to the moral
and material rebuilding of institutions. The
Organization's responsibility goes beyond restoring
peace and minimum conditions for security after a
conflict; it involves cooperation to restore the capacity
for dialogue between the various social actors, respect
for diversity and the will to work on a common project.

The United Nations has had and must maintain
the status of an independent and legitimizing body
whose purpose is to guarantee conditions for a stable
peace. The multidimensional nature of the concept of
reconciliation offers the United Nations a broad range
of options for post-conflict action. It is in that light that
we must view efforts aimed at restoring civil
institutions, establishing or reforming judicial systems,
adopting measures to strengthen respect for human
rights and promoting democracy. A reconciliation
strategy must have as its basic principles truth, justice
and compensation, which should be accompanied by
vital economic and social policies.

Together with judicial action, the path to
reconciliation requires clear moral and material
compensation policies for victims and their families.
The promotion and protection of human rights and of
international humanitarian law must inform such
policies in order to guarantee and strengthen peace.

Reconciliation processes must take into account
the particularities of each situation. What is appropriate
in one place and at a given time may not be appropriate
in other circumstances. There are no universal formulas
for achieving reconciliation.

We think reconciliation is a key dimension of the
work that the United Nations can do in the post-
conflict stage. We should consider a comprehensive
coordination effort within the system. We believe that
that objective will be facilitated with the establishment
of a focal point to coordinate United Nations action on
issues concerning reconciliation in its principal organs,
in peacekeeping operations, in the work of special
representatives and envoys of the Secretary-General, in
the activities of high commissioners and in United
Nations agencies and programmes. Such a
comprehensive effort should also extend to financial
institutions, regional organizations, civil society and
national and local bodies.

Peacekeeping operations must continue to make
progress with regard to the inclusion of experts with
practical experience in post-conflict reconciliation. An
appropriate reconciliation strategy must take into
account the role played by women in the peace-
building process and the contributions that they can
make to the design and implementation of
reconciliation strategies. Reconciliation programmes
must also take into account the special needs of boys
and girls affected by war.

We trust that the outcome of this debate will
enable us to make progress so that the United Nations
can help to end the cycles of crisis that disrupt national
and regional stability and world peace. We face an
important challenge for the Organization, for the
realization of universal values and for the building of a
world in which peace and justice prevail.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of Cameroon,
in which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representative of Cameroon took the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber

The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
remind all speakers of what I indicated during the
morning session: I ask them to kindly limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their text in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

Also, I shall not individually invite speakers to
take a seat at the table and invite them to resume their
seats at the side of the Chamber. When a speaker is
taking the floor, the Conference Officer will seat the
next speaker at the table. I thank representatives for
their understanding and cooperation.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Ireland.


