Mr. Mardini (International Committee of the Red Cross): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
giving the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) the opportunity to contribute to this important
open debate on strengthening peacekeeping operations
in Africa.

The largest peacekeeping operations are currently
deployed in Africa. Regional coalitions have also
increased in response to the security challenges on
the continent. The ICRC is aware of such challenges
because we operate in those very same contexts. Forty
per cent of our budget is dedicated to and spent in
that region. From South Sudan to the Sahel, the ICRC
is mandated to protect and assist victims of armed
conflict on a neutral, impartial and independent basis.
Today, I want to address two points with regard to how
the international community can effectively assist the
African Union (AU) and African States in building
their capacity for peace and security.

First, we can support the commitment of African
States to respecting, and ensuring respect for,
international humanitarian law and other applicable
legal frameworks. It is critical that United Nations
and AU-mandated forces are clear about which legal
frameworks govern their operations. Promising steps
have been taken by the AU to establish a framework
that will foster greater respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
The AU and its member States have also committed
to maintaining high standards in the conduct and
discipline of their peacekeeping personnel.

On our part, the ICRC has long assisted African
States in the integration of international standards into
their national law. The ICRC is currently supporting the
AU in the enhancement of its compliance framework. In
addition, every year the AU and the ICRC co-organize a
round table in Addis Ababa to discuss challenges to and
best practices of peacekeeping operations, addressing
international humanitarian law and the protection
of civilians.

Secondly, we can provide assistance in terms
of training. At this time of enhanced partnership,
the United Nations, the AU, Member States and
international organizations must ensure that troops and
police are adequately trained in applicable standards.
Training modules need to be comprehensive, tailored
to the mandate and relevant to operational needs. For
example, many peacekeeping operations conduct law-
enforcement tasks. Therefore, police components
need to be reinforced, and when military contingents
are involved, law-enforcement principles should be
translated into actionable military guidance.

On the ICRC's part, we contribute to the training
effort. Last year, we conducted sessions on legal
standards and humanitarian priorities for more than
25,000 peacekeepers, including 16,000 from African
States. The ICRC also participates in the AU-led
discussions on training standards, including on the
operationalization of the African Standby Force. In
addition, the ICRC has expertise on health to share,
from its first aid and pre-hospital emergency care
programmes, to the treatment and management of the
weapon-wounded.

The determination of the AU and African States
to resolve their own challenges is commendable. In
engaging together on peacekeeping operations, the
ICRC has seen the benefits of close collaboration
on both the respect for legal norms and on training.
Developing the capacity for peace and security of the
AU and African States is critical and requires sustained
partnerships within the international community.

