Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking, Ambassador Umarov, Chair
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992)
and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea,
for his statement and, through him, the Somalia and
Eritrea Monitoring Group for its latest report and
investigative work. In all their aspects, sanctions help
support our political goals, and it is therefore our view
that they are an important and necessary tool for the
Security Council.

With regard to Somalia, I will address three points.

First, Iwould like to underscore that the fight against
the terrorist groups in Somalia, Al-Shabaab and Da'esh,
remains a priority and must involve more Somali and
local forces. We welcome the work, achievements and
territory won by the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) since 2007, and take note of the Mission's
desire for a planned and coordinated withdrawal. It is
now important that the Somali authorities quickly adopt
a national security architecture that reflects the Federal
structure in Somalia.

The development of a Somali security solution
is our priority. The goal is to establish Somali armed
forces and police capable of progressively taking charge
of the struggle against Al-Shabaab and stabilizing
the territories that have been retaken, thereby taking
over from the AMISOM. That is the rational of the
ongoing reviews, which we support. In that effort,
the involvement of regional forces is crucial. We are
encouraged by the success of the Puntland forces against
Da'esh. The misappropriation of funds and corruption
within the Somali army and the non-payment of troops
highlighted by the report ofthe Monitoring Group must
spur us to remain demanding with regard to such issues
and strengthen the training and professionalization of
the Somali security forces.

Secondly, in Somalia as elsewhere the numerous
violations of human rights and of international
humanitarian law are unacceptable. All those violations
are equally reprehensible, particularly so in the case
of human rights violations committed by the Somali
security forces and the international forces that enjoy
international support. If combating terrorism is our
priority, it must be done while respecting human rights.
It is a matter of principle, but it is also a question of
effectiveness, because a military response by the
authorities, with AMISOM's support, will succeed
only if it enjoys the support of the Somali population.
That is why we support the recommendations of the
Monitoring Group aimed at promoting better respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law by
all stakeholders.
Finally, I would like to underline that the ongoing
drought in the region, which is threatening millions of
lives, calls for an urgent and determined humanitarian
response. France has voluntarily contributed an
additional €l.6 million to support the work of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees for the benefit ofpeople in situations of forced
displacement, of which €l million is earmarked for food
aid. Obstacles to the distribution of humanitarian aid,
some of which are the responsibility of United Nations
partners, especially at the local level, must cease
immediately, as the Chair of the Committee said earlier.

Turning to Eritrea, we welcome the apparent lack
of support for AI-Shabaab, but it is now incumbent
on Eritrea to increase cooperation with the Security
Council in line with the principle of cooperation with
all United Nations mechanisms, including in particular
by inviting the United Nations Monitoring Group to
visit and confirm the lack of support for Al-Shabaab
starting from Asmara. Such a step would be a sign ofa
clear desire on the part of Eritrea to move forward and
be released from the embargo regime that it has known
for eight years.

We must not forget that the embargo regime is
also a response to the unresolved issue of Djiboutian
prisoners. France welcomes the release of four military
Djiboutian prisoners who had been detained in Eritrea
since 2008. It is now time to clarify the fate of the other
Djiboutian soldiers who remain missing, according to
authorities in Djibouti, and address the border issue.
With regard to those issues, the Eritrean authorities
have everything to gain in providing comprehensive
clarifications so as to normalize relations with Djibouti.

Today, 13 April, also marks the fifteenth
anniversary of the decision of the Eritrea-Ethiopia
Boundary Commission regarding the delimitation
of the border between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Like
the European Union, France is committed to that
decision and encourages all measures that will make it
possible to move forward on demarcating the border in
compliance with the 2002 decision. France, along with
the European Union, is ready to support such a process
so as to establish conditions for peaceful relations
between neighbouring countries.

In conclusion, the Chair of the Committee can count
on France's continued support. I would like once again
to commend his work and the Monitoring Group for its
periodic and quality reports, and to reiterate France's
confidence in the usefulness of his mandate.
