Miss Hassan (Djibouti): I would like to clarify that
my delegation has the honour to speak on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), as that fact
has not been reflected in the list of speakers.

I congratulate the United States for assuming the
presidency this month and commend you, Mr. President,
for the way you are steering its work. I would like also
to thank Mr. Robert Serry for his briefing today.

I wish to express the appreciation and support of
the OIC for the efforts of Secretary of State John Kerry
aimed at resuming the Israeli-Palestinian peace talks.
Those timely efforts are essential to achieving the lofty
goal of resolving the thorny Arab-Israeli conflict. We
hope that Secretary Kerry will succeed in bringing the
parties back to the negotiation table, as the implications
of missing fundamental opportunities are certainly
unfavourable, especially at a time when the situation in
the Middle East is highly unstable and volatile.

Despite the promising reality that has emerged
from the recent efforts exerted by Secretary Kerry
to revitalize Israeli-Palestinian peace negotiations,
Israel, the occupying Power, has persisted in carrying
out illegal practices aimed at fortifying its decades-
long occupation of the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem.

In that regard, the OIC believes that Israeli settlement
activities, chiefly in occupied East Jerusalem, which
have markedly escalated recently, remain the core
challenge that needs to be seriously addressed. There is
no doubt that, at a time when well-intended efforts have
been made to give a new lease on life to the Middle East
peace process, the continuation of the illegal Israeli
settlement activities, in violation of international law
and peace commitments, will only undermine prospects
for the two-State solution and destabilize the region.
Hence, Israel's willingness to engage in serious peace
negotiations will depend upon its genuine readiness
to halt all of its settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including in East Jerusalem.

The OIC, which has endorsed the Arab Peace
Initiative, believes that efforts to resolve the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict should be carried out
within the widely agreed upon parameters, particularly
the well-established principle of Israel's withdrawal
from the territories that it occupied in 1967, and the
establishment of the independent Palestinian State
on those territories. That raises the need for Israel
to unequivocally accept the 1967 borders in order to
facilitate the resumption of peace negotiations. At the
same time, Israel, the occupying Power, should carry
out several confidence-building measures that can
create an environment favourable to the resumption of
peace negotiations. Releasing Palestinian detainees,
especially those detained prior to the signing of the
Oslo Accords, remains an important cornerstone in that
regard.

In addition, the removal of Israeli restrictions
imposed on the mobility of Palestinians and the
prevention of acts of terror by fanatical Israeli settlers
against Palestinian civilians are important steps that
should be taken prior to recommencing negotiations.
In that connection, the OIC welcomes the decision of
the European Union (EU) to exclude Israeli settlements
from any future agreement with any EU country, and
to prohibit funding, cooperation and the issuance of
scholarship or research grants to any Israeli individuals
or institutions located in the settlements situated in the
Palestinian and Arab territories occupied since 1967.

Nevertheless, the OIC is very concerned about the
human rights violations against Palestinians in Israeli
jails. The deaths of Palestinian prisoners in an Israeli
jail early this year not only exposed the inhuman
policies and systematic violations perpetrated by the
Israeli occupation against Palestinian prisoners, it
also requires urgent intervention by the international
community to take effective action in order to defend
the Palestinian prisoners' human rights, save their lives
and pressure Israel to respect its obligations towards
Palestinian detainees in accordance with international
humanitarian law and the Geneva Conventions, and to
release them immediately.

The Organization of Islamic Cooperation is very
much concerned about the deteriorating situation
in Syria and the ongoing bloodshed, violence and
destruction of property. The OIC stresses the need
to preserve Syria's unity, sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity. The OIC therefore calls for
the immediate cessation of violence, killing and
destruction, for respect for Islamic values and human
rights, and for saving Syria from the danger of an all-
out civil war.

The OIC urges the Syrian regime to show wisdom
and to engage in serious dialogue with the opposition
in order to pave the way for a transition process that
allows the Syrian people to achieve their legitimate
aspirations for democratic reforms and changes.
However, while reiterating the OIC's commitment
to a peaceful solution to the crisis in Syria, the OIC
calls upon the international community, in particular
the Security Council, to assume its responsibilities
and act promptly to stop the killing, destruction and
displacement perpetrated against the Syrian people,
and to find a peaceful and lasting solution to the Syrian
crisis.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm the full support
and solidarity of the OIC with the Palestinian people,
in their endeavour to regain their legitimate and
inalienable national rights, including their right of
return, self- determination and the establishment of
their independent Palestinian State on their national
soil, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

