Mr. Dilja (Albania): Let me state at the very
beginning how appropriate my delegation finds this
open debate on the very important issue of combating
terrorism. We thank you for this, Mr. President, and
feel deeply motivated to make our contribution here.

Let me also pay tribute to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and to its Chairman, Ambassador
Greenstock, for the excellent stewardship and excellent
work in ensuring implementation by all Member States
of an effective counter-terrorism strategy. The CTC has
really become an important and respected agent for
international consensus on counter-terrorism. I would
like to reiterate that my delegation shares the
determination of the Security Council to keep up the
momentum of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
fully supports the ministerial declaration recently
adopted by resolution 1456 (2003). We consider it to
set the agenda for a further thrust in the fight against
terrorism, and we agree with its messages and
recommendations, and intend to comply with them.

Terrorism is global. We have all agreed to simply
translate that as global responsibility for fighting it -
as the responsibility of any one of the members of the
global community. Our delegation is aware of that
responsibility and, with precisely that awareness,
comes here today to reconfirm its active membership in
the international coalition against terrorism.

The memory of the victims of the terrorist attacks
on 11 September 2001 and of the victims of subsequent
attacks in Moscow, Karachi, Bali, and other places
forever inspires us to fight terrorism with the utmost
determination. It also reminds us that terrorism
threatens all countries and all peoples. From that sad
history, we all draw the lesson that in the face of
terrorism, we are duty-bound to mobilize collectively
and to undertake constant vigorous action - all of us
together and each of us separately - in order to fight it
with clear goals and positive results. The Government
of Albania commends all that has already been done at
the United Nations in the fight against terrorism. We
appreciate the vital role played by the Security
Council, and we acknowledge, in particular, the
activity of the indispensable CTC. Albania fully
recognizes its obligations as a Member of this
international body and firmly declares that it will
remain an active participant and collaborator in the
global coalition against terrorism.

We are fully aware that much more remains to be
done, and that we need to do better. We should
mobilize greater resources and should be vigilant and
committed, not be tolerant, not content to rest on our
laurels. We should be more imaginative. We are fully
aware that we should, in particular, redouble our efforts
at the national level in any area that is directly or
indirectly related to terrorism or that facilitates a
terrorist environment and terrorist activity, such as
organized crime, illicit drugs, drug trafficking or
money-laundering, among other things.

Our awareness is also being translated into
action - affirmative action - supported and assisted
by any international sources of assistance and guidance
available to us. The Albanian Government and
Albanian institutions have made counter-terrorism a
major priority on their agendas. The implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) is a daily endeavour for us. We
have focused on the areas that need to be tackled first.
We have worked to adopt legislation covering various
aspects of resolution 1373 (2001), and we shall
continue to do so. We are constantly working to
establish an effective executive mechanism for the
prevention of terrorist financing. We have ratified or
are in the process of ratifying various international
conventions and protocols related to terrorism.

Our delegation urges this international body, the
Security Council, and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee to continue to keep this issue at the top of
their agendas, to continue to recognize and shoulder
this special responsibility and to continue to call on any
Member State - including my country - for
responsible action. We should all help to ensure that
the CTC remains - as Ambassador Greenstock nicely
and correctly put it - a committee with a continued
sense of purpose, direction and momentum. Albania
will provide its modest contribution. We shall take our
place and shall remain in the front seats aboard the
anti-terrorist vehicle that the Committee is driving.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that terrorism is a
universal evil and that it calls for a universal fight. We
should win that fight; our fate is in our hands. A
famous philosopher defined history as the sum total of
things that could have been avoided. My delegation's
firm conviction is that, together, we shall write the
history of this global endeavour against terrorism as
the sum total of the good things that did happen: as a
history of success.

