Mr. Guehenno: Please allow me to begin with a
word of thanks to the Greek presidency for convening
this thematic debate and for inviting me to contribute
to one aspect of it, namely, the challenges currently
faced by United Nations peacekeeping operations in
promoting the rule of law, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) and security-
sector reform in post-conflict situations. I would like to
take this opportunity to focus in particular on the
interlinkages among those three issues and on the need
for more focused discussion of security-sector reform,
which has received little attention in such forums in the
past. The challenges in this area are indeed formidable.
But, before delving into the details, I would like to
make three general observations.

First, the good news: the total number of active
armed conflicts in the world is actually in steady
decline. In fact, the 28 or so countries of the world
currently affected by some form of active armed
conflict represent a 30-year low. The Security Council
lies at the heart of that decline, particularly since the
end of the cold war. The members of this body have
seized opportunities to broker agreements to end civil
wars and to send multidimensional peacekeeping
operations to assist with their implementation. In
several of those cases - Namibia, El Salvador,
Mozambique and Cambodia, for example - peace
prevails, albeit amid other serious challenges facing
those countries more than a decade after United
Nations peacekeepers departed.

One hopes that 10 years from now the same will
be said about Timor-Leste and Sierra Leone. The
PeacebuiIding Commission proposed by the Secretary-
General, if created, could certainly help increase that
likelihood by ensuring sustained and coordinated
international attention in the post-peacekeeping phase.

Second, while there are enough examples to
demonstrate that this is not mission impossible, there
should be no illusions about how difficult and
precarious the undertaking is. The tragedy of
Srebrenica, to which the Secretary-General just
referred, still serves as a constant reminder ten years
later of how an already dire situation can descend into
conscience-shocking acts of savagery in a matter of
days or hours. When we think that the worst is over, it
is important to remember precisely at that point that
the threat of mass killings, new waves of ethnic
cleansing and/or the resumption of full-scale hostilities
is likely still present in many peacekeeping contexts.
Small missteps and the misreading of events can spell
disaster, and they have.

Moreover, the jobs are getting increasingly
difficult. Although no one associated with the
operations in Mozambique or Cambodia would ever
say that those were easy cases, they now appear to be
so, relative to the scale, scope and complexity of the
challenges United Nations peace operations currently
face in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Sudan, for example.

In order to be better prepared for the unexpected,
the High-level Panel and the Secretary-General have
recommended the creation of a strategic reserve
capacity, ready to be called upon on short notice to
reinforce a mission facing an unforeseen crisis. One of
the highest priorities of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations in the coming year is to work
with Member States to define the concept of operations
of the strategic reserve.

Third, however robust United Nations
peacekeeping operations military capabilities might be,
they alone cannot ensure security in post-conflict
environments absent the right political strategy and the
political will of the relevant national and international
actors. As a result of either international or internal
pressure - or both - the main protagonists to the
conflict must be ready to make the painful political and
personal compromises necessary to maintain peace.
They must transform themselves into leaders or give
way to others able and willing to do the things required
in order to engender the trust of former enemies, bring
a war-torn society together around a common agenda
and steer the delicate balance between promoting
national reconciliation and unity, on the one hand, and
accountability for war crimes and grave abuses of
human rights on the other.

Those exceptionally trying demands require
exceptional individuals to step forward. No amount of
international assistance in the areas of the rule of law,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform can substitute for effective
national leadership. If the basis for political
compromise at the national and international level is
wanting, in all likelihood a United Nations peacekeeping
operation will be fighting an uphill battle, to put it
mildly, to maintain a secure environment.

I have offered those three observations up front to
stress that the right political context is often a
necessary precondition for achieving a secure
environment in a post-conflict setting. But while it may
be a necessary condition, it is not a sufficient
condition. Much more work is actually required in the
field of national institution-building. Indeed, a country
emerging from conflict cannot hope to consolidate
peace, develop sustainable institutions or achieve
economic prosperity if its citizens are too fearful to
walk freely in the streets or lack access to social and
legal services or political processes. Nor can a State
rebuild itself and avoid a relapse into conflict if its
population is threatened by police, armed forces or
intelligence units that are not held accountable and are
unprofessional, poorly resourced and poorly
disciplined, untrained in international standards or
lacking in effective management and oversight
structures. And although stabilization in the immediate
aftermath of conflict is a critical aspect of security,
longer-term efforts addressing the entire range of
security actors and judicial and law enforcement
institutions are just as critical, if not more so.

In short, if peace is to be lasting, the short-,
medium- and long-term security and justice needs of
both the State and its population must be addressed
equally. On those fronts, there are several areas that
deserve further study and potential improvement.

First, our efforts in the security and justice
sectors have tended to be driven by peace agreements,
which address those issues in the context of ending a
conflict. As during the conflict, parties to the
agreement are often driven by their own personal
agendas, and those do not always reflect all the
elements that are crucial for sustainable peace. Peace
agreements articulate in some detail the incorporation
of militia forces into a new police force or army, the
apportionment of senior-level appointments among
warring factions and the harmonization of ranks.

However, those elements, while important, do not
lay a strong basis for the consolidation of State and
human security in the post-conflict setting. Insufficient
attention is accorded to a comprehensive national
security review process to identify the threats, whether
internal or external, to State and human security and
the development of a security architecture that is
responsive to identified threats. As a result, both the
international community and the host countries are ill
prepared to tackle critical challenges such as
corruption, cross-border narcotics and arms and human
trafficking. Peace-agreement-driven approaches have
in some instances even led the international community
to support the reform of State institutions that had lost
their legitimacy in the eyes of the population. It is
therefore not surprising that those same countries have
had a high propensity for relapsing into conflict.

Secondly, as in many other areas of
peacebuilding, international efforts related to the
security and the justice sectors are often disjointed.
First, the United Nations bilateral donors and other
actors at times pursue their own objectives without
buying into a single agreed-upon framework or
approach, and, due to competition for donor funds, the
various actors are often not forthcoming about the
projects that they are planning, which leads to uneven
or duplicative assistance.

Thirdly, within the United Nations there is no
agreement on a single system-wide approach on these
issues. In some cases, we have specific operational
capacities in one part of the system, whereas the
corresponding capacity to support management,
oversight and accountability mechanisms may be non-
existent or lie in a different part of the United Nations
system. In other key areas, such as defence reform or
some aspects of the justice sector, capacity is
altogether lacking. That has led to an absence of
strategic coherence among the various links in the
chain of activities.

Fourthly, international approaches in support of
security sector reform in post-conflict countries often
apply foreign models and standards, which may be
politically unpalatable or, practically speaking, unsuitable
or unrealistic in the light of the realities on the ground.

And finally, existing approaches tend to be more
applicable to developing countries than to post-conflict
countries, as those approaches involve lengthy
processes that are not tailored to situations where the
road map for political and institutional change is often
set out in a negotiated and time-limited peace
agreement.

In seeking to address those challenges, the
international community might reconsider whether it is
always realistic to seek to rebuild, reform or restructure
a country's defence, police, courts and penal system
while simultaneously seeking to re-establish security,
keep the political process on track, facilitate the return
of displaced populations, conduct elections and restore
basic services.

In some cases, it may be appropriate to start early
on complex tasks such as rebuilding courts and training
police so that we do not miss the window of
opportunity for action. Otherwise, violent, corrupt and
inept approaches may become entrenched, and we may
later have little or no opportunity to have a significant
impact. In other cases, however, we may need to re-
examine the sequence of activities so that the
peacekeeping operation focuses on stabilization while
a proper assessment of threats and needs is conducted
and appropriate international, regional and local
partners are identified to rebuild the security
infrastructure and institutions in a sustainable fashion.
We need to think these questions through carefully so
as to ensure that we spend our efforts and resources on
viable processes and institutions that can be sustained
beyond the brief lifespan of a peacekeeping operation.

For the United Nations system, another key to
better delivery is to continue to strive to carry out our
mandates in as integrated a manner as possible. We
have recognized that strong synergies and links exist
between the development and security agendas, but we
must make greater strides in integrating our
development partners at the initial stages of planning
for peacekeeping operations. That would ensure that
our joint efforts are guided by a coherent, long-term
strategy, and would allow smooth handovers to
national and development partners once the
peacekeeping mandate is over. We must ensure that we
involve not only technical experts, but also civilians
and others with a big-picture perspective, in our
strategic and operational planning and activities.

At the same time, we must seek the greater
integration of capacities within the United Nations
system, which would require the assignment of clear
responsibility for specific activities; the development
of repositories of best practices, including diverse
models of reforming the security sector; and effective
coordination that brings together United Nations,
bilateral and other efforts, including with respect to
resource mobilization.

Equally, we must differentiate between areas
where the United Nations system has, or should further
develop, the capacity to carry out operational tasks and
deliver programmes, and other areas where we could
most usefully engage knowledgeably with host
countries and bilateral and multilateral partners that
have the requisite experience or capacity. As such, our
role would be to advocate for assistance from those
with something to offer and to ensure that what is
promised and delivered responds to the actual needs of
the host country. One key area that deserves
examination is defence reform, where the United
Nations currently has limited capacity.

As we reflect on how the United Nations might
better contribute to the justice and security sectors in
post-conflict environments, we might build on our
recent experience in the area of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR), which also
involves multi-actor, multidimensional activities that
stretch beyond the lifespan of a peacekeeping mission.
In April 2004, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations initiated an inter-agency process that
brought together 14 United Nations departments,
agencies, funds and programmes to jointly develop a
set of policies, guidelines and procedures called the
integrated DDR standards. Although that is a United
Nations process, we also tapped into the rich
experience of the beneficiaries of DDR programmes,
Member States, non-governmental organizations and
the World Bank. In one year, the inter-agency working
group has developed a comprehensive set of 30 DDR
models that cover the full spectrum from strategic to
tactical-level issues. We have consulted the drafts
widely, tested them in an inter-agency simulation
exercise, piloted them in our Haiti and Sudan
peacekeeping missions and made significant
improvements in the way that DDR programmes are
funded. We expect to publish the first edition of the
standards, which will lay out the agreed United Nations
approach for DDR, this fall.

That substantive guidance on DDR will be
available to all those who need it in the international
community. In addition, the inter-agency working
group on DDR is developing a Web-based United
Nations resource centre and a joint training strategy for
DDR practitioners.

On the basis of this agreed United Nations approach
to DDR, we are now well placed to streamline our
activities, maximize our effectiveness and minimize
unnecessary duplication at Headquarters and in the
field. It may be worth exploring whether United
Nations efforts in the justice and security sectors might
benefit from a similar comprehensive approach. Of
course, that would require expertise and resources
which the United Nations does not currently have.

We are fortunate that our multidimensional
peacekeeping operations generally have solid mandates
to support justice- and security-related programmes on
the ground, even if we often experience shortfalls in
staffing and funding. A greater focus by the Security
Council on the specific DDR, rule-of-law and security-
related needs in particular settings would provide us
with even stronger and more precise mandates that
would better address the needs of post-conflict
countries. In the meantime, the United Nations system
must continue to work on rationalizing its approaches,
integrating its resources and capacities and delivering a
single and comprehensive United Nations response for
the Governments and populations that we are called
upon to assist. That would also enable the United
Nations system to maintain the level of political
attention that is needed and to draw upon donor
funding in a coordinated manner. The reform or
formation of national security and justice sectors
requires long-term commitment. A single United
Nations approach is surely the best way to ensure the
coherence and sustainability of these efforts well after
the peacekeepers have left the country.

