Sierra Leone welcomes the convening of this open video-teleconference on "Women and peace and security: twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), focusing on better implementation". We thank the Russian Federation for this initiative and congratulate it for presiding over the Security Council in this month of October in spite of the extraordinary challenges posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Sierra Leone takes note with appreciation of the 2020 reports of the Secretary- General (S/2020/946) and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission on the issue of women and peace and security, both of which underscore the need for all stakeholders to redouble their efforts to implement the women and peace and security agenda with a sustained focus on commitments to build back better. We also thank all the briefers for their insightful presentations. Today's meeting is a time for deep reflection on the status of implementation of the historic resolution 1325 (2000) 20 years on. Indeed, it provides another opportunity for all of us to proffer concrete recommendations on how to address the challenges that have emerged over the years and those that persist. Sierra Leone continues to demonstrate robust enthusiasm for the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. We have embedded resolution 1325 (2000) into our national policy instruments and programmes. We started with the adoption of a national action plan, which has now been elevated to the level of a second-generation plan and which is also aligned with our medium- term national development plan 2019-2023, which focuses on education for all, with a cluster dedicated to empowering women, children and persons with disabilities. We are giving women not only space to fulfil their potential but also a voice in governance. The adoption of a resolution on women and peace and security by our Parliament in 2019 created additional leverage for the increased participation of women in issues related to peace and security. We currently have a female Deputy Inspector General of Police. There has also been an increase in the effective participation of women in Sierra Leone's contingent for peace operations globally. In 2019, the armed forces of the Republic of Sierra Leone recruited 332 female military personnel, including 62 cadets - 42 in the infantry and 20 specialists - and 270 recruits. That will help to promote peace processes, as Sierra Leone is a nation that contributes to peacekeeping missions around the world. Affirmative action on the part of the Sierra Leone police has been taken to accelerate the promotion of women in the police force and the increased participation of women in peacekeeping operations, particularly in the police component. We could not agree more with the Secretary-General on COVID-19 having the potential to reverse the limited progress made on gender equality and women's rights. In that connection, we have put women and girls at the centre of our national COVID-19 response and recovery strategy. Sexual and gender-based violence is being combated at the highest political level. In 2019, His Excellency President Julius Maada Bio declared himself a HeForShe Champion. Since then, he has spared no effort to fight sexual and gender-based violence in our communities. He spearheaded the launching of one-stop centres on sexual and gender-based violence and the first-ever Sexual Offences Model Court for rape proceedings - a practical way of addressing the scourge of rape by efficiently dealing with the backlog of cases. Sierra Leone will continue to promote women's full and effective participation in national and community initiatives on peace and security issues throughout the country. We are partnering with international and local organizations to conduct leadership trainings and community awareness-raising sessions on women's human rights across the country. We are refining legal processes in support of women's political empowerment as well as their inclusion in conflict-resolution processes. We are making use of the newly established women's situation room, a platform set up to address the issue of violence and intimidation against women, especially during electoral processes. We fully agree with the call of the Secretary-General for increased support for and the protection of women peacebuilders against all forms of violence and abuse, be it physically or online. Financing the women and peace and security agenda remains a major challenge for many of our countries. There is an urgent need for more investment in that area and not in militarized State security, which exacerbates violence, including sexual and gender-based violence. We urge States with national action plans to adopt more realistic resource-mobilization strategies, such as fully costing every plan, public-private partnerships, developing localization guidelines to ensure that local development plans are incorporated into activities related to women and peace and security, the mapping of women peacebuilders' and women-led peacebuilding organizations, and engaging bilateral and multilateral partners for funding and partnerships. We are aware of our constraints and will continue to address them with informed robust policies and concrete evidence. We wholeheartedly welcome the creation of the Generation Equality Compact on Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action. We are eternally grateful to the Generation Equality Core Group for having selected us to serve on the Board of the newly established Compact. We reiterate our commitment to the guiding principles of the Compact. We equally welcome the efforts of the African Union to adopt the Continental Results Framework, a mechanism that will monitor and report on implementation of the peace and security agenda in Africa. Let me conclude by affirming that better implementation of the women and peace and security agenda requires a renewed determination to ensure that every commitment on paper is matched in practice. It also means paying close attention to the key gaps in effective implementation, such as militarized investments, discrimination against women in peace leadership and a strong focus on women as victims of conflict with no context-specific or gender-sensitive analysis. We will remain proactive in our fund-raising responsibilities. We will explore every reachable source of funding, because there is nothing like "small money", especially from the perspective of ownership through local contribution.
