Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Parfait Onanga-
Anyanga for his insightful briefing, and we thank
African Union Special Representative Bedializoun
Moussa Nebie for joining us today. We would also
like to warmly welcome the Head of International
Relations of Sant'Egidio, Mr. Mauro Garofalo, who
brings the invaluable expertise of the Community in
the mediation process for national reconciliation in the
Central African Republic and the wider region.

Kazakhstan is deeply concerned about the
progressively deteriorating security and humanitarian
situation, marked by growing sectarian and ethnic
violence in the Central African Republic. That is despite
the significant achievements of the Government, as well
as regional and international partners, in advancing
peacebuilding initiatives in the crisis-torn country.

We are confident that the recent visit and active
solidarity by Secretary-General Guterres to the Central
African Republic will provide an impetus for further
progress in all the efforts to consolidate peace. We
strongly believe that our focus should be on the four
interlinking components highlighted by the Secretary-
General during his trip to the Central African Republic,
namely, security, State-building, national reconciliation
and development. Religious factions in different parts
of the country that had not existed before are alarming
indicators. We urge all political, community and
religious leaders in the Central African Republic to
work towards true national reconciliation.

The international community must be engaged
in supporting national authorities to continue the
political process at this critical moment. We welcome
the various mediation initiatives of the European Union
and the African Union, including the African initiative
for peace and reconciliation for accelerating the peace
process, together with the World Bank. The role of the
subregional efforts such as those of the Sant'Egidio
Community are significantly critical.

At the same time, it is crucial to implement the
National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan, which
brings together all the relevant stakeholders based
on an integrated and coordinated approach under the
principle of national ownership. We call on all donors
to fulfil their Brussels commitments to ensure that
the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan is
fully funded, so that it can realize its impact on the
stabilization of the country.

We commend the efforts of the Central African
Republic Government for its initiatives, such as
implementing the national defence plan, developing
a national strategy to combat the illicit trafficking
in natural resources, operationalizing the Special
Criminal Court, reforming the security sector and
preventing impunity with the support of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).
Another priority focus is to work closely with the
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, combat sexual violence against women
and implement the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme.

We express our full support for the mandate of
MINUSCA, particularly in its ongoing efforts to
restore security. In the wake of the resurgence of
violence in the east and south of the country, which
exposed the limits of the overall operational response
of MINUSCA, we agree that the Mission should focus
on its core peacekeeping tasks and prioritize support
to the national and local political processes. It should
adjust its capacity to protect civilians and facilitate the
creation of a secure environment for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.

In conclusion, we would like to stress the need to
support the national dialogue, reinforce the legitimacy
of the Government and its authority and to revitalize
mediation, given that the solution is political and not
military. Likewise, MINUSCA, in coordination with
the United Nations system, will need to strengthen
the security-development nexus through greater
investments in socioeconomic development and the
provision of basic services, youth education and
employment, while simultaneously addressing the
deteriorating humanitarian situation.

Finally, we pay tribute to Special Representative
Onanga-Anyanga and MINUSCA for their valiant
service under such hazardous conditions, and we
endorse the extension of the MINUSCA mandate.

