Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal) (spoke in French): Allow me to thank the Colombian presidency
of the Council for having organized this very important
debate, and to thank the President of the Republic of
Colombia and the President of Haiti, Mr. Rene Preval,
for their presence here today. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General and President Clinton for their
briefings, which are very useful to our work. I would
emphasize the presence of so many representatives of
various friendly Governments, members of our Ibero-
American community, whose support for this debate is
eloquent testimony to our collective commitment to
and solidarity with Haiti.

We are conducting an extensive debate on Haiti
today. It is extensive in that we must address a number
of challenges confronting that country, all of which are
interrelated. They include security, reconstruction,
socio-economic development, the strengthening of its
institutions and of the rule of law, and the promotion of
human rights and civil society. This is an extensive
debate because it also needs to address the underlying
causes of the present difficulties, as well as a range of
measures at the disposal of the international
community to consolidate its support for the people
and Government of Haiti.

We begin, of course, with one simple observation.
Peace and security in Haiti, as well as the efforts for
national reconstruction and the pursuit of development,
are the responsibilities first and foremost of the people
and authorities of Haiti, an independent and sovereign
country. The international community cannot replace
this sovereign will and can only act to support the
efforts to stabilize and develop that country that are
being conducted by the Haitians themselves.

For these reasons, we welcome the election of
Michel Martelly as President of the Republic. This
democratic choice of the Haitian people is an essential
condition to guarantee political and institutional
stability in the country and to strengthen the
confidence of the Haitians and the international
community in the ability of the future Government to
successfully deal with a process of reconstruction and
development that is indeed very complex.

In this regard, I recognize all the work carried out
by President Preval, the progress achieved and the
transparent manner in which the presidential elections
were held. The second round of the election was an
important step forward in the Haitian democratic
process. We would also like to thank the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and the joint electoral observer mission of the
Organization of American States and the Caribbean
Community for all their work in that respect. The
electoral process must now be concluded in a credible
and transparent way, thus further strengthening the
legitimacy of the country's institutions.

Obstacles to security and development in Haiti
are long-standing and structural in nature. The terrible
earthquake of 2010 merely forced us to take an
unvarnished look at the scarcity and difficulties that
Haitians have experienced on a daily basis for decades.
Overcoming the impact of the natural disaster and
accumulated deficits will take time and much effort
before the Haitian people will be able to fully benefit
from the security and development to which they are
entitled.

These efforts will require an ongoing and
significant commitment on the part of the international
community, as well as more effective aid coordination
and greater coherence between the work of
MINUSTAH, the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission,
donors, the United Nations Development Programme,
the various United Nations agencies, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, UN-
Women and the various non-governmental
organizations.

I am delighted to hear from President Clinton that
success has been noted in this area, but more can be
done to improve this coordination. MINUSTAH has
seen decisive success in supporting the work of the
Haitian authorities in reconstruction, property
distribution and the provision of essential services,
medical care, reducing the number of displaced persons
and combating epidemics. Its role also remains
important, in close cooperation with the Haitian
authorities, in the areas of institutional capacity-
building, pursuing the reforms necessary to
strengthening the rule of law, promoting human rights,
fighting crime and protecting the most vulnerable
groups, effectively delivering justice and putting an
end to impunity. These are all elements vital to
ensuring peace and security in the country and to
promoting its sustainable development.

Portugal enthusiastically welcomes all of the
work carried out by MINUSTAH since 2004 and the
dedication of the members of the Mission. In that
connection, I would like to say a special word of
thanks for the personal efforts made by Mr. Edmond
Mulet. We encourage them to continue to work along
these lines while promoting progressive ownership by
the Haitian authorities of their full competencies and
responsibilities in all of these areas, as emphasized by
President Juan Manuel Santos Calderon. Peace requires
neither dependence nor external assistance. Above all,
it depends upon the will of the Haitian people, their
democratic institutions and the economic and social
progress they achieve.

Haiti now has a new democratically elected
President, and thus a real opportunity to promote a
process of national reconciliation and a model of socio-
economic development based on the rule of law and
respect for the fundamental rights of its citizens. My
delegation believes it would be useful in this new
context for the Council to do some in-depth thinking
on ways to strengthen Haitian institutions, the
complete transfer of responsibility for the country's
reconstruction and development in terms of these
institutions, as well as the future of an international
presence in Haiti.

We would also like for the next report of the
Secretary-General to include specific proposals to deal
with security challenges.

Today I wish to express Portugal's confidence in
the will and determination of the Haitian people to
confront and overcome the many challenges they face,
as well as our belief in the commitment and solidarity
of the international community to contribute to this
effort to the greatest extent possible.

