Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation)(spoke in Russian): We are pleased to see you, Sir, chairing the
Council in April and are grateful to your predecessor,
Ambassador De la Sabliere of France, for his
successful guidance of our work last month. My
delegation joins in the statements of gratitude made by
other delegations to Under-Secretary-General Jean-
Marie Guehenno, and to you, Sir, for the detailed
briefing you provided on the outcome of the Berlin
conference. We are grateful to the German Government
for its tremendous contribution to that undertaking.

The Russian Federation welcomes the outcome of
the international conference on Afghanistan, including
the final declaration adopted by it. We believe that that
conference was an important and timely step. Russia
had consistently advocated convening the conference
because it believed that it was necessary to appraise
implementation of the Bonn road map and to agree
upon further steps by the international community to
reaffirm its policy to rebuild Afghanistan, under United
Nations auspices, as a peaceful, independent and
neutral State, living in harmony with its neighbours
and the rest of the world. In our view, the Berlin
conference has fulfilled that aim.

At the same time, despite the outright successes
that have been achieved in the peaceful rebuilding of
Afghanistan, in consolidating central authority and in
reforming the security sector, there continues to be
serious concern with respect to a number of domestic
and external threats. Russia is concerned with the
growing subversive activities of the Taliban and other
extremist forces. Clearly, these forces are seeking to
plunge the country into bloody inter-ethnic enmity and
to prevent the holding of the forthcoming general
elections in the country. We also observe that former
Taliban officials are seeking to make their way into the
Government in order to undermine the basis of the new
Afghan nationhood from within.

Serious concern is also posed to neighbouring
States by the threat of extremist elements entrenched in
Afghanistan. The recent tragic events in Uzbekistan
reaffirm that success in fighting extremism and
terrorism is possible only on the basis of a unified anti-
terrorist coalition that needs to be universal in scope.
There is an additional threat that is related to drugs,
since drug trafficking in particular provides the
financial underpinning for anti-Government forces and
remnants of terrorist organizations. We support the
range of measures being undertaken by the Afghan
Transitional Administration, within the framework of
its national programme, aimed at destroying opium and
poppy crops and the infrastructure for the production of
heroin.

At the same time, it can be observed that the drug
flows from Afghanistan are rising. We have seen that
drug couriers are using Russian territory as a transit
corridor, primarily into the European States. There is
growing trafficking of Afghan drugs within the country
as well. That is why we believe that it is necessary to
take additional effective measures, to closeoff routes
for illegal distribution of drugs from Afghanistan to
neighbouring countries and to establish reliable
security belts along the Afghan border.

That kind of approach has been set forth in the
Declaration on Counter-Narcotics, adopted in Berlin by
Afghanistan and its neighbours. It is in keeping with
previous decisions of the Security Council. It needs to
be implemented in practice with the participation of the
Afghans themselves, neighbouring States, the
International Security Assistance Force, coalition
forces and United Nations specialized agencies.

At the Tokyo donor conference, Russia did not
make specific pledges. In the period that has just
elapsed, we provided to Afghanistan assistance
totalling approximately $170 million. We are prepared
to increase such assistance once there has been a
settlement to the problem of the Afghan debt. Russia is
seeking to resolve this problem under most favourable
terms for Afghanistan. That would pave the way to
converting the restructured debt into investments and
would also create the conditions for direct economic
assistance and for funding joint Russian-Afghan
projects out of Russia's budget.

We anticipate that once simultaneous presidential
and parliamentary elections have been held in
Afghanistan an effective Government, one that will
bring closure to this transition phase, will have been
created. Clearly, this will pose new challenges to the
United Nations and to the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan. We stand ready to consider
proposals from the Secretary-General in this regard and
anticipate that the Afghan leadership will continue to
pursue its policy of close cooperation with the
international community.

We support the draft statement proposed by
experts for the Security Council presidential statement
on the outcome of this meeting.

