Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I also thank all the
briefers for providing factual and substantial reports on
the status of the implementation of both resolution 2231
(2015) and the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA).

We highly commend the professional and impartial

efforts of the Secretariat, the European Commission, the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the
Facilitator to ensure the full and proper implementation
of those crucial instruments, which have contributed
to easing tensions around the Iranian nuclear issue and
to strengthening non-proliferation and export control
regimes in general. We welcome the continuation of the
smooth and effective functioning of the Procurement
Channel mechanism, with the approval of more
proposals to supply relevant goods and technologies
to Iran.

Let me reiterate that the JCPOA fully respects the
balance between the legitimate right of a State to develop
nuclear energy and the need to halt the proliferation of
nuclear weapons, in accordance with the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. As we approach
the second anniversary of implementation day, Ukraine
welcomes the fact that, according to the IAEA reports,
Iran's nuclear programme remains peaceful. Moreover,
Teheran's constant compliance with the transparency
measures set out in the Plan significantly fosters the
sustainable implementation of this historic deal. At the
same time, we also acknowledge that, after two years
of the JCPOA's existence, different interpretations
regarding the applicability of resolution 2231 (2015) to
the Iranian ballistic missile activities remain.

With regard to the fourth report (S/2017/1030)
of the Secretary-General on the implementation the
resolution, Ukraine is concerned about the incidents
of non-compliance with restrictions on arms-related
transfers, as well as the assets freeze and travel ban
provisions, stipulated by annex B to resolution 2231
(2015). Taking into account the risks posed by the
current tensions, Ukraine fully supports the intention
of the Secretary-General to continue examining all
cases of concern and to obtain additional substantial
information. Formalistic responses from Member
States involved regarding the confirmed cases of
non-observance lead only to a further exchange of
accusations and undermine the future of the JCPOA.

As to the alleged cases of transfers of arms and
missiles from Iran to conflict zones, we consider
the proposal of the Secretary-General to hold a joint
meeting of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) and the Council in
the 2231 format as a useful and timely initiative that
could shed light on this worrying but sensitive issue.

In addition, we find it essential to further raise
public awareness on the JCPOA and resolution 2231
(2015), thereby contributing to their comprehensive
understanding and diligent implementation.

Having stressed the imperative of full compliance
with the relevant obligations, I would like again to
emphasize the importance for all the parties concerned
to interact constructively in order to resolve all
outstanding issues for the sake of the this overarching
nuclear agreement. Preserving the JCPOA as a major
achievement in nuclear non-proliferation and diplomacy
is a crucial contribution to regional and global security
and stability. It is even more important at a time when
the preparatory process for the 2020 Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons has already commenced.

In conclusion, let me express my sincere gratitude
to Ambassador Cardi, as the Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), and his entire
team for their concerted and devoted efforts in ensuring
the proper implementation of the resolution during
2017. Their outstanding dedication and commitment
earned wide respect and recognition.

