Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, for the very comprehensive briefing
on the situation that he gave via video-teleconference
from Pristina, and we reiterate our full support to him as
he carries out his important functions. I also thank the
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Daeie, and the Ambassador
of Kosovo, Ms. Vlora Citaku, for the statements they
have just delivered.

I will begin by once again recalling our desire
to see a review of the regularity with which the
Security Council considers the situation in Kosovo,
given the improvement in the security situation and
the progress that has been made in strengthening
Kosovo's institutions. We also believe that those
positive developments justify ongoing efforts to
reconfigure the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo with respect to its structure, size,
number of staff and activities. Alongside a number
of our partners, we call on the Secretary-General to
formulate recommendations along those lines in his
forthcoming report.

France remains convinced that Kosovo's future
is no longer being determined primarily within the
Security Council, but rather through the political
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina under the
auspices of the European Union. Although there have
been tensions in the dialogue over the past few months,
progress has been made. I am thinking in particular of
the agreement on telecommunications of 13 November,
the agreement on license plates for vehicles to facilitate
traffic between Serbia and Kosovo, or the continuation
of work on the Mitrovica bridge. We welcome these
positive developments, which must have a concrete
impact on the living conditions of the people on the
ground. It is important in this respect that the technical
aspects of these agreements should be implemented
within the time limits laid down.

However, this progress is not sufficient. We
therefore expect that all the commitments entered into
under the agreements concluded under the auspices
of the European Union will be implemented as soon
as possible, including with regard to the creation
of the association/community of Serb-majority
municipalities. This is a key element of the dialogue.
We therefore urge the Kosovo and Serbian authorities
to intensify their efforts to produce even more concrete
results in the months to come. The normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina remains in
general a prerequisite for their respective advances
towards European integration, which were further
encouraged at the Paris-Balkans 2016 summit held on
4 July. We invite Serbs and Kosovars to engage on all
subjects with a view to normalization, including on the
Trepca issue.

Ongoing efforts to consolidate the rule of law in
Kosovo must remain a priority. The integration of new
Serbian personnel into the Kosovo judicial system is
moving in the right direction. The reduction in the
number ofincidents involving minorities, as noted in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2016/901), is also good
news. However, we expect Kosovo to pursue its efforts
in the fight against corruption and organized crime.

Stengthening the rule of law also requires the fight
against radicalization in all its forms. France welcomes
the unconditional commitment of Kosovo in this regard,
both locally and within the Global Coalition against
Da'esh. I also take this opportunity to reiterate our
support for the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo, which contributes every day to the rule of
law and security there. France also wishes to stress the
need to ease the tensions of recent months on Kosovo's
domestic political scene.

The construction of an independent, modern
and democratic State requires the establishment of
a calm and responsible dialogue between the various
components of the political field, in compliance with
the provisions of the Constitution and in the context
of the proper functioning of existing institutions. We
are particularly concerned about the tensions arising
from the process of ratifying the border delineation
agreement with Montenegro. In that context, the
Kosovo authorities must continue to mobilize in favour
of dialogue among the various political forces and the
establishment of a peaceful and inclusive society.

Finally, I conclude by stressing that France will
continue to support the efforts of the Kosovo authorities
in favour of the international recognition of their State.

