Mr. M'Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Robert Serry, for his
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestine question. I also would like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine for their
statements.

We are holding this open debate at a time when
the region is seeing intensive diplomatic activities
conducted by the United States Administration. These
are intended once again to bring the Israelis and the
Palestinians to the negotiating table. My country
commends the efforts of United States Secretary of
State John Kerry and welcomes the agreement in
principle reached by both parties, following his six
visits to the region, for the swift resumption of direct
talks after three years of interruption. We welcome the
announcement of a preliminary meeting in Washington,
DC, this week, during which the Palestinian negotiator,
Mr. Saeb Erakat, and his Israeli counterpart, Ms. Tzipi
Livni, will begin exchanges on preparations for the
forthcoming talks.

Today's debate therefore offers us a welcome
opportunity to call on the parties to engage in good
faith in these new negotiations, which my delegation
has consistently held are the only means to reach a
lasting settlement to the conflict, which requires the
establishment of a viable Palestinian State living side
by side with Israel in peace and security within secure
and internationally recognized borders. The two-State
solution should not be an empty promise. It must be
achieved because it embodies peace for the Middle
East.

While we talk of the future, which we hope will
be bright and prosperous, we must also address the
present, which is hardly reassuring. Indeed, violence
continues to rage and rocket fire on the south of Israel
on 24 June and 11 July remind us that Islamist armed
groups, operating with full impunity in the Gaza
Strip, are far from interested in peace or negotiations.
However, choosing violence has not helped to settle
the conflict; on the contrary, it has made peace more
remote. That is why we ask the leaders of Hamas to take
urgent steps to control extremist groups that refuse to
renounce violence.

On the other side, the Israeli Government must
end new settlement building in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem. It should also abandon its project to build
new housing in the northern West Bank. We also urge it
to do more by lifting the blockade on the Gaza Strip, for
merely softening measures is not enough to ultimately
remedy the situation of poverty and precariousness
experienced by Gazans.

My country is also concerned by the issue of
Palestinian prisoners, who undoubtedly are another
reason for the violence. While welcoming the
announcement made by the Israeli authorities of the
imminent increased release of some long-held prisoners,
we urge them to do far more in that regard, given the
large number of prisoners still in detention.

The question of Palestinian refugees remains an
issue of major concern to my country. That question
can be settled only as part of an overall solution to
the conflict, which we very much wish to see. In that
regard, we renew our congratulations to the United
Nations for all of its efforts, through the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, to help those living on the margins.

The long history of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
has taught us that the path to peace is strewn with
Obstacles. We have also seen that every time positive
steps are taken, acts of violence are carried out by
extremists on both sides to undermine the efforts
that have been made. Both camps have those who
want peace and those fighting to maintain the status
quo. That is why Israeli and Palestinian leaders must
remain vigilant and show the world that they are firmly
resolved to find a lasting solution to the world's oldest
conflict. The international community should support
them on the path to peace. The Quartet should also be
involved in ensuring that the forthcoming negotiations
can yield genuine results.

In the Syrian Arab Republic, the conflict has
caused more than 95,000 deaths and almost destroyed
the country's foundations. The killings and massacres,
arrests and arbitrary detentions continue, and our
concerns are amplified by the flight of the country's
population. A generation of youth has been sacrificed,
and the conflict has assumed sectarian dimensions,
characterized by a confessional divide that makes us
fear the worst for religious minorities. The killing on
23 June ofa Catholic priest, Francois Murad, attributed
to jihadist groups, gives us a glimpse of Syria's future
if the parties persevere in believing in victory through
arms.

The Council has failed to stop the carnage, but it
can at least pressure the parties to negotiate for peace.
To that end, it must work towards unity so as to speak
with one voice. Clearly, dialogue is the only way out of
the conflict, which is having negative and dangerous
repercussions for neighbouring countries, particularly
Lebanon, which is paying the heaviest price. Once
again, we would like to support the Russian-United
States initiative to hold the "Geneva II" conference,
which should lead to the establishment of a transitional
policy based on the Geneva communique dated 30 June
2012 (S/2012/523, annex). We call for its implementation
as soon as possible.

A political settlement undoubtedly remains the best
path to end the conflict and to create a new, peaceful
Syria, reconciled with itself.

