Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this briefing. I would also like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Dmitry Titov,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict Zainab Hawa Bangura
and Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, Assistant Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme, for their
insights and comprehensive briefings to the Security
Council.

At the Council's debate on security sector reform
(SSR) last year (see S/PV.7l6l), we called on the
United Nations to do more to help States coming out
of conflict to reform their police and military forces.
We advocated for reinforced efforts to ensure that
security institutions in post-conflict environments
were a source of safety, security and trust, rather than
of extortion and fear. Over a year since that debate
and the adoption of resolution 2151 (2014), we can ask
ourselves if enough is being done to put the resolution
into action. Are the voices of women, youth and civil
society being heard well enough by those implementing
SSR efforts? Is the vetting effective enough to bar those
who have committed rape and abuse fromjoining police
and military ranks? Have we become better in meeting
the needs of the countries concerned?

As has been said many times, ensuring national
ownership of SRR processes is essential. To succeed,
national authorities must lead, own and drive reform
efforts. The United Nations and other contributing actors
on the ground can assist Governments in their efforts,
with a clear objective to create effective, accountable
and human rights-respecting national security
structures. In that regard, we welcome the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations compact initiative aimed
at helping to better coordinate responsibilities between
the United Nations and national Governments.

As we have heard this morning, the subject itself is
wide-ranging, and I cannot deal with all of the issues.
I would like to touch upon just a few of them, starting
with trust.

While the pressure to rebuild security sector
institutions as a country emerges out of conflict may
be enormous, Governments must make sure that SSR
activities involve all segments of society and respond
to the concerns of all, including the most affected
and vulnerable groups. That is the best way to ensure
the common ownership of the reform and to prevent
lingering grievances from resurfacing at a later stage.
The support of the good offices of the United Nations
in that respect could be helpful.

An army or a local police force made up exclusively
of one ethnicity, one tribe or one faith in multi-ethnic,
multireligious communities would inevitably challenge
their impartiality and put into question their readiness
to protect all members of the community. It would
also serve to raise fears and suspicions of bias - for
example, in situations such as the violence we have
witnessed in the Central African Republic.

Likewise, an exclusively male police force, or
prosecutorial bodies, for that matter, would raise
legitimate concerns and fears among women about
their safety and security and would inevitably prevent
women from complaining about sexual violence, rape
and other abuses. Integrating a gender perspective into
security sector reform is therefore a question of trust
and confidence in the bodies and in the reform itself. A
gender perspective must become part of the daily work
of armed forces, police and law-and-order institutions.
It should make those institutions more inclusive and
accountable, strengthen popular trust in them and
improve the overall effectiveness of security sector
reform. Specific programmes aimed at preventing
sexual harassment and gender-based violence must be
implemented so that both the general female population
and the women serving in the armed and police forces
are guaranteed safety and recourse to justice in cases of
abuse. Witness and victim protection mechanisms must
also be put in place.

In that regard, we would like to emphasize the
importance of the Secretary-General's seven-point
action plan on women's participation in peacebuilding,
as well as the whole range of measures that the United
Nations has established to date, including on the matter
referred to today by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. They offer practical ways forward
that should be taken by the United Nations system, with
the support of Member States, regional partners and
implementing countries.

Justice and accountability are other factors linked
to security sector reform, and an underlying element
for SSR durability. They are an integral part of peace
and reconciliation efforts. If left unaddressed, a lack of
accountability for past crimes can lead to a reopening
of old wounds - and therefore a resurgence of conflict,
bringing the efforts of any country emerging out of
conflict to naught. Therefore, security sector reform
should entail, inter alia, solid human rights training,
mentoring, due diligence policies and an embedded
culture of individual responsibility among the
ranks - from top to bottom and bottom to top - for
abuses of office, including human rights abuses.

In countries plagued by repeated cycles of
violence, members of the security forces are known to
have participated in serious human rights abuses and
crimes against humanity, including killings, summary
executions, mass rapes, torture, arbitrary arrests and
abductions. Vetting mechanisms therefore should be a
central component of troop selection in order to break
with past abuses and build disciplined, rights-respecting
forces that protect civilians instead of preying on them.
Cleaning up the ranks also serves to strengthen the
trust between local populations and the armed and
police forces, as well as the general confidence in the
irreversibility of post-conflict recovery.

In that regard, we welcome the steps taken by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to introduce vetting
and build a security sector free from child recruitment
and sexual violence. We encourage the Government
to further develop cooperation with United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in implementing
a zero-tolerance policy towards violations of human
rights law and humanitarian law.

Verification and vetting are currently being
undertaken in the Central African Republic, where
preparations are under way for the national elections.
The pressure to have the armed forces in place and
ready to provide security for the people during that vital
transition time should not lead to compromising on the
integrity ofthe troops. As per resolution 2217 (2015), the
transitional authorities must investigate swiftly alleged
violations and abuses in order to hold perpetrators
accountable and to ensure that those responsible for
such violations and abuses are excluded from the
security sector. Granted, it is a challenging task, and
the assistance of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic in that respect remains very important.

The sharing of information and cooperation between
national authorities and peacekeeping missions, as well
as with the relevant international actors, contribute to
the success of the vetting process. In that regard, we
would like to welcome the efforts in C6te d'Ivoire,
where the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire,
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
and the Ministry of the Interior are developing terms of
reference for police vetting.

Finally, the success of security sector reform
requires having a clear picture on how effective
particular measures have been - what works and what
does not in a given situation - and how best to avoid
the typical mistakes in the process. The implementation
of monitoring instruments, such as sets of indicators
and benchmarks like those developed in C6te d'Ivoire
and Liberia, have an important role to play in ensuring
the sustained relevance and effectiveness of the support
provided to national Governments. In that context,
a specific focus during Security Council's visits on
issues raised by the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General, as well as an annual closed-door
briefing by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
on the implementation of resolution 2151 (2014), as
proposed by the Nigerian presidency in its concept
note (S/2015/614,annex), could offer a useful venue for
discussion and exchange on lessons learned.

Finally, let us not forget the system-wide, holistic,
long-term approach, as underlined by the Assistant
Administrator of UNDP, as well as the underlying
linkages between SSR and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) processes. If DDR fails, if it is
only partial or incomplete, conducting solid and durable
reform of the security sector will be hard to achieve.

