Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I wish you and your delegation every
success in that endeavour. I also want to thank
Ms. Bensouda, Prosecutor ofthe International Criminal
Court, for her report and her statement, which was
very comprehensive. I also thank Council members for
their steadfast support to achieving justice in Libya by
integrating Libya's international legal efforts with the
efforts of the International Criminal Court (ICC).

At the outset, I would like to recall that every
successive Libyan Government since the end of the
dictatorship in 2011 has stated repeatedly that it was
determined to ensure justice and combat impunity. That
is what the current legitimate authorities, as represented
by the elected Parliament and its Government, have
stated. There is no doubt that the current cooperation
between the office of the Libyan prosecutor and the
Office of the ICC Prosecutor is just one example of that
determination.

However, as members know, justice anywhere
depends on security. True security also depends on the
effectiveness of the authority of the State. The authority
of the State must extend to the entirety of the country's
territory and be recognized and respected by all citizens
as an integral part of respect for the rights of all and the
rule of law.

Unfortunately, those conditions have thus far not
been met in Libya. Libya is the victim of armed terrorist
groups that are decimating the State, dismembering it
and dividing up its resources. They spread rancour,
despair and hatred among Libyans. The heads of those
groups and their henchmen, whether they are scheming
politicos or people dressed in the trappings of religion,
are driving young people to die in fratricidal wars
and to destroy their property and the property of the
State. Meanwhile, those new leaders amass funds that
they smuggle out of the country and use to purchase
property in Turkey, Morocco, Tunisia and Egypt.
Most the time, their families live outside Libya, and
their children study in foreign schools, all at Libya's
expense. Sadly, they are just a band of criminals who
lure our young people with money to then use them for
cannon fodder and mutually accuse each other of being
responsible for their deaths. In reality, their only reason
for perpetuating the conflict is to derail constitutional
reform and bring down the institutions of the State so as
to maintain the state of anarchy that aids them in their
efforts to pillage the resources of the State.

Despite all of that, and despite the destruction,
bloodshed and the deterioration of the situation,
Libyans continue to hope that those criminal instigators
will show proof of conscience. They continue to hope
that young people will become aware of the truth of
the situation. They continue to wait for assistance from
the United Nations and from our brothers and friends
to settle disputes and reach an agreement on a political
solution that respects the law and the rules of the
democratic process. At the same time, we hope that the
Libyan authorities will receive the necessary assistance
to confront terrorism.

In conclusion, I can say that we have been
committed to the path of bloodshed and civil war in
Libya, when the armed groups took Tripoli, when each
murderer became a hero and every victim a martyr.
We in Libya - and in the Council - need to work
to put an end to that path as soon as possible in order
to restore the rule of the State, save lives and preserve
property. We hope that Mr. Bernardino Leon, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, will be
successful in his mission with the support of everyone,
including the Council.

The circumstances I have just described have
paralysed the work of the police, the prosecutors and
the courts. Today ordinary Libyan citizens no longer
have a voice or recourse to uphold their rights or to
present any case against anyone over anything, despite
all the injustices they have been subjected to. In saying
this, I am not trying to say that the Libyan Government
is abdicating its responsibilities. Ijust want to recall the
difficulties that face the Government in upholding its
obligations, in particular in those parts of the country
that are outside its control.

The Libyan authorities want Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and the other accused to be subject to ajust
and equitable trial. However, the security situation in
Libya has forced the competent Libyan tribunal to defer
its hearings on the case until the circumstances are more
favourable. To that end, the Parliament and provisional
Government are seeking to regain control of the State
institutions in the capital, Tripoli, and are determined
to do everything necessary to restore the rule of law
and ensure a favourable climate for a resumption of the
hearings in order to uphold the rights of the accused
and to hold trials in line with international standards.

The Libyan Government wants the ICC to
recognize the competence of the Libyan tribunals in
the case of SaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi, as they did for the
case of Abdallah Ai-Senussi. We support the ICC, but
we hope that it will show prudence when it comes to
cases concerning public officials. Simply applying the
law does not cause justice to prevail. The law must be
applied in a measured manner, with full knowledge of
the political situation and security status of the country
concerned. We also need to keep in mind the impact
of the judgements handed down by the Court on the
credibility of the Court and of its judges, in particular
when such judgements undermine the sovereignty of a
State or represent a provocation against the people of
a country. There is therefore a need to avoid insisting
that representatives of a State appear before the Court,
except in cases where there is a lack of an effective or
reformable national legal framework.

The parliament and the provisional Government of
Libya are determined to meet their legal and judiciary
commitments in order to restore security and stability
in the country, combat impunity, render justice for the
crimes committed and try all of those who are believed
to have committed crimes, destroyed private property or
violated human rights in Libya since 15 February 2011,
this regardless of the identity of either the perpetrators
or the victims. The parliament and the provisional
Government are determined to provide reparations to
the victims, achieve national reconciliation, guarantee
the return of internally displaced persons to their
homes, and guarantee the participation of all in political
life, without any discrimination or marginalization.

To conclude, I wish to state that the Libyan
authorities hope for greater cooperation among Member
States so as to help them to find the perpetrators of the
crimes committed in Libya in order to hand them over to
the Libyan judicial authorities and to locate individuals
whose assets were frozen by the relevant Security
Council resolutions. The Libyan authorities also hope
that measures will be taken at the international level, in
line with resolution 2174 (2014), against all those who
are undermining State institutions and impeding the
democratic process in Libya.

