Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the adoption of this resolution
to extend through 2008 the authorities for the
multinational force - Iraq (MNF-I), the Development
Fund for Iraq (DFI) and the International Advisory and
Monitoring Board (IAMB).

During the past year, there have been significant
and positive developments in Iraq. Iraqis should be
proud of their efforts, which have resulted in decreased
violence, improved essential services and greater
engagement with the Middle East region and the world.

We are pleased that the Council has chosen today
to support the request of the Government of Iraq to
sustain that momentum and to extend those mandates.
This vote complements the decision taken by the
Council last August to expand the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and the
launching of the International Compact with Iraq last
May in Sharm el-Sheikh. Together, those actions signal
that the international community recognizes that what
happens in Iraq has profound consequences for us all
and that the Iraqis' striving to establish a stable,
peaceful and prosperous democracy merits our
continued support. They also signal the progress that
the Iraqi people and Government have made on the
path towards economic and security self-reliance. I call
on the Iraqi leaders to make similar progress with
regard to national reconciliation.

The Government of the United States is proud of
its role in helping Iraq combat the challenges of
terrorism and other violent acts besetting the country.
We believe that the extension of these Council
mandates is critical, as these authorities provide a
framework for the international community to sustain
its support for the people and the Government of Iraq
as they work to consolidate and extend the gains made
this year. In particular, this resolution will enable the
MNF-I to continue to participate in the maintenance of
security and stability in Iraq; it will enable the DFI to
continue to ensure that the Government's revenues are
used for the benefit of the Iraqi people; and it will
enable the IAMB to continue to provide critical
oversight, advisory and monitoring functions.
In conclusion, I should like to restate the
commitment of the United States to work in
collaboration with the Government of Iraq in order to
help Iraq achieve the objectives that it has set for itself
as an independent and sovereign State.

