Mr. Oshima (Japan): We thank Under-Secretary-
General Egeland for his briefing on the progress made
and the challenges that remain in the effort to protect
civilians in armed conflict. We commend the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
headed by Mr. Egeland, for playing an active lead role
in moving the agenda of the protection of civilians
forward.

I also pay high tribute to all of the humanitarian
agencies and international organizations, as well as
representatives of non-governmental organization
(NGOs) and civil society, who actively contribute to
enhancing cooperation in this area. Thanks to their
commitment and dedication, there have been a number
of significant developments in the area.

We note and welcome some tangible progress
made in the past years in establishing the normative
standards and instruments for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, such as the adoption of the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel and of
Security Council resolution 1674 (2006). They
represent, among others, significant achievements in
the arsenal of basic tools to help the international
community deal more effectively with the protection of
civilians. We must now pay greater attention to their
implementation and to translating them into action and
behaviour, so we can better assist people and thus
make a difference on the ground in the protection and
the delivery of needed services.

As noted, we also welcome the establishment of
the Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) as an
important addition in the humanitarian arsenal of tools
this year. The strengthened CERF can increase the
predictability of funding and the ability of the United
Nations agencies to carry out their protection mandate,
including assisting civilian populations in forgotten
crises, more effectively. Resources in the expanded
CERF should be allocated and used so as to maximize
the protection of civilians in specific situations.

In the Council's last open debate on the issue, at
its 5476th meeting in June 2006, my delegation pointed
out that a wide range of actors who are actively
involved in the protection of civilians needed a clearer
understanding of their respective roles and
responsibilities, or a better defined division of labour
among them, in order to be effective. In that regard, the
Aide Memoire adopted by the Council in 2002
(S/PRST/2002/6, annex) provided a useful tool to
assist the Council in formulating a peacekeeping
mandate, as a checklist to properly address protection
needs. However, as Under-Secretary-General Egeland
noted in his statement to the Council in June - and my
delegation agrees with his suggestion - the Aide
Memoire needs to be reviewed and updated and put to
better use.

Related to that, my delegation also suggested that
some kind of a model matrix be developed to better
define the respective roles and responsibilities of each
actor involved in the protection of civilians. Such a
matrix could include a time frame in which respective
actors would begin and phase out their activities, as the
situation allows. I urge Council members to reflect on
that and to take appropriate action on the basis of
recommendations that we should request the
Secretariat to formulate.

That being said, I would like to touch upon three
other points noted by Mr. Egeland in his statement and
his conclusions which we believe would merit careful
consideration by the Council and member States.

First, how much should the Council, as an organ
primarily responsible for international peace and
security, concern itself with humanitarian-related
issues? There has been some debate on that issue,
keeping in mind the mandates of the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council. As a general
point, the manner and the extent to which the Security
Council has taken up humanitarian-related issues for
the past two years is, in the view of my delegation,
appropriate, particularly as they relate to the protection
of civilians agenda.

We therefore much appreciated receiving
briefings provided from time to time by OCHA and by
the heads of humanitarian agencies, and in some cases
by civil society representatives, on matters of concern
to the Council with respect to country-specific
situations or thematic issues, such as the humanitarian
impact of sanctions measures. On that basis we
welcome the open debate today and hope that this
practice will be maintained with the same frequency.

In this connection, Security Council resolution
1674 (2006) reaffirms the responsibility to protect
populations. In the 2005 Summit Outcome document
our leaders expressed preparedness to take collective
action through the Council in this matter. Bearing that
in mind, the Council needs to further discuss the role it
should play in protecting civilians in armed conflict
more energetically and in more depth. I have already
mentioned as a practical measure the need to update
the Aide Memoire and the possibility of developing
some kind of model matrix.

Those would be useful first steps, but they are not
enough. The Council will need to go further and
discuss how it can best ensure conditions necessary for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, in general
and in specific situations. In Darfur, for example, a
serious gap remains between what the Government is
able or willing to provide in terms of humanitarian
access and safety of humanitarian personnel, and the
real needs on the ground. Because of this crying gap, a
countless number of people suffer or perish daily and
the crisis intensifies despite the best intentions and
efforts of the African Union through the deployment of
its Mission in Sudan (AMIS). Additional urgent
support to AMIS is essential as the least minimum,
pending agreement on transition to United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
But in the end, as Under-Secretary-General
Egeland noted, international protection, whether by
peacekeepers or humanitarians, can be only an interim
response - a band-aid, to use his term. Efforts to
improve the humanitarian situation cannot be separated
from efforts on the political front, namely, securing a
durable cessation of hostilities, developing fully the
political process and engaging in effective
peacekeeping activity. And here, the Council's ability
and credibility is truly being tested.

Second, in terms of action that Member States
will need to take, we agree that the issue of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) needs to be addressed as a
matter of high priority. We fully support the
recommendation made in the report of the High-level
Panel on UN System-wide Coherence, "Delivering as
One" (A/61/583), that the humanitarian agencies
should clarify their mandates and enhance their
cooperation on IDPs. We need to explore this further in
various forums, including the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the
Executive Committees of UNHCR and other
humanitarian agencies.

Another issue of high priority related to the
protection of civilians is conventional weapons such as
small arms and anti-personnel mines. The widespread
availability of small arms causes a large number of
civilian casualties and gives rise to connected problems
such as child soldiers and insecurity in communities.
This year, too, Japan, South Africa and Colombia co-
sponsored a draft resolution in the General Assembly
on the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in
all its aspects in order to contribute to raising
awareness on the subject. Japan, along with other
Member States, will continue to work on this priority
through the provision of assistance to affected
countries such as Afghanistan. We urge all Member
States to ratify the Ottawa Convention.

Likewise, we are concerned about the
humanitarian toll that unexploded cluster bombs can
cause. Given that there is no legally binding
international instrument to ban and regulate their
06-63968
production and use, the international community needs
to give urgent attention to this terrible problem.

Third, we stress the importance of strengthening
dialogue with non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), including through Arria-formula meetings.
The recent Security Council mission to Afghanistan
met with local and international NGO representatives
for useful exchanges of views and sharing of
information. We welcome the dialogue with NGOs and
civil society members at the workshop in Cote
d'Ivoire. We encourage OCHA to continue to
strengthen interaction with NGOs on the protection of
civilians through holding workshops in the field and
other possible ways.

I will also mention that Japan welcomes the
introduction of a draft resolution by France and other
European countries with a focus on the protection of
journalists from violence in conflict situations. We look
forward to participating actively in the discussion of
that proposal, and we hope that the Council can act on
it expeditiously.

Lastly, since this is the last time that Under-
Secretary-General Egeland briefs the Council before he
leaves office, we wish to pay him a high tribute for all
his valuable work and many important achievements
during his tenure as head of OCHA and Emergency
Relief Coordinator. For the past three and a half years,
he presided over humanitarian coordination, which I
know is no easy job, with great dedication and
distinction in a number of crisis situations, including
the Indian Ocean tsunami, the earthquake in Pakistan,
in Darfur, Uganda, and so on. We all agree that in his
service to the United Nations be greatly succeeded in
raising the profile of the humanitarian cause in the eyes
of the international community, for which he should be
congratulated. The Government of Japan thanks him
for all his efforts, and wishes him well in whatever he
will do after he leaves the United Nations.

