Mrs. Grau: I appreciate the fact that the
representative of Burundi and the Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission are
invited to participate when the Council discusses the
situation in Burundi. I have the honour to read out this
statement on behalf of Ambassador Peter Maurer, the
Chair of the country-specific meeting on Burundi, who
has had to leave New York on urgent matters.

I thank Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General Charles Petrie for his briefing. The
Burundi configuration will have a meeting tomorrow to
hear first-hand from Mr. Petrie and to discuss the
situation on the eve of the elections.

Later this month, Burundi will embark on a five-
stage national election cycle that will last until early
September and will renew all elected positions at all
levels of Government in the country. In all our contacts
with the Burundians, they have expressed their hope
and aspiration that this extended exercise in electoral
democracy will provide new legitimacy for their
institutions and produce the comprehensive political
stability necessary to further building peace and a
sustainable economic future for the country.

Since the Council's most recent meeting on this
item, A delegation of the Burundi configuration visited
the country at the end of February. The delegation met
with all stakeholders, including the President, and
assisted in the preparation of the fourth biannual
review of the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in
Burundi, which was completed on 24 March with the
adoption of recommendations and conclusions.
10-35583
The delegation's assessment of the overall
situation was positive. We do not close our eyes to the
numerous pitfalls and challenges awaiting Burundi on
its way to consolidated peace, but over the course of
now three visits of the Chair to the country we have
seen progress. Important issues that were feared to
have the potential to derail the process have been
tackled. This is particularly true for the creation of an
environment conducive to the holding of free, fair and
peaceful elections that the configuration continuously
insists on. We saw difficulty in producing means of
identification for citizens willing to vote, and this
difficulty has been overcome. We continue to see
widespread concern about political youth groups
spreading fear and intimidation among people of
different political persuasions. In our meetings with the
ministers concerned, we were assured of the
willingness of the Government to tackle the issue.

Burundi, together with the Peacebuilding
Commission has successfully worked on the financing
of the elections. It has been possible to mobilize almost
all the resources needed. I would like to thank all
Member States and international institutions that made
this possible, and to appeal to potential donors -
traditional and non-traditional - to contribute to
closing the remaining gap. I would also like to thank
the Government of Burundi, the National Independent
Electoral Commission, the political parties and the
media for their role in the successful preparation of the
electoral process.

Successful elections in Burundi will be key to
solidifying the political foundation for peace and
economic development in the country. Burundi is the
first among a number of countries in the region to hold
elections this year. With successful and peaceful
elections, Burundi can lead by example. There should
be a dividend for this particular contribution to peace.
Burundi will need more investment far beyond the over
$40 million used for the elections. It will need
investment in the socio-economic integration of the
hundreds of thousands of internally displaced persons,
returnees and demobilized fighters; investment in
labour-intensive infrastructure and agriculture projects;
and investment in the development of economic sectors
that can provide jobs, livelihoods and a future for the
millions of Burundians living in poverty.

Given the budgetary pressure mounting in most
Member States, and among traditional donors in
10-35583
particular, it will be necessary to reach out to private
investors willing to take a risk with Burundi.

The configuration will continue to hold an
international spotlight on Burundi as it evolves in
building peace. The Peacebuilding Commission should
stand ready to help in building partnerships with
international financial institutions, regional entities and
representatives of the private sector willing to explore
opportunities in Burundi. The Burundi Configuration
also remains available as a political platform for all
stakeholders. Finally, it remains the Configuration's
task to ensure that no peacebuilding issues fall by the
wayside.

This year, we have a good opportunity to reflect
together with Burundi on how to further integrate
international support for peacebuilding and
development. We will have to renew existing
frameworks. The Burundi Government, supported by
the World Bank, is developing a new Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper. The Security Council will
decide on a new mandate for the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi. The Peacebuilding
Commission will review its engagement with Burundi.

Taking the case of Sierra Leone as an example, it
would be desirable to streamline and harmonize these
efforts and to aim at merging the new Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper with a new Strategic
Framework for Peacebuilding. It is important for
essential peacebuilding issues to be identified and
addressed in all three of these contexts. It might be
helpful to institute a regular exchange on these matters
and to start exploring possibilities at an early stage.

