Mr. Negroponte (United States): The United
States is fully committed to peace in the Middle East
and we are working with all the countries that have a
stake in this conflict. Secretary Powell returned from
the Middle East early Thursday morning after 10 days
in the region. While there, he met with the leaders of
Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Israel, the Palestinian
Authority, Syria and Lebanon, and with some of them
on more than one occasion. Yesterday, he met with
President Bush to report on the progress achieved and
on the difficult situation on the ground.

Secretary Powell made progress during his
mission and I would like to take this opportunity to
share some of his findings. First, Secretary Powell
obtained an Israeli commitment to wind down its
military operations. The Israeli Defence Forces have
withdrawn from J enin and will be pulling out of Nablus
soon. President Bush publicly affirmed that the Israelis
"must continue their withdrawals". Secondly, Secretary
Powell obtained a clear statement from the Palestinian
leadership condemning recent terrorist attacks, notably
the horrific suicide bombings in Netanya and
Jerusalem. Again, President Bush called on the
Palestinian Authority to "act on its condemnation of
terror".

As he said yesterday, Secretary Powell found
broad support among Israelis, Palestinians, Arab States
and members of the "quartet" for a comprehensive
strategy as a way forward that comprises three key
elements: first, security and freedom from terror and
violence for Israelis and Palestinians alike; secondly,
serious and accelerated negotiations to revive hope and
lead to a political settlement; and thirdly, economic and
humanitarian assistance to address the increasingly
desperate conditions faced by the Palestinian people.

I must emphasize that the progress achieved
should be measured against our commitment to
sustained engagement with the parties and our
determination to make significant progress towards
peace. Our goal remains the full implementation of
Security Council resolution 1402 (2002) and a just and
lasting solution based on resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 1397 (2002). United States Assistant
Secretary of State Burns remains in the region; the
Secretary of State has stated his intention to return to
the region to continue his diplomatic efforts; and
Foreign Minister Shimon Peres is in Washington as we
speak.

Given the complexity of the tasks ahead, we must
remain focused on the region. As the Secretary-General
said to the Security Council yesterday,

"Through three recent resolutions - 1397
(2002), 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002) - and the
presidential statement of 10 April, you have
clearly outlined a vision of a final settlement and
the steps that should be taken to enable political
negotiations to resume."

These resolutions demand an immediate cessation
of all acts of violence, terror, provocation, incitement
and destruction. They also contain comprehensive calls
to action on the political, humanitarian and military
aspects of the current crisis and provide a practical
road map for moving forward. The "quartet", supported
by this Council, called for an immediate Israeli
withdrawal from Palestinian cities and addressed the
need to halt terror and violence, the growing risk to
regional security and the urgent need for economic and
humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian people. They
will meet again soon to discuss next steps.

The United States has pressed Israel to allow full
and unimpeded access to the Jenin camp for
humanitarian organizations and services. American
diplomats have been working with relief organizations
on the ground and access has been improved. The
Israelis should allow immediate, unrestricted access to
international humanitarian and aid workers, as well as
to search and rescue teams. We are encouraged by the
entry into the camp today of Swiss and Norwegian
search-and-rescue teams.

Alleviating the situation in Jenin should be our
priority humanitarian objective at this time. Further
Security Council action is not the best way to meet this
objective. Rather, we can make more of an impact by
working directly with the parties on the ground.
We have also taken several concrete steps to
address the humanitarian situation facing the
Palestinian people. Last Friday President Bush
authorized an additional $30 million in support of the
emergency programmes of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) in the West Bank and Gaza. Moreover,
our aid organization has pledged $62 million in
accelerated assistance for health care, water-system
repairs and emergency food aid. The United States
welcomes the invitation of Norway to convene a
meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee next
Wednesday to consider both urgent and longer-term
assistance and the development and reconstruction
needs of the Palestinian Authority and the Palestinian
people.

My country firmly believes that the Security
Council is most effective and its resolutions most
meaningful when its actions are focused on areas of
convergence and agreement. When we speak with one
voice and demonstrate cohesion, our words have real
strength. Witness, for example, resolutions 1397
(2002), 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002). When, instead,
we are focused too narrowly on areas of difference and
the condemnation of one side or another, we risk
producing words that can only serve to inflame the
conflict at hand. Accentuating our differences can only
be counterproductive to our common purpose of
bringing lasting peace to this beleaguered part of the
world.

