Mr. Almansoor (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me, Mr. President, to begin by congratulating
you on presiding over the Council for this month. We
are confident that you will be able to lead the work of
the Council ably and successfully. We would like to
thank you for convening this important meeting at this
critical time. I would also like to use this opportunity
to express my delegation's appreciation to the
representative of France for successfully leading the
Council in its work during the past month.

The Security Council has convened two
emergency meetings in less than a month to discuss the
series of assassinations perpetrated by Israel against the
Palestinian people aimed at liquidating its leaders,
undermining its security and destabilizing it. Israel's
actions represent crimes against humanity that
undermine the peace and security of the region and
jeopardize its stability.

The convening of this emergency meeting comes
as a response to a request by the Arab Group after
Israel's assassination of the leader of the Islamic
resistance movement Hamas, Mr. Abdel Aziz
Al-Rantisi. We are here to discuss the crimes
perpetrated daily by Israel, the occupying Power, so
that the United Nations and the Security Council may
shoulder their responsibilities under the provisions of
the Charter for the maintenance of international peace
and security. The United Nations is the representative
of international legitimacy and is expected by Member
States to undertake this role.

The Kingdom of Bahrain denounces and
condemns Israeli extrajudicial killings. Such acts
confirm once again Israel's failure to respect
resolutions of international legitimacy and its defiance
of the principles of international legitimacy,
international norms and humanitarian standards. Such
acts are examples of State terror in all its forms and a
defiance of the international community's values.

The Kingdom of Bahrain has repeatedly
expressed its grave concern and regret for the violence
perpetrated by Israel in the occupied Palestinian
territories. The recent assassinations are intended first
and foremost to assassinate any international effort to
revive the peace process in Middle East. The Arab
countries have time and again stressed their
commitment to the process aimed at ending the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territories and establishing an
independent Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its
capital.

The Kingdom of Bahrain appeals to the
international community represented in the Security
Council and the Quartet to shoulder their
responsibilities and to put an end to the crimes
perpetrated by Israel, the occupying Power. The
Kingdom stands by the Palestinian people and their
leaders in their legitimate struggle to recover their
inalienable rights. The Kingdom also stresses the need
for the international community to provide
international protection to the Palestinian people and
its leaders from the Israeli tyranny that will definitely
kill any international effort for peace in the region. The
fact that Israel continues to commit such crimes will
lead the region to violence, counter-violence and
instability. It will also kill any hope of achieving peace
and security in the region and for its peoples.

