Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the current month and to welcome you to the United
Nations. I should also like to thank the sisterly
delegation of Syria for its excellent stewardship of the
Council the past month and to congratulate His
Excellency Ambassador Fayssal Mekdad on assuming
his new duties as Permanent Representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

Last Thursday, the threats of Israel, the occupying
Power, against the Palestinian people and the
Palestinian leadership reached a new level with the
decision by the so-called Israeli security cabinet to
"remove Yasser Arafat" and to request the Israeli army
to draw up a plan for the expulsion of the elected
President of the Palestinian Authority. At this critical
juncture, it must be firmly and unequivocally stated
that the land of Palestine and its people are not the
property of the occupying Power and that to carry out
such an action or even to constantly reiterate such a
threat would be considered an assault on the
Palestinian national dignity; it would mean the end of
the Palestinian Authority and would signal the actual
demise of any peace process between the two sides. In
addition, it should be recalled that international law -
specifically the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 -
is clear in its prohibition of such a war crime.

We believe that the international community must
take decisive and swift action in order to prevent the
occupying Power from carrying out such an illegal,
insane act. For that reason, we specifically called on
the Security Council - as did the Arab Group through
its Chairman, the Permanent Representative of
Sudan - to take the immediate necessary measures in
that regard. We appreciate the fact that members of the
Council addressed the matter last Friday, and we urge
the Council to take action on the draft resolution before
it today. The negative Israeli reaction to the press
statement read by the President of the Council on
behalf of members - as well as to positions taken by
the whole international community - reaffirms the
need for stronger steps to be taken by the Council in
response to this existing danger. Only yesterday, the
Vice Prime Minister of Israel, Mr. Ehud Olmert, made
an announcement to the effect that killing Yasser
Arafat was definitely an available option.

Indeed, Mr. Sharon and his Government represent
a threat to the stability of the region. They reject real
peace, and they insist on the use of force and on a
military solution. Mr. Sharon has publicly said - for
those who want to hear - that he does not want a
lasting and permanent settlement and rather seeks only
long-term transitional arrangements. Clearly, Mr.
Sharon's vision is the imposition of a number of walled
and separate bantustans, confining the Palestinian
people to less than half of the West Bank and to
slightly more than half of the Gaza Strip. The
Palestinians could find a way to connect those
bantustans and to call it a Palestinian State if they
wish, while Israel keeps the rest of the Palestinian land
and continues its colonization and gradual annexation.
To all that, we can add the refusal by Israel to divide
Jerusalem between the two sides and the rejection of
any rights for Palestine refugees.

Those are the facts, and everything that Mr.
Sharon has said or done has been in line with, and at
the service of, such a vision. That is why the
expansionist wall is being built: to wall in the
aforementioned bantustans and to eliminate any
potential for a real settlement. That is also why
settlement activities - including the illegal transfer of
Israeli settlers to our land - are continuing. And that
is why Israel proceeds with its military escalation and
destruction, and why it has worked so vigorously to
reverse the situation to the pre-Oslo conditions 10
years after its beginning.

But achieving such a dreadful and racist vision
requires two main things. The first is the breaking
down of the Palestinian national movement and the
destruction of its leadership, since it would never
accept such schemes. That is why we see such a
vicious campaign against Yasser Arafat, the national
leader of our people, and the attempts to get rid of him.
That is also why Israel did not give anything to the
former Prime Minister, Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, since it
was understood that he, too, would never accept the
schemes of Mr. Sharon and his Government, and that is
also why Israel has not welcomed the Prime Minister-
designate, Mr. Ahmed Qurei - all proving that what
Israel truly wants is the destruction of the Palestinian
national leadership.

The second thing is the undermining of
international legitimacy, the ignoring of relevant
United Nations resolutions and even the termination of
the legacy of negotiations between the Israeli and
Palestinian sides aimed at achieving a reasonable
settlement based on the international conscience - all
coupled with intensive efforts to destroy any real
international initiatives to salvage the situation. That is
why the Mitchell recommendations were destroyed and
buried, and that is why the road map was emptied of its
contents on the way to its burial.

What really happened to the road map? The
Israeli Government tried to stall its presentation, and it
succeeded in that attempt for a while. Then, when the
road map was presented, the Israeli Government never
accepted it. The Israeli Government accepted the
"steps" in the road map and attached 14 reservations or
"concerns", effectively undermining most of it. In spite
of that, the United States of America promised to take
these "concerns" into consideration during its
implementation. On the other hand, the Palestinian side
accepted the road map without reservations.

The time then came for both sides to take the first
essential step set out in the road map. The Palestinian
leadership was to issue an unequivocal statement
"reiterating Israel's right to exist in peace and security
and calling for an immediate and unconditional
ceasefire to end armed activity and all acts of violence
against Israelis anywhere". The Israeli leadership was
to issue an unequivocal statement "affirming its
commitment to the two-State vision of an independent,
viable, sovereign Palestinian State living in peace and
security alongside Israel, as expressed by President
Bush, and calling for an immediate end to violence
against Palestinians everywhere".

During the summit at Aqaba, the Palestinian
leadership, represented by then Prime Minister
Mahmoud Abbas, did implement the first stated step.
He even went a step further than the text of the road
map required. However, the Israeli leadership,
represented by Mr. Sharon, rejected the first stated
step. Mr. Sharon mumbled something about a
Palestinian State, but he did not declare his acceptance
of an independent, viable and sovereign Palestinian
State. That was perfectly in line with his vision, but not
with the vision outlined in the road map. He further
refused to declare an immediate end to violence against
Palestinians everywhere.

What, then, is left for the Palestinian side from
the road map? A Palestinian State in the form that Mr.
Sharon desires, an Israeli rejection of the ceasefire and
a return to the Israeli logic that it is the Palestinian side
only that has to take the necessary steps. We found
ourselves in a situation that had nothing to do with the
road map, especially in the light of the attempts to
sidetrack the role of the Quartet and to reduce the
monitoring mechanism agreed upon in the road map to
something that has nothing to do with either the
monitoring or the mechanism.

In spite of that, and with a great deal of effort, the
Palestinian Government and the Palestinian leadership,
with assistance from the Arab Republic of Egypt and
other countries, were able to obtain a unilateral
declaration by all Palestinian groups to cease all acts of
violence. Indeed, there was a very high degree of
compliance with such a declaration of ceasefire or
truce.
What did the Israeli Government do? It continued
with its confiscation of land, its settlement activities
and the construction of the expansionist wall. It did not
even exert a serious effort to remove the so-called
unauthorized outposts. Moreover, Israel also
maintained the checkpoints, the siege and all of the
policies and measures that are destroying the
socio-economic conditions of the Palestinian people.
Furthermore, it continued its killings of Palestinians,
including extrajudicial execution, as well as its attacks,
destruction and arrests. It continued with all of these
actions, despite repeated warnings from many parties,
until they led to the suicide bombing in West Jerusalem
on 19 August. That was followed by the extrajudicial
execution by Israel of Mr. Ismail Abu Shanab and the
demise of the truce.

Since then, the insane escalation has continued.
The occupying forces have committed at least eight
extrajudicial executions, which undoubtedly constitute
war crimes that should be condemned and stopped. On
the other hand, Hamas carried out two suicide
bombings, in West Jerusalem and Tel Aviv, which
constitute terrorist attacks that should also be
condemned and stopped.

What is shocking about all these events is that, in
spite of their detailed knowledge of these events and
their presumed role as mediator, some have accepted
the logic and positions of Mr. Sharon and his
Government almost entirely and have been repeating
the Israeli arguments and lies. This is not only painful,
but highly irresponsible, and if it continues it will lead
to horrendous consequences.

All of this must be brought to an end before it is
too late. There must be a complete departure from
Violence and the logic of a military solution. We must
return to the negotiating table, and the road map must
be revived and implemented in a real and honest way.

In order for this to happen, however, we cannot
continue in the old way. It is time to admit that the
essential problem is the position of Israel, which is
insisting on a policy of settlement building, refusing to
end the occupation of Palestinian land and failing to
accept an independent sovereign State of Palestine with
East Jerusalem as its capital. Without a change in that
position, there will be no peace process and there can
be no implementation of the road map or of any other
initiative. In turn, such a change, when it takes place,
will open the road to the implementation by the
Palestinian side of its obligations, including the
cessation of all violence and the provision of real
security.

It is time to face reality and to stop covering the
Israeli positions or running away from confronting
those positions while hoping that the process will
remain alive, even if in appearance only. It is time to
stop inventing other reasons for the current crisis, such
as the internal Palestinian situation or other issues,
however important they may be.

The revival of the road map will require new and
serious implementation, beginning with the very first
step, coupled with a decision to face up to the realities
and prevent both sides from evading their
responsibilities. The Security Council could - indeed,
should - play an important role in this respect. It must
provide strong support for the road map and officially
order the two sides to comply with its provisions and to
implement them. We must also, through the Quartet
and perhaps also with the help of the Security Council,
build the agreed-upon monitoring mechanism and have
a real international presence - maybe even
international troops - as the Secretary-General has
proposed in the past and as France is currently
proposing. Such bold steps are required if the current
tragic situation is to be brought to an end and a return
to the path of peace ensured.

I would like once again to reiterate the Security
Council's responsibility with regard to the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and
the situation in the Middle East in general. It has been
almost nine months since the last time the Security
Council dealt with the situation - that is to say, since
the United States veto last December. During the
intervening period, the conditions have dramatically
deteriorated and the situation is much more dangerous
than before. We believe that, regardless of what
happens to the peace process, the Security Council has
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, for defending the Charter and
international law and for defending its own relevant
resolutions and not allowing their violation.

I want specifically to refer to the Council's
resolutions affirming the illegality of the Israeli
settlements and demanding that such activities by the
occupying Power cease. Now there is also the
expansionist wall, which imposes a new and decisive
challenge to the Council. That wall is not being built in
accordance with the armistice line of 1949, which is
also known as the 1967 border. It is being built on
Palestinian land and involves the de facto confiscation
of thousands of dunums of Palestinian land and the
destruction of the lives of thousands of Palestinians.

The continuation of such a wall will effectively
end, once and for all, the vision of two States. The
building of the wall must therefore be stopped, and the
wall must be brought down. We will call on the
Council to take the necessary measures in this regard at
a later stage. For the time being, however, we must
take the necessary measures to prevent the situation
from being further inflamed to ensure that no harm will
be inflicted on our President. Once more, this needs to
be undertaken in compliance with international law,
with respect for the national dignity of our people and
their democratic choices and, ultimately, to preserve
the option of peace.

