Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
begin by welcoming President Tadie of Serbia and
Foreign Minister Hyseni of Kosovo to the Council
today and thanking them for their comments. I would
also like to welcome Special Representative Zannier
and thank him for his briefing and his service in
Kosovo.

It has been nearly two years since Kosovo
became an independent country. Kosovo has already
made tremendous progress in solidifying its
democracy, promoting reconciliation and playing a
constructive role in regional and international
economic cooperation. As others have noted, 65
countries have now recognized Kosovo as a sovereign
and independent State. We commend the people of
Kosovo for the commitment they have demonstrated
and the concrete actions they have taken to implement
the Ahtisaari Plan and to play a responsible role as a
regional neighbour and member of the international
community.

Special Representative Zannier and the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) have made valuable contributions to
Kosovo's progress, as have the European Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and NATO.
Today, I would like to make five points.

First, the United States congratulates Kosovo on
holding elections in 36 municipalities, including one
expanded Serb-majority municipality and three newly
created ones. We look forward to the elections
expected to occur in the remaining two new Serb
municipalities later this year. As the Secretary-General

noted in his report, the November elections and the
December run-offs adhered to democratic standards
and were held in a peaceful atmosphere. The
Government of Kosovo undertook important outreach
efforts to ensure Kosovo Serb participation, which
contributed to the success of the elections.

Secondly, Kosovo continues to take significant
steps to strengthen regional relations. In October,
Kosovo and Macedonia completed demarcating their
shared border and established full diplomatic relations.
In January, the visit of Croatian President Mesie
highlighted the growing friendship and cooperation
among Kosovo and its neighbours. Further, the Kosovo
security force recently deployed units to Albania to
provide humanitarian assistance to flooded regions
there, and on 14 January Montenegro announced that it
too will establish formal diplomatic relations with
Kosovo.

Kosovo has demonstrated that it is ready and able
to play a constructive regional role. We reiterate the
Secretary-General's call for flexibility in defining a
modus operandi that will facilitate Kosovo's full
participation in regional and international mechanisms,
such as the Regional Cooperation Council and the
Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA).
Kosovo's contribution to those groups and its ability to
export goods to all CEFTA members under CEFTA
rules are important to regional stability and growth.

Thirdly, we would like to echo the Secretary-
General's call to redouble efforts on returns and to
safely increase both their number and their pace. To
that end, we urge the reopening of the Kosovo Property
Agency offices in Serbia without further delay.
Belgrade's acceptance of the offer of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
facilitate re-establishing that presence would promote
further progress on returns and help resolve related
property claims.

Fourthly, let me say a few words on the questions
of religious and cultural heritage. The United States
welcomes UNMIK's efforts to facilitate the work of the
Reconstruction Implementation Commission. We are
also pleased to note that the Kosovo Energy
Corporation and Serbian Orthodox Church officials in
Kosovo were able to reach agreement on reconnecting
Serbian monasteries and churches in Kosovo to the
Kosovo Energy Corporation's electrical grid. But we
still need a mechanism to address significant remaining
concerns, such as vandalism and access to cultural
sites. For that reason, the United States has supported
the appointment of a European Union facilitator to
advance discussions on issues of religious and cultural
heritage.

Finally, I would like to address the issue of
northern Kosovo. Illegal parallel institutions, some of
which were established in 1999, continue to threaten
stability and the rule of law in Kosovo. We commend
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
for the progress it has made towards integrating the
Kosovo Police. We hope to see similar progress in
Kosovo's courts, as envisaged in the Secretary-
General's November 2008 report (S/2008/692). So far,
that has not been possible due to the Government of
Serbia's continued opposition. We urge Serbia to look
at the example of reconciliation taking place in other
parts of Kosovo, to the clear benefit of Kosovo Serbs.

I would also like to say a few words about the
provision of the basic service of electricity, to which
the Special Representative referred to today. UNMIK
regulations established an electrical regulatory office in
Kosovo, which in turn gave the Kosovo Energy
Corporation the sole license to distribute and bill for
electricity throughout Kosovo. Attempts by the Electric
Power Industry of Serbia to take control of power
distribution in northern Kosovo undermine that
exclusive authority, harm ordinary citizens' well-being,
and risk confrontation and division within Kosovo. We
urge those involved to act swiftly to resolve differences
and to respect the legal framework for providing
electricity in Kosovo, including the North.

Kosovo's independence is irreversible. Kosovo
continues to make its way along the path towards
European and Euro-Atlantic integration. The United
States will continue to support Kosovo as it makes
continued progress and strengthens its democracy, and
we will continue to support the aspirations of all the
States of South-East Europe for integration into Europe
and the Euro-Atlantic community.

