Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to thank the members of the
Security Council for their valued contribution to the
success of the mission which I had the honour to lead
to cote d'Ivoire on Monday, 9 June 2008.

The aim of the mission - whose terms of
reference we approved together - was to determine
the progress made by Ivorian political players in the
implementation of the Ouagadougou Political
Agreement, with a view to the holding of credible, free
and transparent presidential elections. The mission was
therefore to meet the main Ivorian political players, the
military and administrative authorities, the facilitators
of the political process, representatives of the United
Nations system, civil society players and the technical
operator involved in the electoral process.
We also had meetings with officials of the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI), led by

the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Choi; a delegation from the Convention de la
societe civile; the President of the Rassemblement des
republicains, Mr. Allasane Ouattara; the President of
the Independent Electoral Commission, Mr. Beugre
Mambe; the Joint Chiefs of Staff of the defence and
security forces of cote d'Ivoire and the Forces
Nouvelles, Generals Philippe Mangou and Soumaila
Bakayoko; the Commander of Operation Licorne,
General Bruno Clement-Bollee; representatives of the
National Statistics Institute and the technical company
SAGEM; a delegation of the Forces Nouvelles led by
General Soumaila Bakayoko; the Special
Representative of the Facilitator, Mr. Bureima Badini;
and the President of the Republic, Mr. Laurent Gbagbo.

The meeting with the President of the Republic,
Mr. Laurent Gbagbo, focused on the major points of
interest in the peace process. President Gbagbo first of
all congratulated the Security Council and thanked it
for its interest in the peace process in the Republic of
cote d'Ivoire, and he reaffirmed his commitment to the
holding of presidential elections on 30 November 2008,
despite difficulties due to a lack of financial means. He
thanked the international community and, in particular,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the Special Representative of the Facilitator, whose
work he was very happy with. He thanked them for
their efforts in supporting Ivorian institutions as they
prepare for elections. He felt that it should be stressed
to the Independent Electoral Commission, the National
Statistics Institute and SAGEM. that the deadline of
30 November must be respected.

The President of the Republic said that he had
met his obligations with regard to the promulgation of
decrees pertaining to the electoral process and the
payment of the first instalment to SAGEM. at the end of
May 2008 so that they could begin their operations. He
said that it was now up to the technical operator to
accelerate their preparations for the elections.

With regard to the financial sacrifices already
made by the Ivorian Government, he expressed the
wish that the international community also make a
contribution.

President Gbagbo asked the international
community to show understanding with regard to the
various commissions and operators that are involved in
the electoral process. That option was adopted in order
to inspire greater confidence in all Ivorian parties in
joining the peace process. According to the President,
such a consensus approach was chosen because he and
his Government attach a great deal of importance to
transparency in the voter registration process, which is
very important if the elections are to be held properly.

The mission also raised with President Gbagbo
the issue of the responsibility of public and private
media in maintaining a constructive political climate in
Cote d'Ivoire before and after the elections. President
Gbagbo stated that he plans to urge the public media,
in particular radio and television, to play a greater role
in the peace process. The mission welcomed that
intention, which is in conformity with what was
requested by the opposition and civil society, in other
words, fairer access to public media.

President Gbagbo reaffirmed his acceptance of
the five certification criteria proposed by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Choi, and
encouraged him to play a constructive role among the
various stakeholders in order to ensure the holding of
elections according to the timetable and on the basis of
the criteria accepted by all parties. Those five criteria
are the maintenance of peace throughout the process;
the inclusion of all stakeholders; access to State media;
scrupulous respect for all stages leading to the
promulgation of the electoral list; and acceptance of
the results of the election. The majority of our
interlocutors stressed that the Government must
provide official guarantees in order to ensure that the
five criteria and the related certification issues are
adhered to.

On the basis of our other meetings and our own
observations, we came to the following conclusions. In
general, the mission was happy to see that the political
situation has improved. The Ivorian parties have
accepted the Ouagadougou Political Agreement, and
preparations for the elections have speeded up.
Certainly, considerable progress has been made over
recent months with a View to respecting the timeline
drawn up in the Ouagadougou Political Agreement,
beginning with consensus on the date for the first
round of presidential elections, which is 30 November
2008. Also, several decrees relating to the electoral
process have been signed by President Gbagbo,
including on the conclusion, on 15 May, of the mobile
court hearings and the official launch, in mid-May, of
efforts to reconstitute lost or damaged voter
registration lists. Voter registration should begin on
lJuly 2008, and the provisional list should be
available by 31 August, before the official publication
of the definitive registry on 15 November 2008.

The Security Council mission reiterated its
satisfaction at the political parties' April adoption of a
code of conduct and called on them to respect their
commitments and to ensure that the elections are free,
open, fair and transparent.

With regard to the inclusiveness of the electoral
process, civil society representatives suggested the
convening of a national consensus day to consider
matters pertaining to the electoral process, in particular
involving the participation of civil society in the
monitoring process, and to look into some of the basic
causes of the crisis in Cote d'Ivoire that have not been
addressed by the Ouagadougou Political Agreement but
that are very important for the long-term stability of
the country, namely, land ownership and national
reconciliation.

The President of the Independent Electoral
Commission proposed a code of conduct for civil
society during the electoral period and reassured the
mission of his intention to launch a dialogue with civil
society in the weeks to come.

Progress made on the security situation is
significantly more limited. The Security Council noted
in particular the conclusion of the cantonment of the
Ivorian defence and security forces and the launching
of that process in areas under the control of the Forces
nouvelles. Our interlocutors pointed out further
progress that has been made since the last Security
Council mission to Cote d'Ivoire in 2007, including the
elimination of the zone of confidence, the progressive
elimination of the observation posts along the Green
Line and the re-establishment of State administration
throughout the country. They also indicated that all
parties are now able to move freely throughout the
country, to carry out their election campaigns and to
raise public awareness with regard to the peace process.

The Independent Electoral Commission,
supported by the opposition, the Forces nouvelles and
civil society, has asked for greater security for their
staff and for the candidates and greater freedom of
movement for voters during the process of voter
registration, campaigning and the election itself.
In terms of the role of the United Nations, the
mission took note of the political and technical
progress made in the preparations for the elections

under the leadership of the Independent Electoral
Commission, with the help of UNOCI and the Special
Representative of the Facilitator.

The mission noted that the Government had
adopted several significant decrees with regard to the
electoral process. However, decrees setting out the
methods for voter identification and registration as well
as the respective roles of SAGEM. and the National
Statistical Institute have still not come into effect.
However, the President of the Independent Electoral
Commission pointed out that an agreement had already
been reached between the two operators on those
matters and that, as I said earlier, the process of voter
identification and registration should begin by 1 July.

With regard to logistical preparations, the
Independent Electoral Commission indicated that 80
per cent of its 415 local branch offices had already
been set up throughout the country. The mission
nevertheless took note of the concerns expressed by the
Independent Electoral Commission, the opposition, the
Forces nouvelles and civil society with regard to the
financing deficit for the elections, amounting to
$15 million, which is still lacking.

Still with regard to the electoral process, the
Forces nouvelles, civil society and the opposition have
underscored the very important role of the impartial
forces in providing security for the electoral process,
given the weak progress made in the dismantling of
militias and the disarming of former combatants. In
that respect, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Force Commander of
UNOCI and Operation Licorne Commander informed
the Security Council mission that the heads of the
Ivorian defence and security forces, the Forces
nouvelles, the Integrated Command Centre and the
impartial forces are in the process of preparing a
security plan for the electoral process, in cooperation
with the defence and security forces of some
neighbouring countries.

The disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process has not made very much progress,
in particular with regard to the Forces nouvelles. Also,
the Rassemblement des republicains political party and
civil society have urged the Security Council to
maintain its sanctions regime and arms embargo until
the peace process has become irreversible and the
major activities such as disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, the dismantling of militias and the
reunification of the army have come to an end. All
interlocutors have asked the Security Council to
maintain the UNOCI and Operation Licorne forces at
their current levels until the elections.

In that connection, Generals Mangou and
Bakayoko underlined that the cantonment of former
combatants and the collection of weapons had
continued, despite the constraints experienced by the
Force nouvelle. The Special Representative of the
Facilitator, Mr. Badini, told the mission that he hoped
that the cantonments would be concluded on schedule
over the next five months.

The generals also described progress made by the
integrated command centre with regard to supervision
of essential activities such as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, the dismantling of
militias and the reunification of the army. They
reassured the mission of the capacity of the Ivorian
forces to guarantee security for the elections with the
firm support of the impartial forces.

The mission took note of progress made in Cote
d'Ivoire with respect to human rights, although,
according to representatives of civil society, a trend
towards gender-based sexual violence is continuing.
With regard to the socio-economic and humanitarian
situation, all interlocutors noted the threats to the peace
process posed by the world food crisis and other socio-
economic crises. They stressed that the humanitarian
situation has been precarious in central, northern and
western Cote d'Ivoire and they asked the Security
Council mission to urge donors to do more to assist
cote d'Ivoire financially.

Regarding the role of the United Nations in the
electoral process, as I have mentioned, the Security
Council mission unreservedly reaffirmed its full
support for the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in his role of certifying the electoral process.

Following these various discussions, the Security
Council reaffirmed its full support to the political
process in the framework of the Ouagadougou Political
12

Agreement and encouraged all Ivorian parties to
respect the timetable established for the holding of
credible, free and transparent elections.

Following the mission to C6te d'Ivoire, which we
can consider fruitful, and on behalf of its members, I
pay tribute to the political players involved in the
implementation of the Ouagadougou Political
Agreement for their cooperation at all levels and for
their understanding. I would particularly like to thank
Mr. Choi Young-Jin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and Mr. Boureima Badini, Special
Representative of the Facilitator, for their immense and
very difficult work to find a way out of this crisis
through the holding of credible and transparent
elections in cote d'Ivoire.

I would also like to thank all the Secretariat staff
who accompanied us for the logistical support and
daily assistance that they provided to our mission.

Finally, I would like to thank the Government of
Rwanda, through its special representative, who is
present here, for having provided us safe conduct to
Goma from Kigali, without which we certainly would
not have been able to accomplish our mission in cote
d'Ivoire.

