Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on behalf of my delegation, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September and reiterate my delegation's full willingness
to work constructively with you and support you during
your presidency. I would also like to thank you for the
submission of the quarterly report on the work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) and for your leading role in
chairing it.

Argentina has a firm and historic commitment to
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and believes that the international community should
support the nuclear non-proliferation regime and
its cornerstone, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. At the same time, my country
reiterates the inalienable right of all States parties to
the Treaty to develop their research, production and
use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without
discrimination. That is a principled position that we
have expressed in this and other relevant forums. In
that context, we maintain a robust and peaceful nuclear
programme that has made us leaders in the field in our
region.

We have received the most recent report
(GOV/2013/40) of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), dated
28 August 2013, and continue to share his assessment
of and concern about the lack of progress in providing
clarity on the outstanding issues. We consider it
essential that Iran actively cooperate with the Agency
and provide all required information about its nuclear
programme by providing access to all the necessary
areas to allow for effective verification. In that regard,
we believe it is important that Iran take the necessary
steps to fully implement its obligations, including the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, and restore
the confidence of the international community in the
exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.

We remain convinced that it is essential to continue
to seek a solution through talks that provide certainty
about the peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme.
We therefore encourage the parties to continue their
efforts to that end in a responsible manner and without
preconditions. We also reiterate that Iran must adopt
and implement the so-called structured approach to
resolve the outstanding issues, in accordance with the
call by the IAEA Board of Governors in its resolution
of September 2012 (GOV/2012/50). While we regret
that no concrete results have been achieved thus far,
we hope that the new round of negotiations between
Iran and the IAEA, scheduled for 27 September, will
make it possible to achieve substantive progress aimed
at finalizing the structured approach document in order
to begin the process of clarifying outstanding issues.

With regard to the work of the Committee, I would
like to thank the Panel of Experts for its final report
(S/2013/331, annex) and the recommendations made,
which we fully support. While we highlight the swift
publication of the report as an official document of the
Council, we hope that the Committee will continue to
consider the recommendations and other outstanding
issues.

Finally, let me reiterate my country's position on
the importance of improving the quality of the list of
persons and entities subject to sanctions. We understand
that it is essential that States provide, on a voluntary
basis, additional information to enable the accurate
identification of such persons and entities, in order to
ensure the effective implementation of the measures
imposed on Iran.

