Mr. Swe (Myanmar): I wish to thank you, Sir, for
convening the open debate today. It is most timely. I
appreciate the useful information provided by the
Special-Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, and the Executive Director of
UNICEF, Ms. Ann Veneman.

We are pleased to note that steady progress has
been made in establishing the monitoring and reporting
mechanism in the seven situations designated as
priorities. The first phase of implementation has
highlighted the importance of working closely among
involved parties - the national Governments, relevant
United Nations actors and other partners - for the

successful operationalization of the mechanism.

This morning, a delegation made unfounded
allegations with regard to the use of child soldiers in
my country and by my Government. The source of
those allegations, including the preposterous figure of
90,000 child soldiers, comes from exiles and remnants
of insurgents. Needless to say, those allegations are
completely untrue. The Council has first-hand
experience that information coming from exiles is
completely unreliable. Therefore, I wish to take this
opportunity to apprise the Council of the concrete steps
taken by my Government to prevent the use of child
soldiers.

I wish to reiterate here that the Myanmar armed
forces are an all-volunteer army. As stipulated by the
Myanmar Defence Service Act and War Office Council
directives, Myanmar does not recruit persons under 18
years of age into the military. When new recruits are
found to be underage, they are discharged from the
military.

To effectively implement those rules and
regulations, a High-Level Committee for the
Prevention of Military Recruitment of Underage
Children was established in January 2004. The
establishment of the High-Level Committee has
contributed to stricter enforcement of the recruitment
criteria. Furthermore, the discharging of underage
children who have been in service for years has
become more pronounced with the launching of a plan
of action.

There have been further developments in the
implementation of the prevention of military
recruitment of underage children in Myanmar
following the open debate in July. Education and
public awareness activities have been extensively
carried out. Members of the High-Level Committee
have crisscrossed the country and conducted hundreds
of seminars and education campaigns, with the full
participation of community elders and various social
organizations. The Deputy Executive Director of
UNICEF visited Myanmar in August 2006. During his
meeting with the First Secretary of the State Peace and
Development Council, matters related to the protection
of children - including the efforts of the Government
to prevent the recruitment of underage children into the
military - were discussed. The Deputy Executive
Director was invited to inspect the military recruitment
centres. However, because of time constraints, he was
not able to take up the offer.

Following his visit, the Resident Representative
of the United Nations Development Programme and
the UNICEF representative, together with the head of
the International Committee of the Red Cross office in
Mandalay, visited the military recruitment centre in
Mandalay on 25 October. During the visit, they also
talked freely with new recruits in the recruitment
centre. Subsequently, the UNICEF representative wrote
a letter to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
expressed his belief that "the recruitment procedure has
been fully implemented".

I have met the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General a number of times and have kept her
abreast of the efforts of my Government to prevent the
recruitment of underage children, including the names
and identity numbers of underage children discharged
from the military. More recently, I have provided the
Special Representative with photographic records of
newly recruited underage children who had been
discharged from the military service since May.

Despite all the information provided by the
national Government, as well as the United Nations
country team in Myanmar, the report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict contains little
or no mention of the concrete actions of my
Government. It continues to lack accuracy and
objectivity and to include unfounded allegations.

I wish to inform Council members that Myanmar,
as stated by Under-Secretary-General Gambari to this
Council in September, is no longer in a situation of
armed conflict. The Government is making all-out
efforts to prevent the use of child soldiers.

We are of the view that national Governments
and the United Nations must work closely together to
address the important issue of protecting children. In
that regard, we would like to stress that all the parties
involved, including the United Nations agencies, must
strictly observe and adhere to the provisions of
Security Council resolution 1612 (2005), with special
emphasis on operative paragraphs 2 (c) and (d). I
cannot emphasize strongly enough the importance of
cooperation between the United Nations and the
concerned Government on matters related to the
monitoring and reporting mechanism by United

Nations entities in their contact with non-State armed
groups.

I wish to reaffirm the political will of the
Government of Myanmar to prevent the military
recruitment of underage children. We have also set up
the necessary national mechanism and will steadfastly
implement it.

