Mr. Toure (Guinea) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the members of the Security Council
for organizing this second meeting, and for all their
statements, which once again reflect the Council's
solidarity with the countries seriously affected by the
dangerous Ebola haemorrhagic fever virus, which has
taken the lives of more than 5,000 people and continues
to inflict considerable damage.

I would like to offer the deep condolences of the
Government and people of Guinea to the family of the
deceased, the Government of Rwanda and the United
Nations in the wake of the cruel death this week of
Mr. Marcel Rudasingwa, a leader of the efforts to fight
the Ebola crisis in Guinea. It was not his first mission in
Guinea; he was a valued friend of our country who had
previously served as UNICEF's representative there.

I would like to express our gratitude to all our
partners, particularly the caregivers of Medecins Sans
Frontieres, the Red Cross and others, who have been
making every possible effort to help us overcome the
epidemic. We are especially grateful to the French
Government, which as of 14 November has supplied
Guinea with a major processing centre that is bringing
hope to the people of Guinea in their fight against
Ebola. I would also like to thank Ambassador Power,
Permanent Representative of the United States, Special
Representative Banbury and Special Envoy Nabarro
for their leadership and continuing commitment
to the response to the disease. I further thank the
representative of the French Red Cross in Guinea for
his pertinent briefing.

As of 19 November, the cumulative total of reported
cases in Guinea was 2,055, including 1,224 deaths.
The spread has slowed for the first time since the
epidemic began, and we are seeing a stabilization and
reduction in cases in some places. However, cases have
risen in Macenta, N'Zerekore and Kerouane districts
in Guinea-Forestiere, the epidemic's epicentre, and
elsewhere. In those areas, the response to emergency
situations is being ramped up by raising adults' and
schoolchildren's awareness with the help of appropriate
media communications; setting up an early-warning
system through community workers, traditional
healers and outreach committees; having Red Cross of
Guinea teams secure burials in the presence of family
members, along with support measures; identifying and
monitoring 100 per cent of contacts for a period of up to
21 days, with incentives to remain at home by providing
suitable food; and taking contacts with symptoms into
immediate medical care with secure transport to the
nearest transit or treatment centre.

The Government of Guinea and its bilateral and
multilateralpartners-UnitedNationsagencies,national
and international non-governmental organizations,
donors and other international organizations - have
implemented an accelerated plan to combat the epidemic
with the strategic goals of breaking the chain of
transmission in communities throughout the country
by 31 January; halting the appearance of new cases,
whether originating domestically or imported, by
30 April 2015; and strengthening Guinea's health-care
system so as to improve the provision of care and the
national capacity for monitoring, prevention, early
warning and responding to epidemics.

To achieve those strategic goals, we will focus on
four areas: first, communication through increased
community involvement designed to gain the people's
trust and improve the local impact of the response;
secondly, close monitoring of 100 per cent of contacts
in order to identify and diagnose cases early; thirdly,
treating and isolating patients rapidly so as to break the
chain of transmission as soon as possible and increase
patients' chances of survival; and fourthly, ensuring
that corpses have secure and dignified funerals and
promoting good hygiene practices.

The successful implementation of our accelerated
plan basically depends on rapid mobilization of
human, financial and logistical resources; Guineans'
commitment, individually and at the community level,
to halting transmission of the Ebola virus; and ensuring
real-time operational mobilization ofresources based on
the transmission trends ofthe virus. The results ofefforts
to date include the completion of three Ebola treatment
centres and construction begun on seven others in the
affected areas; five transit centers with between 10
and 30 beds made operational; the deployment of 903
community workers who will monitor 95 per cent of
contacts; neighbourhood awareness campaigns through
outreach committees and 23 rehabilitated rural radio
stations; the establishment of 13 prefecture coordinators,
enabling decision-making to be decentralized at the
local level; the establishment of 42 active teams tasked
with ensuring dignified, secure burials; and support for
the food needs of affected populations.

It is true that the response is beginning to have an
effect on the spread of the disease, and we are learning
which measures do not work and how to improve the
effectiveness of those that produce positive results. We
welcome the fact that the outbreak is slowing in some

places, but the battle is far from over. We must not let
our guard down, because the road is still long and the
challenges enormous, particularly regarding inadequate
real-time management of information from the field;
weak monitoring and evaluation of interventions; and
continued reluctance to accept intervention, mainly
owing to communication problems in some areas.

Added to that is the large number of partners,
which makes coordinating action difficult. In that
regard, it is vital that the deployment of staff from the
United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response
to the affected areas be further speeded up. Indeed,
the implementation of efforts designed to control
infection by treating confirmed cases and monitoring
their contacts is barely enough to stabilize the rate
of new cases. That is exacerbated by mass hysteria,
nationally and internationally, which is an obstacle to
economic activity and creates a social climate that is
not conducive to eradicating the epidemic.

The Ebola crisis has severely tested our health-
care system and affected people's perceptions of it to
the point that they are abandoning our health centres.
Poor funding of the health-care system, combined with
the sudden outbreak of the Ebola virus, has further
weakened the health-care system. Guinean medical
personnel have also paid a heavy price, with 88 health-
care workers having been infected and 46 of them
having died while doing their jobs.

That is why we believe that the struggle against
the Ebola virus epidemic can be sustainably effective
only if the current health infrastructure in the affected
countries, which was already showing signs of
weaknesses, receives substantial support in conjunction
with the Ebola response in order to continue to treat
diseases not related to Ebola and to address any new
health-care emergency. Due to the current crisis, many
health-care centres are not even functional today. In
that regard, my delegation reiterates once again the
need for a subregional approach. For we are convinced
that a selective, uncoordinated approach to the response
has little chance of succeeding given the porous nature
of borders and the mobility of the population.

Coupled with that already worrying picture, we
must recall that besides the medical and humanitarian
aspects, the Ebola virus epidemic continues to have
very negative consequences for the economy, social
cohesion and the political and security situation in the
country. The economic growth rate will be significantly
lower than what it was prior to the Ebola outbreak.
The sudden drop in trade following the closing of the
borders, the decline in agricultural production and the
loss of jobs are affecting household incomes and the
livelihoods of populations, and the most vulnerable
groups - women, young people and the elderly - are
being hit the hardest. The budget deficit continues to
grow because of a sharp drop in revenues and the sky-
rocketing unbudgeted expenses. Investment projects,
including in the mining sector, have been suspended
because of partners" reticence. Social tensions, which
are already threatening the social fabric, are evident in
areas where reluctant populations are not cooperating
with the national and international Ebola-response
efforts. Other areas of collateral damage caused by the
Ebola virus include, among others, care for orphans and
families bereaved by the epidemic, the stigmatization
against people who have come in contact with the virus
and Ebola survivors, the situation of food insecurity
in Ebola-affected areas, the decline in health-care
indicators linked to cases of non-Ebola diseases, and
the closure of primary and secondary schools and
universities.

The considerable progress made in recent years
with the support of bilateral and multilateral partners
in terms of economic recovery, social cohesion and
the democratization of political life risks being
compromised by the far-reaching consequences of the
Ebola virus disease. Therefore, we believe that efforts
to support economic and social recovery must be
undertaken now simultaneously with those undertaken
to stop the spread of the disease in the three most
affected countries, which are also all on the agenda of
the Peacebuilding Commission. In that connection, I
would like to thank the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations on Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone for
their commitment to undertaking an in-depth study on
the impact of the Ebola virus on peacebuilding in our
countries.

In conclusion, I want to thank all the donors
that have already contributed to the Ebola Response
Multi-Partner Trust Fund. My delegation would like
Council members to join the Secretary-General and
the President of the General Assembly in calling on
countries to continue to contribute to the Trust Fund,
as the money raised is still far below the needs to
effectively combat this unprecedented Ebola epidemic.

