Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Let me begin, Sir, by congratulating you
warmly on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of September. We are
pleased to see you, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Bulgaria, presiding over this important meeting. At the
same time our thanks go to Ambassador Tafrov for
having taken the initiative to convene this meeting,
especially because Bulgaria is located in the heart of
the Balkans and has always had a deep interest in all
the important issues relating to that region.

My delegation wishes also to extend its thanks to
His Excellency Ambassador John Negroponte,
Permanent Representative of the United States, and to
the other members of his delegation for the success
with which they guided the work of the Council last
month.

My thanks go also to Mr. He'di Annabi for this
morning's comprehensive and detailed briefing on the
most recent developments in Kosovo.

Mr. Annabi spoke at some length about the arrests
carried out by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK); we
consider that these were of individuals suspected of
having committed serious crimes and that they were
not directed at any group to which those individuals
belonged or with which they were otherwise affiliated.
I reaffirm that UNMIK is proceeding in complete
accordance with its mandate under Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), which charged it with the task
of establishing the rule of law. Nor is the Mission's
mandate limited to the provisions of that resolution or
to the wishes of the international community at large; it
also reflects the wishes of the population of Kosovo.
These arrests were made following lengthy
investigations by UNMIK that began in early 1999.

Moreover, UNMIK's activities over the past few
years have demonstrated its keen interest in
establishing democratic institutions and a stable society
in Kosovo, guaranteeing the protection of all the
people of Kosovo and aimed at enforcing the rule of
law with a View to ensuring a better future for Kosovo.
We look forward to the upcoming municipal elections
in Kosovo with great hope that they will be democratic
and will represent all factions, minorities and ethnic
groups in a balanced manner. In this way, the
atmosphere necessary to guarantee security and safety
for all in Kosovo and to build the economic structures
essential to meeting the needs of its people can be
established.

In general, we support UNMIK's efforts under
Mr. Steiner's leadership and therefore endorse the
principle of establishing the rule of law and justice in
Kosovo, in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).
We express the hope that the issue of the return of
minorities will be accorded the necessary priority. This
will help bring stability to Kosovo, avert various
problems for Kosovar society arising from its
multiethnic nature, and protect it from all the negative
aspects of extremism aimed essentially at tearing it
apart. In order to further increase the growing number
of returnees that we have seen recently, and which we
welcome, it is thus necessary to protect the crossing
points through which the returnees must pass on their
way home and to keep the extremists away from those
points.

We welcome Mr. Steiner's proposal, referred to
by Ambassador Lavrov, to dispatch a Security Council
mission in the near future in order to assess the
situation first-hand, to identify various problems and to
demonstrate genuine support for UNMIK's mandate
and work.

