Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Farid Zarif for presenting the report
(S/2013/631). We are also grateful for the presentations
by Prime Minister Dacie and Prime Minister Hashim
Thaci.

A notable aspect of the report is the progress made
in implementing the first agreement of principles
governing the normalization of relations between Serbia
and Kosovo, signed on 19 April. The recent elections
are key to beginning to implement the agreement. We
regret the incidents of violence that occurred in northern
Kosovo during the municipal elections on 3 November,
which posed the risk of compromising the agreement
reached between the parties. Nevertheless, we note
that the elections that were cancelled and rerun on
17 November took place without major difficulties. We
should now focus on the post-election period, during
which the representatives who were elected will have to
continue to work together to implement the agreements
between Belgrade and Pristina. This is a critical
moment in the relations between Serbia and Kosovo,
and the Security Council should carefully follow their
evolution. The international community's support and
its commitment to Kosovo also continue to be essential.

As we mentioned in our previous discussion of
this topic (see S/PV.7026), we believe that the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) has a central role to play in this new stage
of the implementaiton of the 19 April agreement.
We welcome the fact that UNMIK is intensifying its
efforts and cooperation with all the parties concerned
regarding the main problems on the ground. We support
UNMIK's mediation and facilitation efforts in northern
Kosovo. We also support efforts made for UNMIK to
serve as a communications medium between municipal
representatives and minority communities in order to
guarantee the effective provision of public and social
services.

In short, UNMIK continues to use its capacity and
resources in a wide range of activities to help reduce
tensions and the number of incidents. Therefore, it
is important that UNMIK continue to enjoy all the
necessary support to strengthen its presence in Kosovo,
especially in the north.

Turning to the topic of security, we see that, on the
one hand, the overall situation remained calm during the
reporting period; on the other hand, tensions continued
in the northern Kosovo. Like others before us, we
condemn the death of a European Union Rule of Law
Mission (EULEX) customs officer on 19 September.
We hope that everything will be done to prevent such
incidents from recurring. We trust that the event will be
investigated in order to find the perpetrators and bring
them to justice.

With regard to the Special Investigative Task Force
in charge of looking into allegations of the inhumane
treatment of immigrants and trafficking in human
organs, we note with interest the information set out
in the EULEX report (S/2013/631, annex I). We will
follow with interest the progress on that matter.

Finally, we reaffirm the primacy of resolution 1244
(1999) as the applicable legal framework in Kosovo, as
well as the importance of full respect for international

law. We thank the Special Representative for his
sustained efforts to promote reconciliation among
Kosovo's communities.

