I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and the Police Commissioners of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic and the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti for their insightful briefings. Today's meeting has been very helpful in understanding the progress made in and challenges to United Nations policing, and I would like to take the rare opportunity afforded by this meeting to recognize the contribution of United Nations police (UNPOL) to United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The deployment of UNPOL carries a positive message of increased security and return of law and order. As United Nations missions make the transition away from peacekeeping operations, the contribution of UNPOL becomes most visible. Its efforts in strengthening the rule of law, building the capacities of people-oriented national police services and assisting in security sector reform based on human rights are fundamental in establishing lasting stability in conflict-burdened countries. We welcome the efforts aimed at enhancing the role of UNPOL in peacekeeping and continue to support the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative, together with the added value United Nations police provide to implementing the Declaration of Shared Commitments on Peacekeeping Operations. Correspondingly, I would like to ask Under-Secretary Lacroix about the priorities for United Nations policing under Phase II of the A4P initiative. On the subject of performance, Estonia will continue to emphasize the crucial importance of implementing policies and mechanisms aimed at verifying and enhancing the performance of peace operations, with particular focus on the protection of civilians and the promotion of human rights. We also continue to stress the importance of increasing the effectiveness of policing by better engagement with communities, in particular with the help of community liaisons and human rights officers. In this regard, however, one cannot overlook the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which has increased both the responsibilities of and risks to United Nations police. Accordingly, it would be useful to hear from Mr. Lacroix about the effect COVID-19 has had on the level of vacancies for UNPOL units in peacekeeping missions. On a related note, I would like to ask the UNMISS Police Commissioner, Ms. Unaisi Vuniwaqa, what effect the redesignation of protection-of-civilian sites has had on United Nations police resources. Has it helped free up some of these resources? If so, how has she been able to utilize them instead? Before I finish, I would like to recall the critical function that a more gender-equal composition of UNPOL components plays in effective policing. This is particularly true in community policing and in preventing and eliminating conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence. We will continue to underline the importance of implementing the women and peace and security agenda and its priorities, in particular promoting the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in peace processes and United Nations police. I would like to conclude by expressing gratitude and strong support to all United Nations peacekeepers - women and men - whose dedication and sacrifice bring hope to millions of people and help countries navigate the difficult path from conflict to peace.
