Mr. Burian (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to join previous speakers in thanking Mr. Alvaro
de Soto for his truly excellent briefing and his valuable
observations.

I wish to emphasize that Slovakia fully aligns
itself with the statement to be made shortly by the
representative of Finland on behalf of the European
Union.

Last month, our ministers had a very useful
exchange of ideas on the recent developments in the
Middle East. Slovakia is encouraged by the opinion
prevailing in the Security Council on the need to revive
the peace process in the region and to move forward in
promoting a comprehensive and lasting settlement of
the Middle East conflict. At the same time, we believe
that the international community must undertake
additional efforts and steps to reinvigorate the peace
process in that region.

As far as Lebanon is concerned, we emphasize
once again the need for all parties concerned to
implement all relevant Security Council resolutions.
That is the most effective way, and the only way, to
avoid tragic developments such as those that we
experienced last summer.

We welcome the continuous process of the
reconstruction of Lebanon, the deployment of the
Lebanese armed forces to the south of the country, the
significant reinforcement of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from Lebanon. We are pleased that a
number of steps have been taken to stabilize the
situation and to enforce border control in the region.
However, a lot remains to be done, including
respecting the arms embargo, which must be fully
observed by all relevant parties. In our View, a
constructive approach and cooperation on the part of
the Governments of Syria and of other countries in this
regard remain instrumental.

The domestic and foreign militias in Lebanon
must be disarmed and disbanded expeditiously in order
to ensure that there are no unauthorized weapons in
Lebanon and that there is no authority other than the
Lebanese State.

We also underline the necessity of resolving the
issue of the Sheba'a farms and the delineation of the
border between Syria and Lebanon.

Last but not least, we should not forget the
kidnapped Israeli soldiers. We call on all parties in
Lebanon to help to secure their release. We also accept
that there is a need to address the problem of Lebanese
prisoners. Those two issues, however, must not be
linked, and the release of the Israeli soldiers must be
immediate and unconditional.

We note with satisfaction the recent call of Israeli
Prime Minister Ehud Olmert for the initiation of direct
talks with Lebanon. In this regard, I would like to ask
Mr. De Soto if he would share with us his views on the
prospects and conditions for such talks, and tell us
what role the international community could play in
facilitating an early engagement between Israel and
Lebanon through meaningful dialogue.

As far as the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
concerned, we are convinced that the Quartet
represents the most appropriate mechanism for
advancing the peace process. We note with satisfaction
that, in its most recent statement, the Quartet
reaffirmed its commitment to the principles set out in
the road map, and we support its efforts to revive the
peace process in the Middle East.

As for developments on the ground, we remain
disturbed by the security situation in the Palestinian
territories, especially in Gaza. We hope and reiterate
our call for an immediate end to violence by
Palestinian factions and for the release of the abducted
Israeli soldier. We urge the Palestinian Authority to
undertake all necessary measures to improve internal
security, as well as to prevent terrorist attacks on
Israel, notably the launching of rockets against Israeli
population centres. We support the efforts and
leadership of President Mahmoud Abbas aimed at
achieving that goal and fostering national unity among
the Palestinians. We hope that the Palestinian
Government will cooperate towards that end.

We also note and support the efforts of President
Abbas to form a Government of national unity. We
expect that such a Government will be committed to
the Quartet principles, and that its political platform
will facilitate early engagement, as well as the
continuation of a meaningful dialogue aimed at finding
a solution to the Middle East conflict.

We remain deeply concerned about the difficult
economic and humanitarian situation in the West Bank
and Gaza. In this regard, we strongly support the
continuation and expansion of the Temporary
International Mechanism, which will enable resources
be to channelled and assistance to be delivered directly
to the Palestinian people, and hence address their
urgent humanitarian and financial needs. To this end,
we urge Israel to resume transfers of withheld
Palestinian tax and customs revenues, and encourage it
to carry out this transfer via the Temporary
International Mechanism. We also call for full
implementation of the Agreement on Movement and
Access and appeal for the Rafah, Karni and other
border crossings to remain permanently open.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm our shared
belief in the need to reinvigorate the peace process.
The window of opportunity to do so still exists. We
hope and believe that all concerned and relevant parties
will seize this opportunity and take concrete and
immediate actions. In this regard, we encourage an
early engagement between Prime Minister Olmert and
President Abbas with a view to relaunching mutual and
meaningful negotiations. We encourage such
continuous engagement among all parties to the Middle
East conflict.

