Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset, on behalf of us all, to warmly thank
all the Secretariat staff who worked, in New York
and in the field, to organize and successfully carry
out our visit. I would refer first, of course, to the
personnel of the Security Council Affairs Division,
with a special word of thanks to Claudia Banz and
her team, in particular Kerstin Bihlmaier. I am also
thinking of the teams deployed by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political
Affairs, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) - with special gratitude to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui - the Resident Coordinator, the interpreters
and the security officers. The work of all these teams
was exemplary and played a critical role in ensuring the
success of the visit from 5 to 7 October. We are deeply
grateful to them all. We wish to continue working with
the Secretariat to draw every possible lesson from
the mission.

I would also like to sincerely thank Bolivia and
Equatorial Guinea, with which we have formed a close
team to lead the visit, as well as all the rest of my
colleagues. The following statement is a joint statement
from the co-organizers of the visit. We will each report
on a particular component of the mission.

The Security Council went to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to discuss the current political
situation with the political stakeholders of the nation,
in the context of electoral preparations, as well as
humanitarian and security issues, in particular the
protection of civilians and the reform of MONUSCO. I
will focus my remarks on the political aspect.

In Kinshasa, the Security Council met with a
large number of actors, including the President of the
Republic and the Prime Minister, representatives of the
Majorite presidentielle and the opposition, and a group
of women candidates. We were also able to talk with
the Independent National Electoral Commission, the
Conference episcopale nationale du Congo (CENCO),
and representatives of human rights movements and
humanitarian associations. In addition, we had very
useful and deep discussions with the MONUSCO
leadership, which I again warmly thank.

With respect to the political aspect, on which I shall
focus, the mission allowed us to send a key message.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is at a pivotal
moment in its history. For the first time, a peaceful
transmission of power following elections is possible,
paving the way for the consolidation of stability in the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo and the establishment
of conditions conducive to its development. That is a
real cause for hope, but its achievement requires all the
political forces of the country to come together to meet
the wishes of the Congolese people.

The Security Council came to Kinshasa to
accompany the Democratic Republic of the Congo
on the road to peace, stability and prosperity through
the elections of 23 December. The holding of free,
credible, transparent and peaceful elections on that
date is expected by all. Dialogue remains the only
way to overcome the remaining differences. The
Security Council was reassured by the commitment
of all its interlocutors to participate in the elections
of 23 December. They all indicated their readiness to
pursue the discussions.

The Security Council welcomed the progress made
in the preparations for the elections. At the same time,
the visit allowed us to convey the importance of taking
additional steps to create confidence and establish
conditions conducive to the widest possible consensus
on the political and technical organization of elections.
It is now up to all the political forces to ensure that
the country remains on the path to peace and the
strengthening of its democratic institutions.

The Security Council also encouraged the parties
to fully implement the agreement of3l December 2016,
in particular the de-escalation measures. The Council
called for the process to be accompanied by a free
and constructive political debate in which freedom of
opinion and assembly and equitable access to the media
are guaranteed and fundamental freedoms respected.
The Security Council welcomed the successful holding
of the opposition meeting on 29 September and in that
regard called on the Congolese authorities to lift the
ban on demonstrations forthwith.

The Security Council met with women representatives
of civil society and women candidates in the
presidential and legislative elections. Discussions
focused on both the security and the humanitarian
situation and on the elections, in particular the issue
of women's participation at all levels of the peace and
security decision-making process, including security,
economic and social structures, which, in their current
state, prevent many women from participating in
elections. The Council encouraged the Government
and other parties to redouble their efforts to strengthen
women's political participation in electoral and political
processes and in civil society.

Lastly, the Security Council announced, in full
respect for the sovereignty of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in a constructive spirit of support for
the country, the readiness of MONUSCO to provide
logistical and technical assistance to the elections, if
the need should arise.

That is the message that all 15 Council members
shared with all the political actors we met. Compromises
will be needed on both sides, and we hope that the
political leaders' spirit of responsibility will prevail.

