Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Pluinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We should like to express
our gratitude for the briefings given by the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre LaCroix, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Sudan and South Sudan,
Mr. Nicolas Haysom, and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) Special Envoy
to South Sudan, Ambassador Ismail Wais, whom we
acknowledge and thank for his commitment and great
work carried out during the negotiation process in South
Sudan. We also thank Ms. Grace John for her briefing.

I begin by paying tribute to the fundamental role
that IGAD played in establishing dialogue between
the parties in South Sudan. It was a long and difficult
process with several ups and downs that, thanks to the
determination of the countries of the region and the
will of the parties, led to the signing of the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan on 12 September. The
Agreement was carefully prepared and represents a
significant step forward that contributes to ending the
conflict in that country, something that everyone in this
Chamber seeks.

While we commend this moment in the political
situation, the current situation in South Sudan remains
one of the most critical in the world. The difficult
humanitarian, economic and security situation still
affects most of the South Sudanese population. The
Agreement is an encouraging step forward, but it
needs genuine commitment and strong political on
the part of the South Sudanese leaders for its proper
implementation, which can be the most difficult phase
in a peace process. The ongoing collaboration of the
Transitional Government and the opposition with the
countries of the region and the United Nations should
be further strengthened at this stage.

In that regard, it is very important that the Security
Council maintain unity and work in harmony with the
African Union and IGAD, among other things, mainly
in restoring trust among the parties. As such, a neutral
and constructive position must be maintained. For that,
it is imperative to coordinate our actions with those of
the region.

We urge the parties to implement expeditiously
the second chapter of the Agreement, regarding the
permanent ceasefire. We hope that the ongoing ceasefire
and transitional security arrangements workshops can
bring about short-term results and that progress can be
made, among other urgent matters, on planning for the
unification of the forces of South Sudan.

In relation to the humanitarian situation, we
express concern for the more than 6 million people in
need of some kind of humanitarian assistance, which
represents more than half of the population. Likewise,
the almost 4 million internally displaced persons and
refugees in neighbouring countries face a lack of basic
services, education and health care, as well as serious
food insecurity. Unfortunately, those who suffer most
from the consequences of displacement are children
and women. We must pay attention to the number of
children who do not receive schooling and mobilize
the international community to work with them and
reclaim a generation that is growing up in precarious
conditions as a result of the conflict.

Similarly, we are concerned about the high number
of victims of sexual violence, which mainly affects
women and girls. To that is added the fact that South
Sudan remains one of the most dangerous places in the
world for humanitarian workers. While we welcome the
recent ruling of a national military court condemning
10 soldiers for their participation in the murder, rape,
sexual harassment and armed robbery of humanitarian
workers, we believe that it is necessary to step up efforts
to fight impunity with greater rigour and effectiveness.

Both the Government and the opposition must
ensure an optimal operating environment for the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and humanitarian workers, in compliance with
international law and international humanitarian law.
We also commend the efforts of the United Nations
Mine Action Service, which, together with UNMISS,
works to remove and destroy explosive devices. That
work will contribute to the resettlement of displaced
persons, the return of displaced persons and refugees
and the establishment of favourable conditions for the
provision of humanitarian assistance.

In conclusion, we reiterate our gratitude to the
countries ofthe region for the leadership demonstrated,
which made significant progress in the political process
possible. Likewise, we thank UNMISS for the work it
is doing, and Mr. Nicholas Haysom for his important
work over the past few years. We wish him the greatest
success in his future role as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Somalia.

