Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Eight
days ago we met in urgent consultations to address the
situation in Israel and Palestine, particularly in the
Gaza Strip, after which we released a statement to the
press expressing the deep concern of the members of
the Security Council with regard to the crisis.

Unfortunately, the call to reduce tensions and
restore the November 2012 ceasefire has fallen on
deaf ears. Instead, Israel has escalated the conflict by
initiating the ground phase of its military operation,
while Hamas and other armed groups continue to
reposition and launch rockets from the Gaza Strip. We
deplore the lack of a firm commitment of the parties to
de-escalate the conflict.

We appreciate the efforts of various regional
and international actors who have sought to broker a
ceasefire, although we wonder today whether seeking
to resume the mediation of previous years is the best
option, given the changes that have occurred in the
political map of the Middle East. We strongly support
the efforts of the Secretary-General and especially
those of his Special Coordinator, Mr. Robert Serry,
to whom reiterate our support. We wish to formulate
an urgent call to establish an immediate ceasefire and
protect the civilian population as well as the safety of
United Nations personnel. We believe that the attacks
on civilians in Gaza and Israel violate international
humanitarian law and could constitute war crimes.

In the light of the report yesterday by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, we recall the provisions of
resolution 2143 (2014) on children and armed conflict,
co-sponsored by my country, and condemn the use of
schools for military purposes in violation of applicable
international law. As Under-Secretary-General Valerie
Amos reminded us, this is the third large-scale armed
confrontation in the Gaza Strip in the past six years.
The conflict has deep roots on which the Security
Council has a duty to act.

