Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I want to welcome Prime
Minister Yatsenyuk and to thank him for his briefing.
I also want to thank Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman for providing an
update on the situation in Ukraine.

In a world that is already deeply embroiled in
turmoil in most regions, the current crisis in Ukraine is
one crisis too many. The world can ill afford it. Nigeria
remains unequivocal in highlighting the precarious
and delicate nature of the situation in Ukraine. The
imperative for a cautious approach by all parties to
avoid exacerbation of the crisis could not be more
urgent. That consideration is even more pertinent today
as developments on the ground indicate that so little has
changed since our last meeting in the Council on this
issue (see S/PV.7131).
The fundamental principle at stake in the crisis is
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a
State Member of the United Nations. We want to remind
all concerned to uphold the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations, particularly as concerns the
peaceful resolution of conflicts. In order to engender a
peaceful settlement of the current impasse, there must
be understanding. There must be mutual trust. There
must be flexibility and a willingness between the
parties to engage in constructive and peaceful dialogue.
We want to urge the parties not to slam the door on
dialogue, which represents a priceless opportunity
for all issues to be discussed towards a peaceful and
mutually acceptable resolution of the crisis.

The foundations for reconciliation are not far-
fetched. We can find them in previous agreements.
The Budapest Memorandum of 1994 and the Treaty
on Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership, adopted
in 1990 and renewed in 1997, are valued and credible
instruments that provide a ready framework for
resolving the crisis in Ukraine, and we call on all parties
to abide by their commitments and obligations under
those instruments. We also note that interlocutors have
a vital role to play in ameliorating the situation.

While the Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights, Mr. Ivan Simonovie, is making progress
in discussing human rights-related issues with
stakeholders across Ukraine, we regret that he has had
to cancel his visit to Crimea, which is at the core of the
current crisis. We hope that he will be able to undertake
that visit in the near future, because it is critical.

We would also like to see access grantedto observers
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe in order to allow them to undertake an objective
assessment of the situation on the ground. That, we
believe, would foster a deeper understanding of the crisis.
We want to reiterate our position that the referendum
planned for Crimea contravenes the Constitution of
Ukraine and is therefore illegitimate. For that reason,
we call on the authorities of Crimea to postpone, and
indeed cancel, the impending referendum. To go ahead
with it would add insult to injury. Our ardent desire is
to see a united, peaceful and democratic Ukraine where
all citizens and communities can live side by side in
peace, security and harmony.

