Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Let me join previous
speakers in thanking the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, for his comprehensive
briefing.

We share his concerns regarding the impact of
drug trafficking in different regions of the world. Drug
trafficking and related organized crime tend to weaken
domestic institutions and may contribute to bringing
about political instability, as pointed out by many in
this Chamber today. This is particularly serious in
situations of armed conflict or in countries emerging
from conflict. In some cases, there is also evidence that
proceeds from drug trafficking are used to finance
terrorism. The Security Council may therefore find
itself confronted with significant threats to
international peace and security brought about by drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime. When
faced with such challenges, the Council should be
ready to act in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, with due consideration for the
specificities of each case.

Avoiding such a grave risk should be a common
goal to be pursued through the active cooperation of
Member States in the specialized international entities
and bilateral and plurilateral initiatives. Drug trafficking
is, indeed, a matter that by its very nature requires
concerted and multidimensional action at all levels.
Needless to say, efforts in this area should be based on
the principle of shared and common responsibility and
should focus on all aspects of the phenomenon.

Among the several areas where such cooperation
is important, capacity-building in law enforcement is
of particular relevance, especially in the judicial and
security sectors. Strong State agencies and well-trained
personnel are indispensable in the fight against drug
trafficking. This is an area where the prospects for
South-South cooperation are promising. Brazil, for
example, has been working closely with the UNODC
in West Africa, particularly in Guinea-Bissau, where
we have been investing in training law enforcement
agents and establishing related infrastructure. My
delegation is concerned with the situation in West
Africa in general. We praise efforts already undertaken
by the Economic Community of West African States
and look forward to the full implementation of its
regional anti-drug operational plan.

We also welcome the West Africa Coast Initiative
and extend our support to the creation of transnational
crime units that will allow for increased sharing of
information and intelligence in the region. In my
capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau Configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, I value the
cooperation with the promoters of the Initiative.

Repressive measures alone, however, are not
enough to fight drug trafficking in an effective and
sustainable manner. It is indispensable to address the
frequent underlying socio-economic factors of the
problem, which tend to thrive in a context of economic
despondency and high unemployment. Any successful
anti-drug plan must therefore encompass actions aimed
at creating alternative livelihoods, especially for young
people, to prevent the population from being lured by
the drug business.

Only through broad engagement that takes into
consideration all dimensions of drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime will we succeed in our
common endeavour against them. The United Nations
system provides us with the institutional means through
which we can actively and effectively cooperate. In so
doing, we shall be able to avoid the risk that such
problems will threaten international peace and security.

Brazil supports the draft presidential statement
that we will adopt today and thanks the French
delegation for work well done.

