Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First, let me
thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for
his sobering and concerning briefing. Let me also
thank the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) for its efforts on the ground and for
its initiative in providing the Council with a warning
on the increased threat of conflict-induced famine
in Yemen.

OCHA's warning and this meeting of the Council
are directly based on resolution 2417 (2018), on conflict
and hunger, adopted earlier this year. OCHA's warning
comes at a crucial point in time, when, following this
summer's escalation ofviolence, the number of civilians
killed in hostilities every month has almost tripled;
when an economic depression is pushing millions
people further below the poverty line; when cyclones
threaten the lives of already extremely vulnerable
civilians in Yemen; and when the Council's efforts to
end the terrible conflict have proven to be insufficient.

Last week we hosted a photo exhibit in this building,
with pictures of victims of conflict and hunger. Two
severely malnourished babies from Yemen were among
the victims shown. Those were two faces behind the
staggering statistic of 172,000 severely malnourished
children in Yemen. In that context, I will address three
issues today: first, the threat ofconflict-induced famine;
secondly, the constraints on humanitarian access; and
thirdly, the need for compliance with international
humanitarian law.

With regard to my first point, Yemen is a clear
example of the relationship between conflict and
hunger. The reality of the more than 11 million Yemenis
on the brink of famine is entirely man-made. The OCHA
white paper on the increased threat of famine is a good
example of the early warning we need to prevent a full-
blown famine in Yemen, although in fairness, as Mark
Lowcock said, this is not the first time the humanitarian
community has warned us of the situation we are now
facing. When the Council recognized the need to break
the vicious cycle between armed conflict and food
insecurity with the adoption ofresolution 2417 (2018), it
also committed itselfto action. The Council committed
itselfto addressing those mad-made crises by enforcing
man-made solutions. The parties to the conflict must
take immediate steps and it is up to the international
community, including the Council, to make sure that
they follow through.

My second point concerns the persisting
humanitarian access constraints the parties need to
address. One month ago, OCHA provided the Council
with concrete asks to all parties to the conflict that
would help avert a famine. It is unconscionable that,
since then, no discernible action has been taken by the
parties involved. Today, let me be all the more clear
about what we expect of the warring parties. Houthi-
affiliated militia need to immediately abandon all
humanitarian warehouses they have occupied for
the past two months in Al-Hudaydah. The Yemeni
Government needs to address with the utmost urgency
the import delays caused by Decree 75 before imports
of essential commodities decrease even further. Despite
clearances by the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism, three essential fuel shipments
were delayed in reaching Al-Hudaydah in recent
weeks. Those delays must stop. The coalition needs to
remove unnecessary commercial import restrictions,
which have resulted in container shipments no longer
serving Al-Hudaydah port since last year's blockade.
Al-Hudaydah port should be open and fully functional.
The Council has stated that repeatedly. The road
connecting Al-Hudaydah and Sana'a needs to be open to
humanitarian goods. We need a humanitarian ceasefire
on the ground, as Mr. Lowcock requested. So far, the
Council has been unified. Let us all unite behind the
five asks Mr. Lowcock mentioned today.

That brings me to my third point - compliance
with international humanitarian law. The conduct of
hostilities continues to be a major contributing factor
to the humanitarian crisis. Air strikes and shelling
have killed scores of civilians. They have also hit
hospitals and water sanitation facilities that Yemenis
depend on for clean drinking water and to prevent
cholera and other diseases. Reports of both the Panel of
Experts on Yemen and the Group of Eminent Experts
on Yemen have highlighted the many transgressions
by all parties to the conflict. In the absence of an end
to the violence, their reporting continues to be crucial.
We call on all parties to cooperate with them and allow
them unimpeded access. Accountability is an essential
ingredient for a peaceful and stable Yemen.

In conclusion, we call on the parties to take
urgent steps to alleviate the humanitarian crisis by
implementing OCHA's asks before it is too late.
Humanitarian actors on the ground warn us that
anything short of a halt to hostilities may still be
insufficient to avert a famine. We call on the parties to
cease hostilities around humanitarian and commercial
infrastructure, remove all access constraints and
de-escalate. We further call on them to engage with the
Special Envoy without preconditions.

Martin Griffiths' efforts towards a political
solution continue to have our full support. The parties
must shoulder their responsibility. If not, the Council,
bearing in mind its commitment laid down in resolution
2417 (2018), must consider further steps. We need
immediate and concrete action. Millions oflives depend
on it. The people of Yemen depend on it. The children
of Yemen depend on it.

