Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Once again, I reiterate that we were not aware
of note S/2017/507. I believe that this act is unjust and
raises many issues to which I already intended to refer
in my statement. I hope that everyone will be patient
enough to listen to the statement I shall make on behalf
of the Government of my country. I shall not deliver
a personal statement. All speakers have spoken on
behalf of their Governments, and I shall do the same.
I encourage all members to listen carefully to what I
have to say.

As I talk here at this moment, hundreds of rockets
and mortars are targeting the capital, Damascus.
To date, they have injured 37 people, including six
children, and led to a number of martyrs, including two
children. That comes as no surprise. As the Council is
aware, every time a Security Council meeting is held
to discuss the Syrian situation, there is a massacre
here and a suicide bombing there, as well as the killing
of civilians in some Syrian cities. We have seen not
dozens, but rather hundreds of massacres over the past
seven years. Mr. Lowcock did not get this information
the way he gets messages from what he calls
humanitarian workers in eastern Ghouta who know
about international humanitarian law. Mr. Lowcock
did not solicit the views of the Syrian Government,
which we have expressed in hundreds of letters sent to
him and to the Council. All those who in this meeting
have used the word "regime" to refer to my country
are neither objective nor impartial. They reveal their
countries' involvement in the ongoing terrorist crisis in
my country.

We thank the delegation of the Russian Federation
for convening this meeting to give us the opportunity to
once again present the reality ofthe suffering ofcivilians
as a result of the practices of armed terrorist groups or,
as some call them, moderate armed opposition groups.
Over the past seven years, they have been sowing
death and destruction wherever they have operated.
They have used civilians as human shields. They
have targeted hospitals and schools, turning them into
military centres. They have hurled missiles and rockets
indiscriminately at residential and populated areas.
Of course, as the Permanent Representative of
France said before leaving this meeting, all of this
is a form of resistance. He referred to the terrorists
who bombard Damascus as the "resistance" that the
Syrian regime is trying to suppress. This meeting is
particularly important, as some actors - especially
the United States of America and the so-called
international coalition - have moved from the stage
of aggression by proxy through their support for
terrorism to the stage of direct aggression. Those actors
have recruited terrorists from all four corners of the
world. They call them jihadists and send them to Syria.
Whenever terrorists have failed, those actors have been
there - militarily, politically, through the media and
the United Nations - to intervene in order to achieve
what their terrorist proxies failed to achieve.

Let us be clear. Some Council members - and I
specifically mean the United States of America, the
United Kingdom and France - would like to deprive
the Syrian Government of its constitutional and
sovereign right to defending its territories and people,
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations back
when we had wise founding fathers and international
law and as guaranteed by all United Nations resolutions
on counter-terrorism.

Today, I have heard references to the draft resolution
contained in document S/2018/l46, on humanitarian
issues. The penholders, Kuwait and Sweden, have been
working on it for several weeks. I thank them for their
efforts. However, those efforts are deeply flawed. The

penholders did not coordinate with the Syrian delegation
at all. They did not even ask to hear my country's view
on the draft resolution that concerns it.

Let us imagine for a moment that hundreds of
terrorists had used the Bois de Boulogne as a centre to
target civilians in Paris, launching dozens of missiles
every day. Would we have seen a draft resolution
calling for a humanitarian truce to give the moderate
armed French opposition the opportunity to regain its
power and launch missiles targeting Paris?

Let us imagine for a moment that hundreds of
terrorists had used Central Park here in New York
as a centre to target civilians in Manhattan, and had
launched dozens of missiles every day. Would we have
seen a draft resolution calling for the medical evacuation
of the moderate armed American opposition?

Let us imagine for a moment that hundreds of
terrorists had used Hyde Park as a centre to target
civilians in London, launching dozens ofmissiles daily.
Would we have seen a draft resolution calling for the
delivery of humanitarian aid to the moderate armed
British opposition? Would we have seen statements by
high-level Secretariat officials, such as Mr. Lowcock,
calling for stopping the fight against armed groups that
they describe as non-State armed opposition groups?
Unfortunately, that is how United Nations documents
refer to terrorists nowadays - non-State armed
opposition groups.

Of course, those are all hypothetical scenarios that
might seem far-fetched. However, that is the reality
in Syria. It is the tragedy that we are seeing in Syrian
cities every day, including the city of Damascus and
its inhabitants. It is a bitter reality that the Syrian
Government is facing as a result of the erroneous
approaches adopted by the United Nations and the
positions of some of its Member States. Damascus
is the oldest populated city in history. It is seeing
destruction, death and sorrow every day as a result
of missiles, mortars and rockets launched by armed
terrorist groups operating in eastern Ghouta. These
terrorist groups - the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham, the Al-Nusra Front and affiliated groups - are
designated as terrorist groups in the Security Council.
Today, 8 million people live in Damascus, among them
hundreds of thousands who fled armed groups that
attacked their villages and their homes in many parts of
Syria, including eastern Ghouta.
The United Nations today is going through a
professional and moral crisis that is unfathomable.
High-level Secretariat officials see no harm in adopting
the positions of Governments that sponsor terrorism in
my country. They are directly involved in distorting
facts, manipulating figures, using insidious phrases and
terminology, and depending on unreliable sources in
their statements and reports. Of course, I cannot list all
of those scandals today. I will only remind the Council
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons Fact-Finding Mission report (S/20l7/567),
issued in June 2017. The report states that among the
open sources on which it relied was the testimony of
British doctor Shajul Islam. For those who do not know
who Mr. Islam is, he is a foreign terrorist fighting
for the Al-Nusra Front in Idlib. He was convicted in
the United Kingdom and was not allowed to practice
medicine there as he was involved in crimes related to
terrorism, such as kidnapping British journalist John
Cantlie. That is but one example of some misleading
reports issued by the Secretariat.

We are convinced that those abhorrent practices
will not stop and that some United Nations officials will
ignore the serious information that we have conveyed
to them about armed terrorist groups fabricating the
story that the Syrian Government used toxic chemical
substances against civilians in eastern Ghouta. Those
groups are training some of their members to pretend
that they have been exposed to toxic substances. Of
course, those scenes are broadcast by well-known
networks and correspondents of Mr. Lowcock, and the
Syrian Arab Army is blamed for it. Although we have
sent hundreds of letters to the Secretary-General, the
President ofthe Security Council and specialized United
Nations agencies specialized in counter-terrorism and
the prohibition of chemical weapons, we are sure that
some at the United Nations will not hesitate to believe
that story and blame the Syrian Government. That is
simply because certain agendas in the Organization
compel some to join in the extortion of the Syrian Arab
Republic and its allies that are fighting terrorism on
behalf of all those present.

For over two months now, the Syrian Government
has been sending letters almost daily to the Secretary-
General and the President of the Security Council
documenting the number of missiles used, which have
amounted in the past few weeks to almost 1,200. We
have been also documenting the human and material
losses of civilians in the city of Damascus as a result of
being targeted by terrorists groups in eastern Ghouta.
However, in its statements and appeals the Secretariat
has no problem ignoring the suffering of 8 million
people in Damascus. It has not hesitated to participate
in the misleading campaign launched by some States
to protect a few thousand members of armed terrorists
groups in eastern Ghouta. They are sacrificing 8 million
civilians in Damascus to protect a few thousand
terrorists in eastern Ghouta. This is scene in short.

Both international and United Nations sources
are spreading news of a stifling siege on eastern
Ghouta. That is not consistent with the indisputable
reality on the ground. We are talking here about a
vital area that is the main source of food for the city
of Damascus. Commercial trucks constantly move
back and forth to Ghouta. The Syrian Government has
facilitated the delivery of humanitarian aid to people
in eastern Ghouta, when conditions on the ground have
allowed. We have also approved medical evacuations
to Government hospitals in Damascus. The truth that
we all know, and even high-level Secretariat officials
know, is that armed terrorist groups are controlling
the humanitarian aid that enters eastern Ghouta. They
distribute it among its members and deprive civilians
of any of it.

There is another truth that the Secretariat is
ignoring. Residents of eastern Ghouta have taken to the
street in protest against the practices of terrorists who
point their guns at innocent people. Of course, those
besieged innocents are also sending messages, but
Mr. Lowcock's radar is not receiving them. I would like
to ask the Secretariat the following. How does it justify
ignoring the reports and information that the Syrian
Government has presented on thousands of hostages
and kidnapped people being detained by armed terrorist
groups in eastern Ghouta in the so-called Attawba
prison? They require immediate medical evacuation.
The United Nations is ignoring video footage posted
by armed groups showing women and children, among
the hostages, being pushed into metal cages and left
on the street. It is a painful scene reminiscent of the
times of slavery. It is true insanity that the Secretary-
General spoke of yesterday and has been echoed by
some colleagues today. Yes, there is terrorist insanity
in eastern Ghouta and we must put a stop to it.

What is even worse is that some in the Secretariat
are trying to use the agreement on de-escalation zones
to distort the facts and ignore repeated violations
perpetrated by these armed terrorist groups. They are
being instructed from the outside by actors that some of
them are present in this Chamber. They are instructed
to target Syrian military sites and launch attacks
using rockets, missiles and car bombs on residential
neighbourhoods in Damascus.

These groups operating in eastern Ghouta that
kill civilians in Damascus daily are armed terrorists
groups, regardless of any change to their names,
affiliations or alliances. Today they are Jaysh al-Islam,
the Al-Rahman Corps, the Dawn of Islam and Ahrar
al-Sham. Yesterday they were the Islamic Front, Hay'at
Tahrir al-Sham and the Al-Nusra Front. I invite all
members of the Council to take a look at the websites
of those groups and the satellite television channels
that Western satellites are helping broadcast. It will
become apparent that they all share the same Wahhabi
terrorist ideology, and that they all call for takfiri ideas
and the annihilation of others. Any attempt to change
their names and description by calling them moderate
opposition or non-state armed groups will not change
their terrorist reality. It will not prevent us, as the
Government, from defending our citizens with the
support of our allies, and fighting terrorism pursuant to
the Council's resolutions on counter-terrorism.

Some among us today are exploiting the suffering
of the Syrian people and trading in their blood. They
are demanding accountability while being direct
partners in supporting and defending terrorism. They
are involved in direct military aggression against my
people, as was the case in Palestine, Afghanistan, Iraq,
Libya, Africa and Latin America. The dilemma that we
are facing today is that the mechanism of work inside
the United Nations is being held hostage to political
and financial polarization. As a result, this mechanism
of work completely disregard the crimes of the so-
called international coalition led by the United States
of America.

As mentioned by my colleague the Ambassador
of the Russian Federation, the international coalition
completely destroyed Raqqa, killing hundreds of
civilians and destroying shelters, infrastructure and
bridges over the Euphrates river and everywhere in
Syria, under the pretext of fighting the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). It used internationally
prohibited weapons against civilians in Syria, including
American Napalm, just as it did in Viet Nam. The
international coalition targeted Syrian armed forces and
allied forces more than once in order to break the siege
on ISIL. The coalition and its militias made a deal with
ISIL so that ISIL fighters, their families and their heavy
weapons could leave Raqqa and other places in order to
fight the Syrian forces and their allies elsewhere.

The United Nations is completely disregarding the
repeated aggressions of Israeli occupation forces on
our territories as part of its support to armed terrorist
groups. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations is
clueless as to what is going on in the Golan. The United
Nations itself is completely disregarding Turkish
aggressions and violations against Syrian sovereignty,
and the direct military aggression initiated now by
Turkey on Afrin. Nobody has addressed this issue in
their statements.

In conclusion, responding to those who fear that
eastern Ghouta might become a second Aleppo, I invite
them to go to Aleppo today and see with their own
eyes how millions, not thousands, have resumed their
normal lives after Aleppo was liberated from terrorism.
Indeed, eastern Ghouta will become a second Aleppo,
as will Idlib and all areas that have suffered under the
terrorism of armed groups in Syria.

We will not succumb no longer to the extortion of
those who have supported terrorism in Syria. We will
not be complacent to the plans of the Governments of
the five States that met in Washington, D.C., last month
to divide Syria and ensure the failure of both the Sochi
conference and the political process as a whole. That
news was reported today in the United Kingdom.

We will not sit idly by while those who use terrorism,
take unjust economic measures and wage direct military
aggression against the Syrian people seek to achieve
their cheap political agendas. Rest assured that history
will soon admit that we and our allies have fought a war
on behalf ofthe entire world against terrorism, which is
being supported by Governments that soon will be held
accountable by their people and world public opinion.
Those Governments have invested all they can in
terrorism until it reached their cities, their own citizens
and all safe places throughout the world.

When I look at some ofthe faces in the Chamber and
see the political hypocrisy therein, I recall the famous
adage by the Great Russian writer Fyodor Dostoyevsky,
who said: "Rest assured, hell is big enough for everyone.
There is no need for people to compete so fiercely to be
the worst."

The meeting rose at 2.10pm.
