Mr. Vieira de Mello: I should like to express, on
behalf of Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta and on my own behalf,
our gratitude for the unanimous support - I think I can
use those words - for our mission and for the
Secretary-General's recommendations, contained in the
"Observations" section of his report to the Security
Council, including those relating to the extension of the
mandate of our mission until the end of this year. This
support will act as a very powerful incentive and
encouragement to my colleagues in East Timor - East
Timorese and international colleagues alike, those from
the various United Nations agencies and the non-
governmental community, which continues to play a
crucial role in the reconstruction effort- as well as
those here in the Secretariat. But, perhaps more
importantly, this was a message of hope to the East
Timorese population large. This has been a truly
exceptional debate, and I wish to thank you personally,
Mr. President, as well as your staff and your
Government, for the investment of energy, time and
commitment that I know you have made in the cause of
East Timor.

On the question of the post-independence
presence, most speakers, including you, Sir, have
assured us that they wish the United Nations to remain
involved and to continue to play a strong support role
after East Timor becomes independent. This is of great
importance to the Timorese people and the Timorese
leadership. I cannot overstate the importance of this
message. Some members- in particular, China-
have requested us to submit an in-depth study and
detailed proposals, which I am sure the Secretary-
General will agree to do in the not-too-distant future,
on his proposed structure and on the proposed
functions and mandate of this follow-on, integrated
United Nations mission in East Timor; and this will
also outline the role of other United Nations agencies,
not least the United Nations Development Programme.

I am also grateful for statements made by
different speakers, including the President of the
General Assembly, on the question of flexibility in the
use of assessed contributions in East Timor for the
building of this new governmental structure.

On the question of security, I am grateful for the
support we have received in the establishment of the
new East Timor Defence Force. As far as civilian
police is concerned, the United States representative
requested my comments on the suggestions made by
Jose' Ramos-Horta on the use of national contingents.
As I said this morning, our colleagues in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations are looking
into this question. I have made similar
recommendations to New York and I believe we can
find a new formula that will improve considerably the
performance of the international civilian police
component in East Timor.

I was also requested to provide the Council with
my own assessment of the results of the Timorese
police training so far. My assessment is very positive.
As a matter of fact, I think it is one of the areas in
which UNTAET has been particularly successful, not
only numerically speaking, but also in terms of high
quality and the degree of commitment of the new East
Timorese police cadets. I should also note that, so far,
32 per cent of recruits into the East Timor police force
have been women. The figures for February 2001 will
be 300 Timorese police officers, in various stages of
training, in the streets of East Timor. As of February
2001, a minimum of 100 police officers will graduate
from the police academy each month, which will take
us by June to 800 police officers and another 200 in the
academy undergoing training. By December this year,
the number of East Timorese policemen and
policewomen in the streets of East Timor will have
increased to 1,400. However, as I stated in my
presentation, this new police force will not be fully
trained and fully deployed before the year 2004.

On the question of Timorization, the
representative of the United Kingdom asked me how
we could improve it in qualitative rather than
quantitative terms. Let me say that the assessment I can
make today is that Timorization has been excellent at
the top of the executive echelons, as well as in the
proto-legislative that we have established. It has been
fair at the lower levels of the executive structure, the
new East Timorese civil service, as well as in the
judiciary. It has been poor in the senior levels of the
new civil service, which obviously are crucial for the
long-term success of our endeavours in East Timor.
This is why we have agreed in recent months that this
should be the focus of our attention for the remainder
of the transitional period. This is due to many reasons
that I will not enumerate here, but that I am sure
members of the Security Council are aware of.

On the question of the judiciary, the
representative of the United Kingdom also asked me
what had been the international response to the appeal
we circulated here in late November. Well, it has been
limited; in fact, only the United Kingdom has made an
offer of financial support. But our paper has been
recirculated by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to the members of this Council, as well as
to troop contributors, and I know that the Department
will be organizing very soon - next week, I
understand - a technical meeting with permanent
missions here in New York to try to explore with them
additional urgent support in response to our request,
mainly in terms of investigative personnel. That is
what we need 4 competent, trained human resources to
help the Serious Crimes Investigation Unit complete
investigations that have been outstanding for too long.

On justice at large, the representative of the
United States also asked me how we could ensure that
this process continues beyond independence. We can
do this not only through the consolidation of the new
East Timorese judiciary, and in particular the Special
Panel For Serious Crimes that has been created in the
Dili district court, but also, I should point out, through
the creation - which has now been approved by East
Timorese civil society at large - of a truth and
reconciliation commission. This is a very important
step forward, particularly for crimes that do not fall
into the category of serious crimes. We are working
hard on the drafting of the regulations for the
establishment of this commission and I am hopeful
that, by March, it will be functioning, not only in Dili,
but also in five subregions, as it were. In the remainder
of the transition and beyond independence, this should
be a very important mechanism to satisfy the Timorese
population that justice is being addressed to their
satisfaction.

On the question of civic education that was put to
me by Ambassador Valdivieso of Colombia, I think
Jose' Ramos-Horta has already clarified that incidents
of a political character have been very few indeed. It is
our hope that, through the adoption of the regulation on
political parties, the regulation on elections for the
constituent assembly, the pact on national unity - to
which Mr. Ramos-Horta referred this morning - and a
code of conduct for political parties, as well as through
the civic education campaign, which will be launched
and integrated into the electoral registration exercise
and will use the infrastructure that will be put in place
for the electoral registration process, we will be able to
contain any potential violence in the coming months.

The East Timorese people are highly disciplined,
as we have remarked over the years and since our
arrival in East Timor, and they are determined to reject
violence. They have acquired one fundamental right,
which is to live in peace, and they will exercise that
right. Moreover, the groups that might be at the source
of this violence are very small. We know them and I
believe they can be neutralized through peaceful
means, but also, if necessary, using our very strong
civilian police and military presence on the ground.

On refugees, many questions have been raised. I
will not try to answer them all. Ambassador Wibisono
partly answered those questions, as far as the
Indonesian Government is concerned, and we fully
support the policies of the Indonesian Government on
this question. Many initiatives have been taken jointly
with the Indonesian authorities in recent months. I will
not enumerate them again, because time is very short. I
mentioned a few in my presentation here this morning.
I also told the Council that I discussed some ideas with
the new regional military commander, General Da
Costa, only three days ago in Denpasar. We did the
same with the Director-General of Political Affairs in
the Indonesian Foreign Ministry and with the head of
an inter-agency task force of the Indonesian
Government, who has visited us in Dili twice in recent
weeks. I do hope that, with a stronger and better
coordinated implementation of some of these ideas, we
will finally manage to address and resolve the
remaining refugee challenge in West Timor.

As far as disinformation is concerned,
Ambassador Wibisono is right in saying that rumours
are spread in West Timor that create artificial fear in
the minds of the refugee population as to how they
would be treated if they decided to return to West
Timor. We have been discussing with the Indonesian
authorities a new strategy to counter this
disinformation campaign in the refugee settlements in
West Timor, and we are very much counting on the
Indonesian police and the Indonesian army to help us
spread objective and true information on the situation
in East Timor. We have also agreed recently that we
will again be inviting the Indonesian media, from
Jakarta and Bali, but also from Kupang in West Timor,
to visit us and move around the country freely, as they
have done in the past, so as to relay a more accurate
picture of the situation in East Timor to public opinion
and the refugees in the West.

Finally, we are also hopeful that in the bilateral
negotiations on 30 and 31 January the question of
pensions for East Timorese refugees who find
themselves in Indonesia at present and who were civil
servants under the Indonesian administration will be
satisfactorily resolved. That would be a very powerful
incentive for them to return home.
(spoke in French)

I will end by responding to the questions put to
me by Ambassador Levitte.

With regard to the adequacy of UNTAET's means
in relation to the situation on the ground over the next
few months, he asked us whether any assessments
could be presented within three months. My response is
yes, of course, we can do this without any difficulty
because we had planned to provide regular
assessments, particularly with regard to the military
force.

As far as the other two questions that were put to
me - how, after the holding of elections, I see the
relationship between UNTAET and the Constituent
Assembly and how we might need to change the way
UNTAET functions - let me say first that all Timorese
political leaders in have very clearly stated that they
will recognize unreservedly that the United Nations
continues to exercise administration over the territory
up until independence. Therefore, my role is that of a
transitional administrator. I think I said this morning
that a new Cabinet reflecting the results of the election
will be appointed after the elections for the Constituent
Assembly, which should facilitate the interfacing ofthe
executive with the legislative.

As I see it, one problem could arise if the
Constituent Assembly, as I said this morning, also
exercises legislative power before independence.
Depending on the length of time until independence
and the scope of these powers, it is clear that we will
need, and I will need, to apply operative paragraph 1 of
resolution 1272 (1999) with a degree of flexibility and
a lot of tact and balance, which states that the
Transitional Administration will be empowered to
exercise all legislative and executive authority,
including the administration of justice. Clearly, with
regard to legislative power, we must strike a balance
with this new Constituent Assembly, if, I repeat, it is to
exercise legislative power before independence.

(spoke in English)

This concludes my remarks and replies to some of
the questions. I am sorry that I have not answered them
all, but it is very late and I thought I should address
only those that were particularly salient or relevant to
the remainder of this transition. Once again, I thank
members wholeheartedly for allowing us to take the
floor perhaps more extensively than would have
otherwise been the case.

