Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to begin by expressing my full appreciation to
Bolivia for having organized this briefing, which is
aimed at underscoring this very important issue.

Landmines and explosive remnants of war pose
a serious threat to the life and safety of civilians in
many countries throughout the world. The hazards
posed by such explosives indiscriminately threaten not
only civilians but also those working in national law-
enforcement institutions, in addition to peacekeepers
and humanitarian relief workers, including deminers.

In addition, such explosives have grave long-term
humanitarian, social and development consequences.
They pose an obstacle to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to civilians in need and to the development of
affected areas. This limits the chances of development
and of improving the socioeconomic conditions of
the people living in such areas. They also constitute a
heavy burden on peacebuilding in countries emerging
from conflicts, which can last for decades after the
conflicts end. Neglected mines and explosive remnants
of wars are sources to obtain the materials required
to manufacture improvised explosive devices (IEDs).
Those IEDs are used by armed groups and terrorists in
many attacks that have claimed the lives of thousands
across different countries and regions of the world.

Egypt is one of the countries that is most affected
by mines and their impacts. More than 22.7 million
mines and explosive devices were laid in Egyptian
territories during the Second World War. That is 20 per
cent more than the total number of laid mines in the
world. More than 17 million of those mines exist in the
area of El Alamein. Identifying the locations of such
a huge number of mines and clearing them require
significant financial resources. Therefore, they are
a great impediment of development, not to mention
the humanitarian threat that has led to thousands of
casualties over the years.

Given all this, Egypt has paid special attention to
addressing the issue. Egypt established the National
Demining Committee to oversee demining activities
and the development of affected areas. The Committee
has drafted a national mine strategy to address mine
issues in collaboration with various relevant ministries
and governmental bodies, as well as with civil society
organizations. A trust fund has also been established,
in cooperation with the United Nations Development
Programme, to assist in implementing that strategy.
Egypt has also implemented a moratorium on the
transfer of mines to any other country in 1984. Egypt
also stopped the production of mines in 1988, even
before any international conventions on the matter
existed. Egypt has stressed the importance of striking
a balance between humanitarian considerations and
considerations related to the legitimate use of mines
for self-defence, as well as their use as a regulated and
controlled way to secure borders.

Egypt stresses the important role played by the
United Nations, through the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group on Mine Action to provide assistance in the field
of mine action. Egypt also welcomes the incorporation
of mine action into the mandates of peacekeeping and
special political missions authorized by the Security
Council in conflict areas. Egypt also stresses the
importance of drafting a comprehensive approach to
mine action. That approach should mobilize efforts
within the international community to support national
efforts in countries affected by mines and provide
assistance to build capacities to deal with mines and
hazardous explosives. Egypt also stresses that any legal
framework or instrument should respond in particular
to the legitimate concerns ofthe States most affected by
mines and explosive hazards. The States that laid mines
in territories of other States should bear the legal and
moral responsibility for having done so. They should

share the burden of disposing of such mines.

In conclusion, Egypt hopes that today's meeting
will contribute to mobilizing the international
community to intensify cooperation in order to address
the humanitarian-, security- and development-related
consequences of mines and explosive hazards.

