Mr. Guillen (Peru)(interpretation from Spanish): I
would like to express my thanks to you, Mr. President,
and to extend my greetings to your predecessor, who
presided over this Council with distinction.

There are times when it is necessary to engage in
repetition when positions are immovable and when
circumstances deteriorate. The Peruvian delegation comes
to this meeting to say that there is a situation of
considerable deterioration and constant challenge to
decisions of the Security Council, of the General
Assembly, of other principal organs and of the
Organization as a whole.

In the decision adopted in 1947, it was made very
clear that the situation of the city of Jerusalem should be
that of corpus separatum. In accordance with international
developments in this matter, we have repeated on many
occasions that there should be international guarantees
pertaining to the special status of the city of Jerusalem.

Two proposals submitted to the Security Council
were vetoed on 7 March 1997 and on 21 March 1997,
despite the will of the majority of the membership of this
Council. Because of this, at a special session of the
General Assembly at which a resolution was adopted by
a vast majority, it was clearly established that the status
of Jerusalem was not only a question of, and did not
depend solely on, the bilateral agreements between the
countries. As was stated in the General Assembly and
was expressed in the resolution adopted by a considerable
majority, that status should include internationally
guaranteed provisions.

The current extension of municipal powers outside
the city of Jerusalem is an excessive step that offends the
norms and the decisions adopted by these organs of the
United Nations of which all States present are members.
We believe that such steps will be difficult to rescind in
the future if this deliberate policy continues as it has. We
believe that it is essential that the Security Council adopt
decisions firmly and decisively, and without vetoes, on
this matter.

We believe that the status of Jerusalem is not solely
 

a political matter. It is not a bilateral issue. nor is it solely
a religious matter. It is a matter of concern to the entire
world. It is a matter in which international law and the
legal norms of the United Nations are involved.

Several thousand years ago. in the Holy Book. the
God of the people of Israel made an appeal that man not
act with hostility towards his neighbour. that he not
subjugate him, lest he provoke God's wrath. I believe that
these words of that God should be present in the conscience
of all of us here. I believe it is such an ancient matter that
it docs not deserve hasty treatment. taboos. hesitation or
acts of weakness that detract from the legitimacy of the
decisions of this Council.

