Ms. Rasi: I have the honour to speak at this
meeting today in my capacity as President of the
Economic and Social Council and to talk about the role
of business in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
post-conflict peace-building. I also wish to thank you
for inviting me to participate in this important meeting.

Let me start by referring to the recent report of
the United Nations Commission on the Private Sector
and Development entitled "Unleasing entrepreneurship:
making business work for the poor". The report
recognizes the importance of the private sector in many
spheres of economic and social life, including in the
alleviation of poverty. Overall, the report emphasizes
the private sector's contribution to sustained economic
growth.

It is my strong conviction that sustained
economic growth is one of the keys to conflict
prevention. In this regard, there must be constant
efforts to better mobilize the whole United Nations
system. The General Assembly, the Security Council,
the Economic and Social Council and other bodies
must all have a role in conflict prevention. Institutional
gaps should be filled, and the division of labour among
United Nations bodies should allow for complementary
considerations of countries in turmoil within the
respective areas of competency of each body.

We also need more thorough analysis of the
various causes of conflicts, whether political,
economic, social or cultural. Sources of conflicts and
violence are manifold, but economic elements are often
decisive. Overcoming economic vulnerability and
insecurity is central to helping prevent violent conflict.
Moreover, environmental degradation may also
contribute to social eruption and conflict.

The causes and prevention of poverty overlap
substantially with the causes and prevention of open
violence and complex humanitarian emergencies. We
may distinguish between short-term and long-term
prevention. Long-term efforts include undertaking
structural and institutional change, building capacity
and spurring economic and political development.
Short-term measures are often political and military,
but also developmental and humanitarian to ameliorate
potential conflict.

Today, it is widely accepted that the private sector
has a primary responsibility in building economic and
social well-being. There is also an emerging
understanding about the need to bring business, as one
of the actors, to the table where we discuss conflict
prevention, post-conflict peace-building and recovery
in fragile, conflict-prone societies. We need
partnerships and multi-stakeholder approaches among
Governments, civil society institutions and
corporations. It is worth noting that in 2001
development ministers of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development encouraged
trends towards partnership with business - domestic
and international - to raise awareness of how firms
can be good corporate citizens, avoid feeding the
negative dynamics of conflict and make positive
economic and social contributions to preventing
Violence.

In the spirit of corporate citizenship and civic-
mindedness, the private sector itself must assume
responsibility, including in uncertain conditions, to
help prevent and mitigate conflict. The actions of
private companies during conflicts, and the corporate
ethics behind those actions, and sensitivity to human
rights are important in this regard.

Today conflict is too often caused by the struggle
to exploit natural resources. The private sector
contributes towards instability and conflict if it
provides a source of financing to armed groups in
exchange for natural wealth - diamonds, gold and
timber. In this regard, Security Council resolution 1306
(2000), banning the import of uncertified rough
diamonds from Sierra Leone, was a major step in
recognizing the role of the private sector in conflicts. It
should also be noted that some industries have engaged
in self-regulation, with varying degrees of success.

Peace-building requires a huge economic
investment and the involvement of investors. The key
challenge is to rebuild economies in such a way that
the benefits of recovery are spread as widely as
possible across society. Such an enabling environment
of broad-based recovery requires considerable
institution-building. Encouraging the private sector to
stimulate local development, job creation and basic
social infrastructure can contribute to long-term social
stability and improved local livelihoods.

However, private business cannot be forced to
invest in post-conflict areas. An environment should be
created to attract private business into the area and to
contribute to stabilizing social situations. The private
sector can have a particularly positive role in providing
jobs during and after the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process. Private companies can also
support social development programmes concerned
with wider development and conflict prevention issues.
The key constituencies to be engaged in the peace-
building process are the local businesses, as they have
a true vested interest in peace and stability.

More concrete work is required in looking into
the political economy of violent conflicts and
identifying conflict-sensitive investments. We must
promote transparency of natural resource revenues and
the extractive industries, assist in strengthening the rule
of law and effective enforcement, target corruption,
promote economic diversification, encourage the
development of local business and reduce exposure to
price shocks.

Resuming normal economic activity is severely
impeded without a central bank or a revival of
commercial banks and insurance companies. The
provision of bank finance for working capital, fixed
investment and residential reconstruction must also
restart. Prior to the start of major violence, financial
systems are often insolvent. The involvement of all
economic actors is vital, while basic functions need to
be put in place.

In recent years the Economic and Social Council
has taken a more active role in developing a capacity to
respond to the countries emerging from conflict and
thus to help prevent human conditions from worsening.
The Council continues to address the roots of conflict
throughout its work. At its substantive session this year
the Council will concentrate on the least developed
countries. In the preparations, we have also focused on
those countries that are emerging from conflict. In the
light of their experiences, the private sector is essential
as a development partner, with the support of the
international community in backing recovery efforts
when necessary.

I am happy to note that the Economic and Social
Council and the Security Council have begun to
collaborate in these endeavours. But much more can be
done by the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council working together
to develop a comprehensive and a more rapid-response
capacity for countries in special situations, where
speed, scale and time are of the essence. We must also
develop together a sufficiently long-term perspective
towards both sustainable development and conflict
prevention.

We are confident that the setting up of the High-
level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change will
help the Organization undertake reform measures that
will make it more agile and more flexible in responding
to the challenges of the twenty-first century. We in the
Economic and Social Council stand ready to play our
part in contributing to strengthening the United Nations
in this strategic area.

