I thank the Security Council for the opportunity to brief it on Syria and my efforts to facilitate the political process pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015). I am joining the meeting today from Geneva, where I look forward to reconvening the Constitutional Committee next month. I have placed the issue of detainees, abductees and missing persons at the heart of my efforts since I began my tenure. We regularly meet with the families of detained and missing persons, and their experiences have made a deep impression on me. This is a humanitarian and human rights issue that demands sustained and meaningful action, in line with international law. Moreover, meaningful action on this file, which touches all Syrian families, could also build significant confidence within society, as well as between the parties and international stakeholders. My Deputy and I have engaged directly with the parties, and our team also continues to participate in a working group together with Iran, Russia and Turkey, although it has not met now for many months due to coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Frankly, progress on this file has been vastly insufficient, to the frustration of many Syrians both inside and outside Syria. A great many Syrians remain detained, abducted or missing, and many families still desperately seek information on the fate of their loved ones. The lack of progress is a pity because this is a cause that we can all get behind. Let me remind the Council that a little over a year ago it unanimously adopted resolution 2474 (2019), on missing persons in armed conflict. It is unfortunate that today in Syria the scale of the problem remains unchanged. Consequently, I want to begin today with a loud and clear appeal for the Syrian Government and all other Syrian parties to unilaterally release detainees and abductees, and to take meaningful action on missing persons at a scale that is commensurate with the scope of this tragic issue. Without addressing it, true reconciliation, the healing of society's wounds, credible justice and sustainable peace will remain elusive. Let us make the upcoming Eid Al-Adha an occasion that sees more Syrian families welcome their loved ones home. Of course, the tragedy of detainees, abductees and missing persons represents only a single layer of the humanitarian catastrophe that has engulfed Syria - the greatest of this century. Syrians are now being hit by yet another tsunami of suffering - economic collapse. Over the past month, Syria's currency has regained some of its lost value, but still remains significantly depreciated relative to last year. In addition we see a downward spiral in almost every other measure. There is rampant inflation, rising unemployment, weakened demand, more businesses shutting down, increased food insecurity, with families skipping meals, and shortages of medicine. We also now see a rise in reported cases of COVID-19, exacerbating Syria's economic malaise and further constraining the humanitarian response. Testing remains extremely limited, particularly in areas outside Government control. As of 22 July, the Syrian Ministry of Health had confirmed 561 cases - a relatively low figure, but still more than double the cases since my last briefing (see S/2020/551). In addition, the geographical spread of the virus is increasing, penetrating more areas outside of Damascus, including the first 22 cases in north-western Syria, as well as s1x cases in the north-east. Humanitarian access is ever more imperative. Echoing the Secretary-General, I want to call on all parties to the conflict to ensure humanitarian access to all people in need, in accordance with international humanitarian law. I take note of the Council's decision to extend the United Nations cross-border mechanism in north- western Syria via the Bab Al-Hawa border crossing for 12 months. Let me also echo the Secretary-General's appeal from earlier this year for the waiver of sanctions that can undermine the capacity of the country to ensure access to food, essential health supplies and COVID-19 medical support to respond to the pandemic. To end Syrians' suffering, we must end the violent conflict through a nationwide ceasefire, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), as well as an effective, targeted, cooperative approach to Council-listed terrorist groups, in line with international humanitarian law. There has been some progress towards that goal. In recent months, we have seen relative calm throughout Syria, with no major escalation and front lines mostly frozen. But we continue to see flare ups of violence within and across those front lines, which gives us cause for concern. South-western Syria remains tense. In late June, we saw reports of clashes followed by further protests, assassinations and other security incidents. The Russian Federation has been working to help contain the situation. I have also been sending the same message. Meanwhile, underlying geopolitical tensions persist in the south- west, and I note fresh reports of Israeli air strikes across a broad range of targets in Syria. In the north-west, the calm brought about by Russian and Turkish efforts continues, largely, to hold. I note further progress in Russian-Turkish cooperation inside the de-escalation area, including the first joint patrols across the entire M4 route. I also note that the extremist Wa-Harid Al-Mu'minin Operations Room, which had launched cross-line attacks against the Syrian Government earlier this year, was forcibly dismantled by listed terrorist group Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham following sustained clashes between the two groups. Last week, we saw an attack on a joint patrol near Ariha, injuring Russian and Turkish soldiers. Subsequently, there was a brief uptick in pro-Government air strikes south of the M4 and shelling in north- west Syria, as well as air strikes on Al-Bab city near the Turkish border. I hope that Russia and Turkey can help contain the situation and sustain calm across north-western Syria. North-eastern Syria remains broadly stable, but has seen some concerning incidents - most notably, fatal car bombings around Tall Abyad and Ras Al-Ayn, a drone strike resulting in fatalities near the town of Ayn Al-Arab, another drone strike near Al-Darbasiyah and recurring disruptions to the Allouk water station. We appeal to all stakeholders there, local and international, to exercise restraint and uphold the existing arrangements, which have provided calm throughout this year. Meanwhile, the continuing activity of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) remains a serious concern in southern, central and eastern Syria, with reported riots among ISIL detainees in Al-Hasakah. Let me here recall once again that all parties to the conflict remain bound by international humanitarian law, including the rules of distinction, proportionality and precautions in order to avoid civilian harm. We have now firmed up plans to convene the third session of the Syrian-led and -owned Constitutional Committee. Earlier this week, I was able to confirm with the co-Chair nominated by the Syrian Government and the co-Chair nominated by the Syrian opposition that we will begin in Geneva on 24 August, provided that travel conditions do not change. I was also able to inform middle third members of that as well. I have encouraged all to prepare for a productive session on the agenda and I hope that thereafter we will be able to proceed in subsequent sessions in a regular, business-like and substantive manner. I hope that the Syrian parties can count on the support of the key international players with influence in ensuring the success of the upcoming session. In that regard, I appreciated the expressions of support from the Presidents of the Astana guarantor countries and the many countries who participated in the fourth Brussels Conference for reconvening and advancing the work of the Constitutional Committee and for the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). I also hope that those key international players will work to unlock progress on the broader political process. Only through international dialogue can we begin to address many of the myriad challenges that Syria and Syrians face from humanitarian need, detention, displacement, violence and terror, to economic destitution and the violation of Syria's sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence. We continue to see starkly different views on the nature of these challenges; the debate on sanctions is just one example. There is no sign that this or any of these issues will be resolved by entrenched positioning and rhetoric, in the hope that the other side eventually caves in. Serious and consequential international diplomacy is needed, to bridge significant gaps, including through reciprocal measures. I believe that this is possible and that common interest exists for such a dialogue. I have been encouraged by the continuing dialogue between the Russian Federation and United States and will continue to engage them and all relevant countries on how to build a constructive Syria diplomacy that can support a Syrian- led and -owned political process facilitated by the United Nations. If that path is not taken, all the other paths would lead to further loss and suffering for everyone, inside and outside Syria. That cannot be in anyone's interest. That is why, guided by resolution 2254 (2015) and with the support of the key international players and the Council, I hope that we can chart a path forward step by step to end the Syrian people's suffering and allow them to shape their future through the release of those detained and abducted; a nationwide ceasefire to end violent conflict; a safe, calm and neutral environment that enables the safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugees; and a final political settlement built around a new constitution and inclusive free and fair elections under United Nations supervision - one that meets the Syrian people's legitimate aspirations, that fully restores Syria's sovereignty, unity, independence, territorial integrity and economic prosperity.
