Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: Six weeks after direct
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations began in Washington,
DC, we are at an impasse. The parties have not met
since 15 September.

On 26 September, despite calls for its
continuation from the Middle East Quartet, Israel's
partial settlement moratorium in the West Bank expired
and was not renewed. Construction that had been
frozen resumed in some settlements. President Abbas
indicated that he would not continue negotiations
unless Israel froze settlement activity.

The Secretary-General has publicly expressed his
disappointment that the moratorium was not renewed
and reaffirmed that settlement activity is illegal under
international law and contrary to the Road Map. He has
been in direct and frequent contact with regional
leaders, including President Abbas and Prime Minister
Netanyahu, and has urged all to find a way forward.
10-58828

On 21 September, the Quartet met in New York,
noted the positive impact of the settlement restraint and
urged its continuation. The Quartet reiterated that
unilateral actions by either party, including settlement
activity, would not be recognized by the international
community. It encouraged the parties to work together
to find a way to ensure that negotiations continued in a
constructive manner to resolve all final status issues
within one year.

Following consultations with Quartet partners,
this position was reiterated in a message that Special
Coordinator Serry delivered on behalf of the Secretary-
General to the Arab League Summit in Sirte, Libya, on
9 October. In Sirte, the League of Arab States Follow-
up Committee of the Arab Peace Initiative supported
President Abbas's position not to continue in
negotiations unless Israel freezes settlement activity
and agreed to reconvene in a month to assess the
situation.

The Quartet envoys have been in regular contact
and principals are discussing a proposal to meet soon
to review developments. We have a brief and crucial
window to overcome the current impasse. Intensive
diplomatic efforts, led by the United States and
supported by all members of the Quartet, are ongoing
to create conditions conducive to the continuation of
negotiations. These efforts were made even more
difficult by the Israeli Government's approval on
14 October of construction tenders for 238 housing
units in the settlements of Ramot and Pisgat Ze'ev in
East Jerusalem, contrary to international law and
running directly counter to the Quartet's efforts.

Time is of the essence, and we need progress in
the coming weeks. The Secretary-General continues to
believe that, if the door to peace closes, it will be very
hard to reopen it. There is no alternative to a negotiated
settlement resulting in the creation of an independent
and viable State of Palestine living side by side with
the State of Israel in peace and security.

Despite these uncertainties, the State-building
agenda of the Palestinian Authority continues to
advance. On 21 September, the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee (AHLC) met in New York. The Committee
members recognized that the Palestinian Authority's
reform agenda had accelerated in 2010, with critical
achievements in public finance reform, infrastructure
and the provision of social services. They supported
Prime Minister Fayyad's determination to implement
10-58828
the Homestretch to Freedom agenda by August next
year. The AHLC welcomed Israeli measures to remove
some obstacles to movement in the West Bank and to
ease restrictions on some imports to Gaza, while urging
further steps, particularly in support of greater private
sector-led growth.

As a symbol of continued support for private-
sector development, which will ultimately drive the
sustainable economic growth that is critical to the
future State, on 11 October Prime Minister Fayyad
broke ground on the agro-industrial park in the Jordan
Valley funded by Japan. The park could create 10,000
Palestinian jobs and provide a major boost to the
economy. However, as with other infrastructure in Area
C, this park will require the Government of Israel to
approve the necessary permits.

While in New York, Prime Minister Fayyad
briefed AHLC members, as well as Arab League
foreign ministers, that commitments of donor funding
for 2010 remained critically below what is necessary to
ensure that the Palestinian Authority can meet
expenses. Reforms have steadily lowered the budget
deficit, reducing the Authority's reliance on donor
funding for budget support. However, despite the
continuing generosity of some donors, commitments
for 2010 remain insufficient to ensure that the
Palestinian Authority can meet expenses in both Gaza
and the West Bank, and the Palestinian Authority faces
increasing difficulties in borrowing from domestic
banks to cover this shortfall.

There continue to be tensions and violent
incidents in the West Bank. The Palestinian Authority
is working to provide security in areas under its
authority and to meet its Road Map commitments to
combat terrorist attacks - and reportedly thwarted
attempts by militants to launch attacks during the
reporting period, underscoring the continuing security
challenges on the ground. A sixth battalion of
Palestinian national security forces is currently training
in Jordan, with international assistance, before being
deployed in the West Bank.

Despite Palestinian efforts, Israeli security forces,
citing security concerns, conducted 353 operations in
the West Bank during the reporting period, in which six
Palestinians were killed, including two leaders of the
Hamas Izz el-Deen al-Qassam Brigades allegedly
involved in the killing of four Israelis near Hebron on
31 August. Also, 157 Palestinians were injured and 330
3
arrested. Incursions on this scale weaken efforts to
build genuine security cooperation. One Palestinian
labourer was killed while trying to reach East
Jerusalem through the barrier, and another suffered a
fatal heart attack.

A total of 44 violent incidents were recorded
between local Palestinians and settlers, in which six
Palestinians and four Israelis were injured. One
Palestinian was shot by a settler on 8 October, and
there were two incidents of Palestinians being run over.
In a deplorable act of desecration, there was an arson
attack by settlers on a mosque near Bethlehem on
4 October. To defuse tension and promote inter-faith
tolerance, six rabbis subsequently visited the mosque
and donated new Korans to replace those damaged in
the blaze. There were also attacks by Palestinians on
settlers, including on 26 September, when Palestinians
opened fire at an Israeli vehicle near Hebron, injuring a
man and his pregnant wife.

Hundreds of olive trees are reported to have been
set on fire, poisoned or uprooted by settlers throughout
the West Bank in the run-up to the harvest season.
Prime Minister Fayyad marked the beginning of the
olive harvest on 10 October by participating in olive-
picking in the northern West Bank village of Iraq
Burin, which has been the scene of repeated attacks by
settlers in past months. Much more needs to be done by
Israel to prevent violence by extremists against
Palestinian civilians under occupation, and to impose
the rule of law.

On 13 October, Israel demolished 10 outposts in
the West Bank. This is a positive development, which
we hope will be followed by further steps towards
Israel's Road Map commitment to dismantling outposts
erected since March 2001.

The wall partly constructed in deviation from the
Green Line and in contravention of the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice continues to pose
significant challenges to the movement of Palestinians
in the West Bank. Despite efforts to ease restrictions on
movement and access, the number of obstacles in the
West Bank remained at 508. On 11 October, an
organizer of the anti-wall campaign who advocates
peaceful resistance was convicted of incitement and
organization and participation in demonstrations, and
was sentenced to one year in jail by an Israeli military
tribunal.
There were renewed confrontations in sensitive
areas of East Jerusalem during the reporting period,
underscoring the tensions caused by the presence and
expansion of settler communities in the heart of
Palestinian neighbourhoods. On 22 September, a
Palestinian was shot and killed by an Israeli private
security guard in the East Jerusalem neighbourhood of
Silwan after he was allegedly attacked by Palestinians
throwing stones at his car. Violent clashes ensued and
spread to other Palestinian neighbourhoods. On
26 September, an Israeli court rejected an appeal
claiming ownership of a building by two Palestinian
families in the East Jerusalem neighbourhood of
Sheikh Jarrah, leaving a further 20 families living in
the area at risk of eviction.

The status of the four Palestinian lawmakers from
the Hamas-affiliated Change and Reform bloc remains
unresolved. This unsustainable situation needs a
sensible resolution that ensures that they are not
expelled from Jerusalem.

The situation in Gaza remains a source of serious
concern. The modest gains of recent months must not
obscure the need for more far-reaching measures to
ease the blockade, including enabling freer movement
of people and exports and a wider range of goods on
the commercial market as part of a broader effort to
implement all aspects of resolution 1860 (2009).

If we are to make progress, all parties must work
to ensure calm. During the reporting period, Palestinian
militant groups fired seven rockets and six mortars
from Gaza into Israel, while Israeli security forces
conducted five air strikes and six incursions into Gaza.
Three Palestinian militants and one civilian were
killed, while 18 civilians and one militant were injured.
We urge all parties to respect international
humanitarian law and to halt violence.

During the reporting period, a total of 2,570
truckloads entered Gaza, with a weekly average of 857.
Fifty-eight per cent of the imports were food products.
In June, prior to the announcement of the new Israeli
policy for Gaza, the weekly average was 566 trucks.
However, the current imports still represent a third of
the June 2007 pre-blockade weekly average. We
reiterate that the appropriate way to meet needs in
Gaza is through the further opening of legitimate
crossings.

I am pleased to report the completion of 151
housing units in Khan Younis, which on Friday,

15 October, began to receive their new inhabitants.
Further approvals of United Nations projects have been
received from the Government of Israel. While these
are only a portion of the total package presented to
Israel, they are nevertheless part of an expanding flow
of United Nations recovery and construction work,
which will begin to address Gaza's immense recovery
and reconstruction needs. In that regard, the United
Nations will present additional programmes of work
before the end of the year and will continue to work
with the Government of Israel to streamline
implementation arrangements. One immediate step
would be for Israel to expand the working hours and
days for which the Karni crossing is open.

The de facto Hamas authorities closed down
several civilian associations during the reporting
period, including a journalists' syndicate and a farmers'
union. Some civic groups, including partners in United
Nations-implemented projects, have suspended their
operations in Gaza, claiming to have experienced
increasing pressure from the authorities. In addition, on
19 September, unknown assailants set ablaze a
recreation water park in Gaza. We are also concerned
that, on 22 September, a Palestinian man was sentenced
to death by firing squad after a military tribunal
convicted him of collaboration with enemy parties.

We reiterate our concern over the continued
captivity of Staff Sergeant Shalit and call for his
immediate release. Humanitarian access to him should
be granted without further delay. We note reports of a
resumption of efforts to conclude an agreement that
would secure his release in exchange for the release of
a number of the more than 9,000 Palestinian prisoners
in Israeli jails.

We continue to support efforts to advance
Palestinian reconciliation based on commitments of the
Palestinian Liberation Organization. These efforts have
been stalled following Hamas's refusal to sign the
Egyptian-brokered draft reconciliation proposal. Senior
Fatah representatives met with Hamas leader Khaled
Mashal in Damascus on 23 September. A further
session of talks is expected on 20 October.

As mentioned at the last monthly briefing to the
Council (see PV.6388), the Secretary-General's Panel
of Inquiry on the 31 May 2010 flotilla incident will
discuss and review the interim reports once it had also
received a report from Israel. The Israeli commission
to examine the maritime incident of 31 May 2010

continues its proceedings, which are now at an
advanced stage. We look forward to the continued
cooperation of the parties with the Panel and to the
Panel's further progress and substantive work.

It remains essential - and indeed urgent - that
serious steps are taken to restore the regional tracks of
the peace process, in particular between Israel and
Syria. Only a comprehensive approach to peace will be
sustainable and has the potential to ease tensions in the
region. On the ground, the situation in the occupied
Golan remained stable but settlement activities
continued.

Turning to Lebanon, tensions generated by
speculation and allegations related to potential
indictments by the Special Tribunal for Lebanon grew
steadily in recent weeks. Those tensions were
accompanied by a sharp increase in the use of
belligerent rhetoric and challenges to State institutions,
raising fears of sectarian violence. Against that
background, the Special Coordinator for Lebanon,
Michael C. Williams, held meetings with Lebanese
officials and political leaders and called on all sides to
tackle difficult issues in an atmosphere of calm. The
Secretary-General expressed his support for the work
of the Special Tribunal, stressing that it is independent,
with a clear mandate from the Security Council,
through resolutions 1664 (2006) and 1757 (2007), to
uncover the truth and end impunity, and that no one
should prejudge the outcome.

On 13 and 14 October, the President of the
Islamic Republic of Iran conducted an official visit to
Lebanon, including to the south of the country. The
visit sparked serious concerns in many quarters.

The living conditions of Palestinian refugees in
Lebanon remained of serious concern. The United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) continues to face
funding shortfalls, both for its regular programmes,
aimed at delivering basic services to Palestinian
refugees, and for the reconstruction of the Nahr
al-Bared camp. We reiterate our call to donors,
including countries in the region, to provide vital
financial support for the reconstruction efforts, as well
as for the work of UNRWA.

The overall situation in the area of operation of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon remained
generally quiet. During the past month Israeli air
violations took place on an almost daily basis. The
twelfth report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) will be
released today.

We must remain collectively committed to the
goal of a peace agreement within a year from the start
of talks in September. We must overcome the current
impasse and - more important - ensure that when
talks resume they move intensively and definitively to
seek resolutions of the key core issues, including
borders. The Secretary-General will continue to work
closely with the Quartet and regional and international
partners - and the parties themselves - to support
this agenda.

The United Nations remains committed to an end
to the occupation that began in 1967 and to the goal of
establishing an independent, democratic, contiguous
and viable Palestinian State living side by side in peace
and security with Israel and its other neighbours.

