Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French): 1 wish to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan Salame, for his briefing today. Belgium once again reiterates its ongoing commitment to the return of peace in Libya. Belgium firmly supports all elements of the Special Representative's plan, including the economic and political aspects, which complement the ceasefire. Belgium also welcomes the conclusions of the Berlin process, which were endorsed by all participants at the 19 January summit. They should reflect our determination to support Special Representative Salame's plan for a way out of the crisis in Libya and are the best way to avoid a regional conflict and to achieve a political solution for the Libyan people as a whole. Inrecent months, we have systematically denounced flagrant violations of the arms embargo and called for a lasting ceasefire. Belgium now hopes that the Security Council's repeated call for non-interference by external actors, for intra-Libyan dialogue and for respect for the arms embargo will finally be put into practice. It is the responsibility of each State to ensure that its arms exports are not diverted to illicit destinations. Only increased vigilance and a determination to respect its own commitments will make it possible to ensure full compliance with the arms embargo. We also remain concerned about the information coming from the field. It appears that military equipment and reinforcements of foreign mercenaries have been provided to both sides, even after the Berlin conference. There has also been an increase in the use of heavy artillery, particularly against civilian infrastructure and in the immediate vicinity of densely populated areas. The growing presence of increasingly sophisticated equipment and foreign military actors would make further escalation even more cruel. We are also deeply concerned about the blockage of oil production, which would have disastrous consequences for the country's economy and the population as a whole. We call on the Libyan parties, in particular General Khalifa Haftar, to back the Berlin conclusions and to engage constructively with the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) in the preparations forthe high-level political forum. The Berlin process, the only initiative with a chance of restoring peace to Libya, must receive unanimous support if we are to prevent an escalation with serious adverse regional consequences. I also hope that the Berlin meeting will lead to the end of interference of certain States in the Libyan conflict and that, on the contrary, those States will now use their influence with the Libyan parties in a positive way, finally encouraging them to commit firmly and definitively to the path of dialogue. By way of reminder, Belgium denounces the two memorandums of understanding signed between the National Government and Turkey - the first, because it infringes the democratic rights of other States, and the second, because it reinforces the military approach and risks massively violating the embargo. Lastly, the consolidation of the ceasefire and practical modalities for its implementation are urgent. In this regard, Belgium welcomes the appointment of the delegates of each party to the Joint Military Commission's 5+5 talks and urges them to hold a productive meeting. We also look forward to the early resumption of direct political dialogue between the Libyan parties at the political forum proposed by the Special Representative. We also welcome the engagement of regional organizations in support of the implementation of the Berlin communique. Once again, I would like to reiterate that it is the responsibility of all parties to protect civilians, including the most vulnerable. In this regard, I would like to reiterate my country's commitment to ensuring that the most serious crimes committed in Libya do not go unpunished and that the responsible parties are brought to justice in national courts or the International Criminal Court. In conclusion, I once again commend the courage and determination of all UNSMIL personnel and of Special Representative Salame.
