Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I have listened
with much interest to what the Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission has had to say, as well as to
the briefings by the Chair of the Senior Advisory
Group and by Under-Secretary-General Malcorra.

Peacekeeping operations mandated by this
Council have been the main instrument for United
Nations action on the ground for conflict resolution.
They have stood the test of time and will remain the
critical pillar of United Nations activities for years to
come. They have also provided the umbrella for
peacebuilding activities. However, over the years, we
in this Council have invariably added to the mandates
of peacekeeping missions. The critical imperative is
therefore for placing adequate resources at their
disposal.

As many of the situations where United Nations
peacekeeping missions are operating are those of
prolonged conflict or are post conflict, it is essential
that the United Nations missions involve themselves in
building local capacities for the provision of basic
administration and essential services. Civilian
capacities are critical in this endeavour, and their
presence in a significantly enhanced manner in United
Nations peacekeeping missions has to engage us here
in the United Nations as Member States.

We are very appreciative of the work done by
Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno and the Senior Advisory
Group in examining the issue in detail and making
recommendations on how enhanced civilian capacity
could be incorporated in the work of the United
Nations in post-conflict situations. We have also noted
that the Secretary-General has set up a steering group
to facilitate follow-up of the report of the independent
review on civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict
(see S/2011/85) and that Under-Secretary-General
Malcorra will be leading that effort.

This is a detailed report, and the issues of
enhanced civilian capacities require that we engage
ourselves as Member States. At the United Nations we
have a number of institutions in which we will have to
do this, including the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth Committee.
Significantly enhancing civilian capacities will have a
major impact on the staffing, resourcing and impact of
peacekeeping missions, but these must neither dilute
nor detract from the requirements of peacekeeping.

The open framework and the cluster approach to
identifying tasks and responsibilities in the aftermath
of conflict could help in better defining peacebuilding
priorities and tasks. The concept of a lead agency has
to be reconciled with the requirement of unity of
command, so essential in peacekeeping, and to ensure
that peacebuilding does not fall victim to turf battles.
There will also be demands for creating entities in New
York to administer these advanced civilian capacities.
We need to avoid setting up large and top-heavy
bureaucratic structures. Our focus must remain on the
field and delivery there.

The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) has been acting on the provision of police
capacities for many years, and I am happy that India
has been able to contribute both formed police units -
including the first female formed police unit - and
senior police personnel to serve in management and
command positions.

The report has identified several critical areas for
providing core government functions where civilian
capacities are best suited. India has been included as
one of the countries whose capacity in several of these
areas has been noticed for possible tapping by the
United Nations. In the past, when called upon to
provide civilian capacities for United Nations missions,
India has responded promptly. I recall the secondment
of several of our civilian officials to United Nations
missions in the former Yugoslavia and even right now
in Afghanistan.

The report has underscored recognition of
national ownership and the importance of support to
core government functions to ensure success in
preventing relapse into conflict. It is critical that
national ownership is accepted in its real sense, and not
only by way of lip service while actually pushing for
the solutions favoured by the donors. It is also critical
that civilian capacity deployments are demand-driven.

My delegation believes that the recruitment
model should give primacy to a partnership with
Governments of Member States and involve the
secondment of Government officials. It is also
important to ensure gender balance. This has a number
of advantages. It gives the United Nations rapid access
to the required capacities, allowing rapid scaling up
and scaling down of capacities. Above all it provides
capacities that are trained to work in and establish
government structures, and it would mesh well with the
peacekeeping personnel on the ground. The DPKO has
a fourth-generation model. Perhaps that too could be
used to generate civilian capacities from Governments
of Member States.

My delegation also believes that the capacities
that are being sourced must be relevant to the
conditions in post-conflict situations. The expertise
that is most relevant and actually tried on the ground is
in developing countries that have undertaken
successful efforts in recent times in building
government structures and arranging for better delivery
of basic services. There is an international shift in
many fields towards sourcing capabilities from the
global South, driven by sound economic and functional

considerations. United Nations efforts to source
civilian capacities from developing nations would be in
consonance with these broad prints.

The United Nations remains, in the eyes of the
affected, the most credible and legitimate
representative of the international community. Its
peacekeeping activities have provided the bedrock of
this trust. It is imperative that civilian capacities add to
this credibility.

