Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): On behalf of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa, I wish to extend my sincere
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting at this very meaningful and
timely moment - just a few days after we celebrated
the fortieth anniversary of the foundation of the
Organization of African Unity, now the African Union.

The agenda proposed by the Pakistani presidency
for today's meeting is a mark of the attention which the
Security Council gives to the problems affecting the
African continent, and reflects the urgent need to find
ways to strengthen the commitment of the international
community to Africa.

My statement this morning will focus on the need
for enhancing the efficiency of the mechanisms
currently used by the United Nations in the
Organization's engagement with Africa, especially the
role of the working groups.

It is gratifying to notice the growing role in the
United Nations system of ad hoc groups - the Ad Hoc
Working Group of the General Assembly on the Causes
of Conflict and the Promotion of Durable Peace and
Sustainable Development in Africa; the Economic and
Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group on African
Countries Emerging from Conflict; the groups of
friends; and the Council's Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution, on behalf of which
I am speaking this morning.

These instruments, if properly used, can and
should be important tools in promoting peace and
dealing with the crises that afflict the international
community, especially on the African continent. It is
our view that there is a need to enhance the work of
those groups by rendering their recommendations more
pertinent to the work of the Security Council.
Furthermore, working groups should find mechanisms
for cooperation and coordination with sanctions
committees, as it is established that the imposition of
sanctions often remains an important tool for
guaranteeing compliance with internationally accepted
norms, leading to the resolution of conflicts. This was
the case with Angola, where sanctions against the rebel
movement, when properly applied and monitored,
became a vital factor towards ending the war in my
country.

The Security Council open meeting on the Ad
Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa, held on 22 May 2002 under the
leadership of my colleague Ambassador Koonjul, made
important recommendations on cooperation with the
Economic and Social Council on confidence-building
in the Mano River region, on the role of the special
representatives of the Secretary-General in Africa, on
the establishment of groups of friends and on the
question of cooperation with the African Union and
subregional organizations.

However, the gap between the decisions and/or
recommendations and their implementation continues
to be a matter of great concern. Therefore, there is a
need for the working groups to undertake a more
rigorous assessment of the recommendations in order
to make them more implementable and action-friendly
by the United Nations system, especially the Security
Council. A working group's effectiveness will depend
on its capacity to focus on concrete action or concrete
situations and on its ability to mobilize the
international community's attention, as well as to
provide proper advice and support for an appropriate
and timely response.

The case of Guinea-Bissau and the manner in
which it is being addressed jointly by the Economic
and Social Council's Ad Hoc Advisory Group on
African Countries emerging from conflict, the Security
Council Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa and the Group of
Friends of Guinea-Bissau constitutes a good example
of the positive participation of working groups. The
coming joint mission to be undertaken by the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council to that
country will certainly reinforce this point.

As I mentioned earlier, the Ad Hoc working
Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa
made pertinent recommendations to the Security
Council on cooperation with the African Union. To
meet this objective, better coordination and
consultation with the Union and regional organizations,
such as the Economic Community of West African
States and the Southern Africa Development
Community, is needed. The response of the
international community and the Security Council to
conflicts still prevailing in Liberia, Cote d'Ivoire and
the Great Lakes, particularly in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, is a perfect example of what
better cooperation can achieve.

I would like to welcome the Secretary-General's
efforts aimed at enhancing this cooperation by
establishing an Office within the Secretariat to deal
especially with African issues. The recent appointment
of Mr. Gambari as head of that Office is equally well
received. This represents another good example of the
assistance being provided to the African Union to
enhance its capacity.

The signing by the States members of the African
Union of a protocol creating the Peace and Security
Council was a significant step taken by the continent to
face challenges in conflict prevention, management and
resolution. We therefore welcome the United Nations
readiness to assist in the implementation of that
protocol.

One of the main concerns of the continent
continues to be the need for a timely United Nations
peacekeeping response to African crises - as has been
reiterated once again this morning in earlier
statements - as the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and more especially in Bunia
clearly demonstrates. This morning, the Council
adopted resolution 1484 (2003) authorizing the
deployment of the Interim Emergency Multinational
Force following a general appeal to Member States. We
commend the leadership of France and the active
support of members that will be participating in that
effort.

I would like to conclude by saying that peace and
development are the two main challenges in Africa and
in many other regions of the globe today. This demands
a comprehensive and multisectoral engagement by the
entire international community. This meeting today,
ending Pakistan's presidency for the month, should be
considered a step forward in our Council's search for
new modalities to respond to emerging crises in the
world in which we live today.

