Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to express thanks to you,
Mr. President, Ambassador Vitaly Churkin, Permanent
Representative of the friendly Russian Federation, for
your wise leadership during the deliberations of the
Security Council for the month of October and for
granting us this opportunity to address the Council. I
would also like to express thanks to His Excellency the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for Yemen,
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, for their great efforts
to reach a peace agreement to end the coup against
the Yemeni State and the tragedy of war launched by
the Houthi militias and the pro-Saleh forces against
our people since September 2014. We also wish to
thank Mr. O'Brien, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. Hadi of the World Food
Programme (WFP) for their briefings. We also thank all
members of the Security Council for their statements,
all of which reflect great concern with regard to the
tragic conditions in my country, Yemen.

Today, after two years of the coup in Yemen, the
scene is depressing and dark. The Houthi militias, allied
with the former President, have tampered with the fate
of the Yemeni nation, looted our scare resources and
paved the way for hunger, diseases and epidemics that
devastate the people. They are telling all Yemenis either
to accept the coup, the prevalence of sectarian politics
and the Iranian plot in Sana'a, which creates permanent
tension in the area, or to face death and destruction.
The Under-Secretary-General and the representative
of the WFP have presented a glimpse into the dire
humanitarian situation my country has reached.

In areas under the control by those masterminding
the coup, who are not Yemenis, access of humanitarian
aid to the besieged city of Taiz has been impeded and
access to the United Nations mission in the city has also
been denied. This Organization failed to condemn that
fact during the cessation of hostilities. Since the end
of the talks in Kuwait, the coup party has refused to
interact positively in the framework of the proposed
peace process based on the three terms of reference.
They have continued waging war and exploited the
cessation of hostilities to smuggle mid-range missiles
with a range of more than 600 kilometres, such as those
that targeted the holy sites in Saudi Arabia that are
sacred to all Muslims throughout the world.

Iranian-made Noor and Kosar missiles - naval
missiles that have been modified to launch from land
to attack sea vessels - have targeted international
waterways in the southern part of the Red Sea. Reports
of the Panel of Experts on Yemen and the American
Fleet in the region have confirmed the scope of the
shipments from Iran to the coup masters in Yemen. The
Security Council has failed to issue a single statement
condemning that terrorism-sponsoring State, despite
several communications transmitted by Member States
to the Secretary-General and the Security Council.

The choice of peace was, and remains, the choice
of the Yemeni Government. It is our unwavering
position, and the only alternative to end the suffering
of our patient and strong Yemeni people, who have
been continued to pay the price of an unjust war waged
everywhere in Yemen by the militias of the Houthi and
Ali Abdullah Saleh. We in the Government believe that
peace is the only way to eradicate the criminal gangsters
and warlords and to liberate the people from those
murderers who, devoid of conscience, have destroyed
our resources and valuable infrastructure and threaten
our daily life.

For the past two years, the Yemeni Government
has demonstrated its positive and responsible position
and participated interactively in initiatives of the
international community. We have continuously
proposed painful concessions for the sake of peace in
Yemen, while the coup masters continue to refuse a
peaceful settlement and persist in carrying out militia
activity. As a result some may have thought that we
might propose measures to undermine sovereignty
and the restoration of the State, resorting to security
arrangements without guarantees or an understanding
of the social, geographical and political background of
the conflict in Yemen.

While we emphasize the importance of the three
terms of reference for peace in Yemen, the coup side
has insisted on evading those solutions and continuing
unilateral actions that have been rejected by the
international community, such as establishment of a
political entity to administer the State and appointing
a coup-based Government. When the consultations in
Kuwait ended, owing to the refusal of the other side
to interact with the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, international efforts continued, leading to
ministerial meetings of the four in Jeddah, New York
and London. We in the Government welcomed the new
efforts supplementing the United Nations efforts. We
emphasize that any attempt to evade the three terms
of reference for peace, as represented by the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative and its implementing
mechanism, and the National Dialogue Conference
outcomes and Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2216 (2015), all serve to stoke actions by the
coup, and thus the violence in Yemen. Any proposal
that is not aimed at ending the coup and its withdrawal
from all of the cities and the State institutions and the
handing over of weapons and missiles and release of
the prisoners, all of that would be taking the side of
the militias and accepting the logic of terrorism and its
control over the fate of nations.

Sustained peace cannot be achieved by rewarding
the coup masters for their coup and handing them
authority on a golden plate. It cannot be achieved
by keeping most of the weapons in the hands of the
militias, while they continue to occupy villages and
governorates and cities under the pretense of a gradual
solution, while demanding an end to legitimacy. Peace
will not be achieved by ignoring the recognized terms
of reference and ignoring the sacrifices of the Yemeni
people or their victories. Peace will not be achieved
without removing all those that have impeded the
peaceful transfer of power in Yemen, sabotaged the
transitional period, rejected the outcomes of the
National Dialogue Conference outcomes and waged
war and destruction and threatened international
peace and security and navigational activities in
international waterways. Peace will not be achieved
without removing every person so involved, including
former President Ali Abdullah Saleh, his son Ahmed
Ali Abdullah Saleh and Abdulmalik al-Houthi and their
brothers and assistants.

All parties in Yemen, including political parties,
military leaders, security leaders and elected leaders of
local governate councils and youth groups and women's
organizations, have issued statements in the past few
days condemning any deviation from the path of peace
and any attempt to thwart efforts to stop the conflict in
Yemen. They have expressed support for His Excellency
the President to prioritize the negotiations so that we
can bury the coup and ensure victory to democracy and
the Republic of Yemen.

Today Yemen's sovereignty is represented by the
presidency. It cannot be compromised, as it is the sole
guarantor of the completion of the political transition
in Yemen. To complete the new federal constitution, we
have warned many times, as Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh
Ahmed well knows, that further pressure against the
legitimate Government will lead to strengthening of
the coup's forces and will not allow the international
community to contribute to rebuilding the Yemeni
State. On the contrary, that will fuel the coup forces
and the idea that the international community is closer
to understanding the Iranian expansion plan in Yemen.

We have affirmed several times in this Chamber
that the war in my country, Yemen, can end today. As I
stated, that is based on the power of the Yemeni people
and their rejection of the death banner raised by the
militias, through raising their voices as one in rejecting
and demanding an end to the coup and this unjust war
against our great Yemeni people.

I therefore call upon the Yemeni people to reject
the devilish criminal militias that have transformed
life in our nation into a real nightmare, so that we
can implement together, once again, the outcomes of
the National Dialogue that we formulated with our
dreams and aspirations in order to catch up with the
rest of humankind and build a federal, democratic,
peaceful Yemen.

In conclusion, Yemen highly appreciates the
efforts of His Excellency the Secretary-General and his
Special Envoy Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, as well
as those on the part of the Security Council and the
Ambassadors of the Group of 18 for peace and stability
in Yemen. We also renew our thanks and gratitude to
our brethren in Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates
and Egypt and the remaining States Organizationf the
Arab Coalition to restore legitimacy in Yemen. We call
upon all members of the Security Council to continue
making the unified efforts that have accompanied the
crisis in Yemen since it began in 2011. Because of
the Council's unified position, a great deal has been
achieved in Yemen in partnership with the Yemeni
Government. This can be added to the impeccable
record of the United Nations in conflict resolution in
the world.

