Mr. Trautwein (Germany): Permit me at the
outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
welcome you to New York, and I wish you and your
delegation all the best for the month of August - and,
naturally, for the following months as well. Let me also
thank the Romanian Ambassador and his delegation for
the very impressive work they carried out during their
presidency in the month of July. I would also like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Hedi Annabi for his
comprehensive and instructive briefing based on the
Secretary-General's detailed report (S/2004/6l3).

Germany subscribes to the statement that will be
delivered later by the Ambassador of the Netherlands
on behalf of the European Union.

We heard during the briefing that we are again
facing a mixed picture: there has been progress in
many areas but there is slow or no progress in others.
We heard again about the impact of the mid-March
violence on the standards implementation process. Let
me highlight a few aspects that we consider to be of
particular importance.

The events of mid-March dealt a severe blow to
Kosovo's development in many areas, not least with
regard to the well-being of its people. Kosovo must
continue to concentrate on confidence-building and
reconciliation. A key factor in that process is the
reconstruction of damaged properties as a prerequisite
for the return of those who were displaced during the
course of the March violence. As we have heard, a
considerable number of those persons have been
willing and able to return to their homes. Germany
welcomes those positive achievements. The joint
declaration of 14 July establishing a ministry for
community matters, human rights and returns, and the
public commitment of the Kosovo authorities to
complete reconstruction within the agreed timelines, is
very good news.

An important aspect of confidence-building is the
punishment of those responsible for the violence at all
levels. We do see some results, but we believe that
further efforts are necessary.

In general, it still seems true that Kosovo
Albanians and Kosovo Serbs talk more about each
other than to each other. Both communities must
intensify their direct dialogue. It is up to the Kosovo
Albanian majority to reach out to the Kosovo Serb
communities, but the Kosovo Serbs have to respond to
Kosovo Albanian offers for dialogue and cooperation.
We feel it is essential that the Kosovo Serb population
become fully engaged in Kosovo's political life. That is
in their own interest, and it is the best way to address
their concerns. Kosovo Serbs have to speak up for
themselves in the Provisional Institutions, where
Kosovo's future is being defined. It is in their own
interest to participate in the forthcoming elections. In
that respect, we are deeply concerned about ongoing
discussions regarding boycotting the elections. We call
upon all Kosovo Serbs and Serb political leaders to
stop those discussions. We also want to see a
resumption of the direct dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade, which remains an important element for
improving the overall climate.

As far as the standards implementation process is
concerned, there again there is light and shadow. The
current report of the Secretary-General points out that,
in a number of fields, the progress is still too slow with
regard to putting words into action. In particular, the
economy is still a matter of grave concern. However,
there is progress in the efforts to establish a
comprehensive framework for a competitive market
economy.

There are other important areas of progress. I
would like to mention, with appreciation, that the
working groups on standards implementation have
begun their work and that they are working with
greater efficiency. In general, there seems to be a
genuine and increasing commitment to move ahead
with the implementation of standards, which remains
the basis for progress. In that regard, we look forward
to the next report of the Secretary-General, including
an assessment by the Special Representative, as set out
in the Council's presidential statements of December
2003 and April 2004.

One further positive development was the
finalization by the end of July of the framework
document on local government reform, as mentioned
during the briefing. We call upon all Kosovars to
participate fully in the implementation of local
government reform. All communities in Kosovo will
benefit from that reform. It directly responds to their
needs and contributes to ensuring sustainable living
conditions. The reform is aimed at providing more
participation and more democracy for the whole of
Kosovo. We firmly believe that if we manage to
achieve the reform of local government, that will also
help to solve many of the current problems in the
standards implementation.

Let me conclude by thanking the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo for its
continued efforts in Kosovo and by assuring the new
Special Representative, Mr. Jessen-Petersen, of the full
support of my Government.

