Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan expresses
its appreciation to the presidency of China for convening
this debate, as well as to Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres and the Commissioner for Peace and Security
of the African Union, Ambassador Smail Chergui, for
their thoughtful and insightful briefings on enhancing
African capacities in the areas of peace and security.

The first United Nations-African Union annual
conference, which was held on 19 April and resulted
in the Joint Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, marks a new phase of enhanced
strategic partnership between the two organizations.
We need to maintain that momentum with a view to
accelerating and increasing its operationalization and
implementation. My delegation therefore would like to
make the following observations.

First, we should prioritize conflict prevention and
mediation by improving the efficiency of the United
Nations-African Union preventive diplomacy with more
coordinated actions, early warning, rapid response and
what the Secretary-General calls a whole new approach
that shifts our focus to preventing conflicts rather than
the current trend of spending more time and resources
resolving them. That characterized the Secretary-
General's new agenda for peace, which also strives to
fast forward the Agenda 2063, including the Silence the
Guns by 2020 project.

Secondly, our response to crises remains
fragmented despite the fact that the causes of crises
are deeply interlinked. Therefore, it is necessary to
elaborate a comprehensive approach that connects
security, humanitarian and development efforts, all
with a greater emphasis and additional financial outlays
on peacebuilding measures. Currently, we spend more
than $7 billion on peacekeeping and less than $1 billion
on laying the foundations for long-term sustainable
peace by addressing the root causes of tensions
and instability. Therefore, we must invest more in
sustainable development, building State institutions and
consolidating constitutions, democracy-building, rule
of law, good governance and security sector reforms.

Equally important are investments in human
development, including education, health, job
creation, employment and social services. We must
simultaneously boost infrastructure development in
order to foster trade and agriculture, as well as water,
food and energy security. Kazakhstan has invested
in the problems of technical assistance and capacity-
building through the Ministries for Foreign Affairs of
45 African States. Looking to the future, we intend to
stay engaged in that sphere. It is critical to focus on
climate mitigation, disaster-risk reduction and building
resilience, because only that will promote intra-African
economic growth and result in greater and more vibrant
regional integration and progress. Implementing the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel,
which features a dual track of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, is a good model for achieving stability
and development in other conflict zones. It is also
important to ensure that women and youth are fully
integrated into all activities at every stage related to
peace and security. It is also important that they are at
the negotiating table at the highest levels.

Thirdly, the United Nations should be encouraged
to leverage the comparative advantages of regional
and subregional organizations, as well as groups
of neighbouring countries, which possess a better
understanding of the dynamics and root causes of
conflicts, and mobilize respective local resources. The
AU's peace operations have proven to be very effective
owing to the familiarity of African soldiers with their
own terrain and local conditions, as well as the tactics
of armed groups. Good examples of that are the work
of the AU-United Nations hybrid missions and the
creation of regional forces, such as the Multinational
Joint Task Force, which was able to effectively combat
Boko Haram, as well as the Group of Five for the Sahel
Joint Force.

Likewise, Africa should be part of our global
counter-terrorism multilateral action. However, that
means that the mandates of our multidimensional
hybrid missions must be realistic and achievable. At the
same time, they must address asymmetrical conflicts
with ongoing monitoring and evaluation. That calls
for sufficient financial and capacity-building support
to AU. Otherwise, the ability to deliver will not match
the expected aspirations. The United Nations and the
international community should provide equipment,
resources, technical support and training and establish
sustainable and predictable financing mechanisms for
AU peace operations, in accordance with resolution
2320 (2016). The various options for ajointly developed
budget, as identified in the Secretary-General's report
of 26 May (S/2017/454), should be explored for optimal
results. We also believe that the Peace Fund will be
a robust mechanism for cooperation and partnership.
We look forward to discussing the matter further
during our planned visit to Addis Ababa in September
for the annual consultations with the AU Peace and
Security Council.

As an observer to the African Union, Kazakhstan
remains committed to further strengthening the
capacity of the AU and to helping African countries
fulfil their vision for peace, progress and prosperity.
We need to invest now because as Africa develops,
it will shape global events in the future. It is already
recognized to be the driver of the world economy in the
twenty-first century.

