Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank everyone for their condolences
and support, which have demonstrated their solidarity
with Egypt during this very stressful time. The crimes
that have claimed the lives of many innocent people
in Egypt and countless other places in the world show
how important it is for us to work together to eliminate
that phenomenon.

Allow me to thank Ms. Sandra Honore for her
briefing. We fully support the efforts that she has
made with her team in Haiti. I would also like to take
this opportunity to congratulate the Government and
the people of Haiti for holding presidential elections
at the beginning of the year and for choosing a new
President who will lead the country towards political
stability, conclude the transitional period and ensure
the return to constitutional order. Haiti is at a historical
crossroads. Despite its political progress, it continues
to face tremendous challenges at every level, including
an aggravated economic situation and political and
security challenges.

Egypt contributes police personnel to the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
The Mission plays a pivotal role in addressing those
challenges, and that role needs to continue until national
institutions are fully capable of shouldering their
responsibilities.ThatwillhelppreventanewcrisisinHaiti
with political, security and humanitarian ramifications
that would require another international intervention.
Moreover, it is vital for the international community
to work hand in hand to support Haiti and promote the
capacity of its State institutions so that they can live
up to their responsibilities at this critical juncture and
move towards a more stable future. Therefore, as we are
looking to renew the Mission's mandate, I would like to
raise the following points.

First, we stress the need to ensure that the Mission's
mandate is in line with political developments, progress
in the field, and the need to build State institutions.
We therefore support the six-month extension of the
mandate, after which a new mission will be established
with a specific mandate.

Secondly, we stress the need for the new mission's
mandate to be limited to the establishment of State
institutions, in particular a national police apparatus
and rule-of-law enforcement institutions, in line
with national priorities and needs and without any
unconventional or successional mandate.

Thirdly, the United Nations bears a moral and even
legal responsibility to support the Haitian authorities in
their fight against the cholera outbreak. Therefore, the
United Nations presence must ensure that there is the
necessary capacity to halt this outbreak.

Fourthly, it is important we promote our efforts in
the next phase to create a genuine partnership with the
Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission so that the support provided to Haiti
includes the social, political and development
dimensions needed for a more stable society and that it
is responsive to the country's basic needs.
In conclusion, we must avoid making hasty decisions
that pay no heed to the special needs of Haiti and the
necessary capacity to build national institutions capable
of shouldering their responsibilities. Allow me to take
this opportunity to express our full support for Haiti,
and I stress our trust in the ability of the Government
and the people of the country to get through this critical
period and move towards development, prosperity and
inclusion in the region.

