Mr. Thoms (Germany): I thank the Republic of
Senegal for the invitation to this important discussion
on the links between water, peace and security.

In recent years, the World Economic Forum's
Global Risks Report has ranked water crises as among
the global risks with the greatest impact and likelihood
of occurring. Water scarcity is a cross-cutting issue that
affects all spheres of human life: drinking water and
nutrition, peace and security, sustainable development
and economic growth. The International Organization
for Migration estimates that by 2050 approximately
200 million environmental migrants will be forcibly
displaced, temporarily or permanently, owing to floods,
droughts, desertification or sea-level rise.
Despite those bleak forecasts, the often evoked
"water wars" are not inevitable. We believe that
transboundary water cooperation is the appropriate
answer to achieving effective and lasting regional
solutions for water disputes. Such cooperation must
reflect the interests of all riparian countries and must
be based on efficient and sustainable water use. There
are several positive examples to prove that. In Europe,
there is water cooperation in the Danube and the Rhine
river basins. In Africa, there is water cooperation in the
Lake Victoria basin and the Lake Chad basin. In the
latter example, the riparian States strive to protect the
dwindling Lake Chad and to ensure water security for
the entire region, despite being afflicted by the terror
of Boko Haram.

We are convinced that fostering and promoting
transboundary water cooperation requires stable legal
frameworks. At the global level, the United Nations
Water Conventions of 1992 and 1997 provide valuable
tools for transboundary cooperation, benefiting all
of the riparian countries in a basin. We therefore
encourage all countries to join those Conventions and
make use of their experience and frameworks. At the
regional level, the river-basin organizations are key for
the implementation of the principles laid down in those
two Conventions.

Finally, in order to prevent water from being used
as a method of warfare, it is ofthe essence to strengthen
the implementation of international humanitarian law.
Let me mention in particular the 1977 Additional
Protocols to the 1949 Geneva Conventions. The recent
example of Da'esh and the Mosul dam has drastically
shown the tangibility of such threats.

In order to be adequately prepared for mitigating
the effects of looming water crises and their potential
implications for peace and stability, as well as to ensure
the successful implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals, we encourage all United Nations
States Members to actively contribute to strengthening
the United Nations water architecture.

