Mr. Lucas (Angola): We start by commending the
delegation of the United Kingdom for calling for the
convening of today's meeting. We thank the Under-
Secretaries-General for Political and Humanitarian
Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman and Mr. Stephen O'Brien,
respectively, for their insightful briefings on a critical
situation prevailing in the Lake Chad Basin, a region in
the heart of Africa facing huge challenges that threaten
the very existence of Lake Chad and the survival of
millions ofpeople living on it shores. It is our hope and
expectation that today's meeting will further contribute
to sensitizing world public opinion and the international
community to this very serious issue.

The challenges facing the region are of three
distinct but often interrelated natures: environmental
degradation due to climate change and human actions;
security threats linked to poverty, unemployment,
youth radicalization and terrorism; and the huge
humanitarian crisis unfolding against the backdrop of
high rates of population growth, extreme poverty, and
the food and nutrition crisis.

Lake Chad's resources benefit around 20 million
people living on its shores in four countries. The lake
supports the peasant economy of local people who
see their sources of livelihood in peril and the lake
at the brink of ecological disaster, as it has become a
tiny fraction of its former size. A set of factors such
as shifting climate patterns and human activities,
namely, the diversion of large quantities of water from
inflowing rivers, the irrigation for crop production
and an increasing population's demand for water, have
had a strong impact on and triggered the diminution of
the lake's size. Several initiatives at the national and
regional levels aimed at managing the lake's shrinking
water resources and at reversing the trend towards its
extinction have been undertaken. These initiatives
are a demonstration of the concern by the people,
Governments and the international community with
respect to the current state of affairs.

The Lake Chad Basin Commission, a regional
initiative established with the objectives of, inter alia,
regulating and controlling the use of water and other
natural resources in the basin, while relatively active
and having made some achievements, has not delivered
visible improvements in the lake's water replenishment.
The Lake Chad Basin Commission has developed the
Lake Chad replenishment project with the objective of
regenerating the lake through the transfer of 900 cubic
metres per second of water from the Ubangi River by
way of a navigable channel to Lake Chad aimed at
reversing land and water degradation and reviving the
lake's ecosystem. Being an ambitious project, it has the
potential to radically change the current situation in the
Basin and the lives of its populations.

The countries of the region should assume their
irrevocable responsibilities and strengthen their
political will in order to mobilize the international
community, which should seriously consider extending
tangible support to the project. If the current situation is
not rapidly reversed, it has the potential to become yet
another hotbed of crisis and conflict and a real threat to
regional and international peace and security. In short,
the Lake Chad Basin is no longer able to secure the
livelihoods of the people living on its shores, a state of
affairs that is triggering a threatening security situation
and the current humanitarian crisis.

The security situation in the Lake Chad Basin
has continuously deteriorated over the past few years,
against the backdrop ofshrinking resources. Poverty and
joblessness create a reservoir of radicalization, violent
extremism and willing recruits for the terrorists. The
seven-year-old Boko Haram insurgency that spread from
Nigeria into Chad, the Niger and Cameroon prompted
countries bordering Lake Chad to join forces in the
Multinational Joint Task Force, on the understanding
that a collaborative and cooperative regional approach
would be the most effective way of denying safe havens
to the terrorists, whilst strengthening those countries'
military capabilities to face and defeat Boko Haram.
The Multinational Joint Task Force was endorsed by the
African Union in January 2015, and the Security Council
commended Lake Chad Basin countries and Benin for
their efforts to operationalize the Multinational Joint
Task Force.

Despite progress in the fight against Boko Haram,
the terrorists are still active in the region, intensifying
asymmetric attacks and continuing their rampage of
terror, death and destruction. It is imperative that the
international community support the Multinational Task
Force and the countries of the region in consolidating
the gains achieved to date in the fight against terrorism
in the region.

The recurring nature of food insecurity and poverty
in the region requires a concerted effort to assist the most
vulnerable, prevent severe hunger and malnutrition and
ensure that communities in distress are able to recover.
Although the Governments of the region are making
efforts to address humanitarian challenges with the
international community's support, the sheer scale of
the crisis, its complexity and its potential for further
deterioration call for a renewed sense of urgency.

According to the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the number of
displaced people in the most affected areas has risen
from 1.6 million to 2.4 million, while food insecurity
and malnutrition have rapidly grown worse. Women
and children represent a majority of the displaced as
Boko Haram attacks continue and military operations
intensify. Now more than ever, the humanitarian
community is called to protect and assist people
displaced by conflict and the communities hosting them.

In conclusion, it is crucial that Member States in
the Lake Chad Basin region continue their joint efforts
to address the multiple challenges affecting the region.
Angola fully supports regional and international
efforts to rehabilitate Lake Chad and give new hope to
extremely distressed populations, as well as to combat
terrorism until Boko Haram is defeated and to provide
assistance to the millions ofpeople in desperate need in
the Lake Chad Basin region.

