Mr. Wirajuda (Indonesia): Allow me at the
outset to express my appreciation to you, President
Thabo Mbeki, for your initiative to convene this
thematic debate on an issue of tremendous importance
to the maintenance of international peace and security.

Before I proceed, I wish to reiterate Indonesia's
long-standing and irrevocable commitment to Africa.
The then-newly-independent Indonesia, though still in
its infancy, had little hesitation in promoting the cause
of Africa's independence struggle through the seminal
Africa-Asia Conference held at Bandung in 1955.
Since then we have contributed actively to United
Nations peacekeeping operations on the continent: in
the Congo in the 1960s, and then in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Liberia, Mozambique,
Namibia, Sierra Leone, Somalia and the Sudan.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security, as well as in conflict
prevention, is long-standing and is recognized in the
Charter. It is a subject that has been gaining
momentum and relevance, and rightly so: our
increasingly complex and interconnected world,
marked by a proliferation of actors and variables,
requires us to look at issues in an ever more holistic
and integrated manner. We simply do not have the
luxury of remaining insulated or indifferent, as the
destinies of all are intertwined and as conflicts in one
region of the globe will sooner or later affect other
regions.

Indonesia is an avid supporter of regional
cooperation. We are convinced of the transformational
potential of regional cooperation in preventing and
settling conflict and bringing regional peace and
stability in its place. Such conditions are prerequisites
for economic development. Our own region's
experience attests to that fact. Ensuring peace and
security in South-East Asia for more than four decades,
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
has contributed immensely in shouldering burdens that
would otherwise have fallen on the United Nations.

Indonesia is also a strong advocate for
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. Of course, such cooperation is
invaluable in strengthening and empowering regional
organizations. It is not, however, a one-way process.
Indonesia believes that the United Nations also benefits
from such cooperation. After all, it would seem only
natural that in dealing with particular conflict
situations the United Nations should benefit from
regional knowledge, perspectives and experiences.
There is no need to reinvent the wheel. Synergy and
partnership should be promoted.

Most recently the United Nations and the African
Union (AU), as well as subregional organizations in
Africa, have shown us that such cooperation can
deliver tangible results. Challenges certainly remain.
More support is obviously needed to enable the AU to
respond to and deal more effectively with conflicts on
the continent on behalf of the international community.
The United Nations and the African Union must
therefore enhance their capacity for confidence-
building, friendly diplomacy and peacemaking and
realize their full potential. The need for such an
undertaking is self evident, for it is the undeniable
reality of our time that conflict situations in Africa
constitute significant portions of the Security Council's
agenda. The reward for such an undertaking is
therefore greater still.

Collaboration between the AU and the United
Nations has the potential to transform conflict
situations, bringing peace, stability and prosperity to
the continent. We commend the AU for taking the lead
in Somalia through the deployment of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), thus
contributing to peace and security in that country. We
call for more support for AMISOM. by the international
community. We also commend the AU for contributing
to peace efforts in the Darfur region of the Sudan,
where, with the consent of the parties, it deployed the
African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS). The
transformation of AMIS into a hybrid operation
provides us with important lessons that help us to
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and
the AU and are also valuable for other regional
organizations. We have also drawn on the experience
of the AU and the United Nations in conflict
prevention and peacemaking to supplement our own
experience in those fields.

Consistent with the statement of the President of
the Security Council last November (S/PRST/2007/42),
under Indonesia's presidency, we recognize that
regional organizations need to strengthen and increase
cooperation among themselves. In that regard the
United Nations can provide its political support and
technical expertise. Indeed, with you presiding over the
Council today, Mr. President, I am particularly pleased
to highlight the close cooperation that Indonesia and
South Africa have forged in promoting interregional
cooperation. I am referring to our joint efforts in
promoting Asia-Africa strategic partnerships launched
at Bandung in 2005 during the 50-year commemoration
of the historic 1955 Asia-Africa Bandung Conference.

I would like to highlight in particular the Asian-
African Subregional Organizations Conference
(AASROC) meetings in Durban and Bandung, which
preceded the second Asia-Africa Summit in 2005.
AASROC is significant in its approach of promoting
cooperation among regional and subregional
organizations in Asia and Africa. Cooperation between
regional organizations or arrangements is an essential
feature of contemporary international architecture.

Indonesia has benefited from interregional
collaboration. The European Union and ASEAN have
contributed significantly to our successful efforts to
restore peace and security in the province of Aceh
during the period from 2005 to 2007, especially by
participating in a joint monitoring mission to supervise
the implementation of the Aceh peace agreement.

With regard to the current hub-and-spokes
relationship between the United Nations and the
regional organizations, we are in favour of its
expansion into a one consisting of a hub and a network
of spokes, a network of regional organizations working
together to maintain peace and security, connected to
each other and with the United Nations at the centre.

With regard to my own region of South-East Asia
and its regional organizations, since the Security
Council thematic debate last November (5776th meeting), the ten members of ASEAN have moved
forward by signing the ASEAN Charter. The Charter
represents not only our shared values and shared
visions but also our commitment to progress in unison
and to contribute to international peace and security.
That is our contribution as the ASEAN community.

Our region can learn from the experiences and
best practices of other regions, including Africa.
However, to us the notion of receiving is tantamount to
the notion of giving - to provide, to confer. In a world
of plenty, giving is a feature to be embraced by all.
Indonesia believes that ASEAN can also offer its
experiences and best practices to other regions. To
strengthen our outward-looking strategy we have
cultivated dialogue-partner relationships with some ten
countries and organizations. ASEAN's reach extends
far beyond its immediate subregion. Above all, we are
strengthening our links with the United Nations. We
signed a memorandum of understanding on United
Nations-ASEAN cooperation last September.

Our participation reflects not only our wish to
share our views and experiences on the issues but also
our desire to learn the views, lessons and best practices
of other countries and other regions, which we can take
home to our region. We also hope our experience can
be useful to other regions in the interest of a more
peaceful world for all.

