Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like, at the outset, to welcome to the Security Council
Chamber the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda. We have read with
interest the Prosecutor's sixteenth report on the situation
in Darfur, and are dismayed by the fact that, with the
exception of those accused in the Banda and Jerbo
case, the criminal trials initiated by the Prosecutor at
the express request of the Council have not yet gone
forward because the accused have not yet been brought
before the Court.

The Prosecutor concluded that credible criminal
procedures did not exist in the Sudan such that they
could impugn the admissibility of the open cases that
have been brought or otherwise cast doubt on the Court's
jurisdiction in their regard. That was the situation in
June, when the fifteenth report was presented, and it
still holds today, since there has been no real progress
in the matter.

In fact, most of the report does not refer to the four
open cases, but rather to ongoing investigations into
alleged crimes that are being committed in Darfur,
which could lead to the opening of new criminal cases.
That would apply to alleged indiscriminate aerial
bombardments and land attacks against civilians,
alleged acts of gender-based and sexual violence,
alleged crimes against human rights activists and
members of civil society, alleged kidnappings and
attacks on aid workers and United Nations personnel,
alleged recruitment of minors and alleged interference
with the delivery of humanitarian aid.

Such facts are cause for concern, and the Council,
along with the ICC, should take up the allegations at
the appropriate time. However, that catalogue of grave
incidents and alleged violations and abuses should not
let us lose sight of the undeniable fact that for now the
primary focus of the Council's attention and that of the
international community should be on carrying out the
arrest orders issued by the Court, which would in effect
fulfil the implementation of resolution 1593 (2005) and
the obligations therein.

One of the stated aims of the Rome Statute and of
the establishment of the ICC was to deter the likely
perpetrators of horrendous crimes in the context of
generalized Violence or armed conflict by sending
them the message that atrocities that once shook the
conscience of humankind, such as ethnic cleansing and
genocide, would not go unpunished, and that the United
Nations and its States Memberes would spare no efforts
to bring those responsible for such crimes to justice.

In that context, it is regrettable to see that in a year
when we celebrated the first decade of the International
Criminal Court, international criminal justice has not
been able to function fully in Darfur. In paragraph 2 of
its historic resolution 1593 (2005), the Security Council
decided explicitly "that the Government of Sudan and
all other parties to the conflict in Darfur shall cooperate
fully with and provide any necessary assistance to the
Court and the Prosecutor pursuant to this resolution".
In my delegation's opinion, the obligation to cooperate
with the Court definitely includes the duty to implement
arrest warrants issued by the Prosecutor.

