Mrs. Raskovic-Ivic (Serbia): I am particularly
pleased to be able to greet those present here today and
express my respect for this body.

First of all, I would like to single out the singular
importance of the Security Council as a guarantor for
the preservation of universal principles of international
law and the entire world order in establishing, building
and ensuring future peace in Kosovo and Metohija and
in the entire region of South-Eastern Europe.

As the successor State to the former Serbia and
Montenegro, Serbia is firmly convinced that only by
consistent implementation of international principles,
such as the inviolability of sovereignty and the
territorial integrity of democratic States, is it possible
to maintain and promote peace and stability in the
Western Balkans. We deem it particularly important to
reiterate that Serbia is absolutely ready to assume its
share of responsibility in the process of a successful
resolution of the issue of Kosovo and Metohija on the
basis of international law and in accordance with
modern democratic values.

We come before the Security Council with full
confidence, with the expectation that it will make its
crucial contribution in the spirit of the documents it has
previously adopted, primarily resolution 1244 (1999),
of 10 June 1999, which unambiguously reaffirms the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of our country. We
are firmly convinced that the Council's future decisions
also will be consistent with these fundamental United
Nations principles.

We welcome the further encouragement of the
dialogue on Kosovo and Metohija, that is, with respect
to achieving a solution regarding the future status of
Kosovo and Metohija. For Serbia, that status is
substantial autonomy within the internationally
recognized borders of Serbia.

However, I must point out that the report on the
situation in Kosovo and Metohija and on the activities
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) (8/2006/361), which is before the
Council today, is not sufficiently clear, mostly because
it proceeds more on the basis of unrealistic
expectations than of facts. The report does not
accurately reflect the situation regarding the
implementation of standards.

I would like to recall that, in his comprehensive
review of the situation in Kosovo (S/2005/635, annex),
Ambassador Kai Eide rightly indicated that the only
way to make progress is through the process of
establishing future status and continuing the
implementation of standards. Unfortunately, so far
there have been no serious signs that any of those
perfectly fitting and appropriate recommendations are
being taken into account. Little progress has been made
to resolve issues relating to property rights; returns
have been almost frozen for a number of years now;
and instruments for the protection of human rights and
the rule of law are dead letters. According to a report
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, 44,000 cases are pending before the courts,
while 17,000 damage compensation claims are on hold.

It is well known that human rights in Kosovo and
Metohija have been violated on a massive scale. The
very right to survival of Serbs and non-Albanians - a
definite minority in the province - has been
threatened. Every week - sometimes every day - we
and UNMIK witness various forms of violence
perpetrated against the non-Albanian population. I
must point out that two thirds of the non-Albanian
population have been expelled from Kosovo and
Metohija. In reality, low-intensity extremist violence is
tolerated in Kosovo and Metohija, and there is no
progress in the reconciliation process among the in-
conflict communities.

Since June 1999, 929 Serbs and other non-
Albanians have been killed or reported missing, and
there have been 7,000 ethnically motivated attacks,
4,830 of them terrorist attacks. All of those crimes
have gone unpunished. From 25 October 2005, when
negotiations were announced and the Albanians were
sent a clear signal about the need to freeze conflict
actions, until recently, there have been at least 200
ethnically motivated attacks - that is, there is
reasonable suspicion that they are such - against
Serbs and other non-Albanians, in which 2 people died
and 26 have been seriously wounded.

It is noteworthy that roads used by Serbs to travel
from isolated areas have been targeted of late.
Initially - at the beginning of last year - those
attacks were focused on central Kosovo, on Lipljan and
Gracanica. In the second half of the year, a series of 12
terrorist attacks was perpetrated on the road connecting
Strpce with other Serbian communities, while buses on
the road leading from the municipality of Gora to
Prizren were shelled. This spring, the brunt of the
attacks shifted to northern Kosovo and Metohija - the
municipalities of Kosovska Mitrovica and Zvecan. The
attacks were committed mostly at night, with automatic
weapons being used against vehicles known to ferry
Serbs and other non-Albanians.

Kosovo Albanian violence on 17 and 18 March
2004 demonstrated that stability in that part of Europe
is fragile and that reconciliation between Serbs and
Albanians is far from a reality. As many as 5,000
people were expelled, eight people were killed and 35
Orthodox churches and 935 homes were destroyed, as
were 10 health institutions and Serb schools, in just
two days. Six towns and nine villages have been
ethnically cleansed. Of the 50,000 people who took
part in the large-scale Albanian extremist action, only
six men were remanded in custody. For the sake of
comparison, I would like to point out that in post-
Dayton Bosnia and Herzegovina there have been fewer
than 200 ethnically motivated incidents over the past
10 years, while the same number occurred in Kosovo
and Metohija in the space of only seven months.

The international community's proclaimed
objective of making Kosovo a stable, democratic and
multi-ethnic society is still far from being achieved. It
has to be acknowledged that economically Kosovo is
extremely underdeveloped: 600,000 able-bodied
people, including 70 per cent of the young, are
unemployed; the black market is flourishing; and
human beings are trafficked and goods are smuggled.
There is no rule of law and corruption is rife. Pervasive
organized crime hampers economic recovery and
presents a serious political, economic and security
problem, as it primarily undermines people's faith in
institutions.

The participation of Serbs in the work of the
Provisional Institutions is one of the topics addressed
in the report - and one of the true problems. We
consider that it is of the utmost importance for Kosovo
Serbs to participate and to play an active role in the
political life of Kosovo and Metohija, but only under
the condition that their participation is meaningful, that
it is not merely a matter of political decorum and that
the out-voting of Serbs is prevented. That implies that
those institutions must be democratic and that all
interested parties should be engaged in working
towards the democratization of Kosovo and Metohija
society.

Decentralization in Kosovo and Metohija is of
great importance to the Serb community. It is not only
about establishing closer links between citizens and the
authorities, or about ensuring better and more efficient
services to citizens. For Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija,
decentralization is a vital condition, enabling survival,
security and return. That is why the Serb negotiating
team proposed the strengthened self-government of
Serb majority municipalities, horizontal ties among
municipalities and direct issue-oriented and transparent
ties with Belgrade. Those proposals have nothing to do
with the idea of the division of Kosovo and Metohija,
as claimed by the Albanian representatives. They are
merely a concrete and institutional response to the
existing situation, in which the survival of the Serb

community - and thereby the multi-ethnic character
of Kosovo and Metohija - has ultimately been
threatened.

The activities of the working groups established
on the basis of the outcome of the Vienna meeting in
2003 are an important aspect in defining future status
and in the peace process. The resolution of the issues
of missing persons, returns, transport and energy
cooperation would certainly improve the overall
situation and reduce the level of political tension.
However, so far neither UNMIK nor Pristina has been
overly enthusiastic about the process.

In our View, the security situation in Kosovo and
Metohija is extremely precarious. We cannot agree
with the assertion in the report that the security
situation is stable, with a small number of inter-ethnic
incidents. We express concern about the new wave of
attacks against Serbian representatives, aimed at
further intimidating the Serbian population right before
the start of status negotiations.

The current situation in northern Kosovo and
Metohija and the deployment of new KFOR
contingents in the area should also be borne in mind. I
would like to believe that their presence will strengthen
security and lead to the establishment of cooperation
with the Serbian community and its leaders. I also hope
that we will be able to launch a joint struggle against
organized crime and violence in the near future.

Considering the lack of progress with regard to
the freedom of movement of minorities, the cessation
of the operation of inter-city bus lines for minority
communities because of budget constraints is of great
concern. We also consider that the decision by the
international police to cease police escorts for Serbian
political representatives will lead to the further
isolation of the Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija.

In the context of the unjustifiably accelerated
transfer of competences to the Provisional Institutions
in the field of the rule of law, we consider that the
establishment of the Ministry of Police and the
Ministry of Justice and the accelerated transfer of
competences from UNMIK to those Ministries at the
time of the launching of the political process to address
the future status of Kosovo and Metohija are intended
to influence the outcome of the negotiations by
supporting the request of Kosovo Albanians - that is,
at prejudging the future status of Kosovo and Metohija.

I would like to point once again to the
observation in the comprehensive review of
Ambassador Eide that the justice system is the weakest
of Kosovo's institutions and that the further transfer of
competences in those areas should be considered with
great caution.
The failure to include certain facts in the report of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the

findings and conclusions with respect to corruption at
Pristina airport (A/60/720) serves to conceal the real
situation and to prevent the Security Council from
gaining proper insight into the realities of Kosovo and
Metohija and the effects of UNMIK's work. My
Government considers the conclusions in the report to
be very important, particularly the following:

"With UNMIK peacekeeping operations
winding down and in the light of the widely held
view that the United Nations will withdraw from
Kosovo in 2006, the reluctance by senior Mission
management to address fraud and corruption will
have a devastating impact on public perception
inside and outside of Kosovo, as the United
Nations will be seen as escaping from the
problems rather than solving them." (A/60/720, para. 46)

My Government and hundreds of thousands of
expellees are particularly concerned over the lack of
progress in returns of internally displaced persons
(IDPs). According to data of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, 16,000 Serbian and other
non-Albanian internally displaced persons have
returned to the province; but according to the data
available to the Coordinating Centre for Kosovo and
Metohija and the Republic of Serbia Commissariat for
Refugees, that number is only 2,000. Others have
returnee status for largely administrative reasons. Take,
for example, the case of the town of Prizren, where
Albanians, Serbs and Turks - 12,000 members of each
of those three national communities - lived before the
war. Eight hundred Serbs are on the Prizren return list,
but in fact only 16 Serbs live there.

We believe that the report before us provides a
general assessment that the return and integration
process continues to face challenges, but that it does
not reflect the true picture of the problem. The
assessment in the Secretary-General's report on
UNMIK concerning the visible support of the
Provisional Institutions in Kosovo and Metohija for the
return process is unfounded. Special mention should be
made of the report's observation that no progress has
been made in the reconstruction of the property
destroyed in March 2004. Of course, Belgrade supports
all activities aimed at creating conditions for the return
of expellees. In that context, we support the signing of
the Protocol on IDP returns by representatives of the
Coordinating Centre for Kosovo and Metohija of the
Government of Serbia and by representatives of the

Pristina working group on returns. At the same time, I
would like to point out that the conditions for returns
will not be met by the Protocol, but by work in the
field.

As you stated, Madam President, today, 20 June,
is World Refugee Day. It has been seven years since
Serbs and other non-Albanians were expelled from
Kosovo, and they are still waiting to come home. In
that connection, it is worrisome that since the previous
Security Council meeting on this item, held in
February (see S/PV.5373), no tangible progress has
been made in the implementation of standards. The fact
that no substantial progress has been made in the six
rounds of negotiations on the future status of Kosovo is
also a source of concern. Unfortunately, the flexible
position of our negotiating team has not been
reciprocated by the Albanian team, which has
embraced a firm and single-minded position. Such a
position serves more to fuel expectations and raise
tensions among the majority Albanian population in
Kosovo and Metohija than to help find solutions to
serious problems in the province. The tensions have
also been heightened by certain representatives of the
international community - UNMIK, among others -
claiming that the independence of Kosovo is the only
possible outcome, or even a fait accompli.

Martti Ahtisaari has a narrow space in which to
manoeuvre, but there is room for compromise. The
narrow space for a solution can be found somewhere
between the situation in Kosovo and Metohija up to
1999 and independence. Independence is not a
compromise; independence means merely succumbing
to one ofthose two positions. Serbia is totally opposed
to any redrawing of the borders and believes that any
"either-or" solution - making one side a winner and
the other a loser - would not be good. Our negotiating
team, political leadership and general public deeply
believe that a solution must be found through
negotiations, that it must not be imposed and that both
sides must engage more wholeheartedly and be
prepared for alternative solutions.

For its part, the Government of the Republic of
Serbia has launched two initiatives aimed at providing
new impetus to the negotiations. In its first initiative -
submitted to the members of the Contact Group and
Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari on 19 May - my
Government proposed that direct negotiations be
started on the future status of Kosovo and Metohija.
According to that proposal, direct negotiations between

Belgrade and Pristina on the status of Kosovo and
Metohija would begin with a high-level round of
negotiations and continue with a discussion of key
elements that would crystallise the status and that
would be conducted in four working groups, on
constitutional matters, security, economic questions
and decentralization.

In its second initiative, submitted on 30 May, the
Government of the Republic of Serbia presented a
concrete proposal on the future status of Kosovo and
Metohija. It is a compromise between two extreme
positions: the status of Kosovo and Metohija prior to
1999 on the one hand, and independence on the other.
It is the most concrete proposal that our side could
have made, offering more than the standard autonomy
that is known and practised in European countries. The
proposal also calls for the conclusion of an
international agreement that would be reached through
status negotiations and would include basic principles
and concrete provisions regarding the future status of
Kosovo and Metohija. It would be signed and
guaranteed by Serbia and the United Nations.

Serbia is ready, together with the Security
Council and in line with international norms, to make
every effort to reach a compromise solution to Kosovo
and Metohija. We also trust that the United Nations and
the international community will not succumb to
threats of violence and pressure to break up a
democratic State. We are convinced that that would
thoroughly undermine the very foundations of the
international order. Serbia is resolutely opposed to any
attempt to impose a solution to Kosovo and Metohija,
since that would imply dividing the country and taking
away a part of its territory.

Since we believe that we embrace the same
principles as those on which the legal order and the
United Nations are based, we have no doubt that the
Security Council will act in a just manner, applying the
same rules and universal principles to Serbia that are
valid for all members of the Security Council and
States Members of the United Nations. I am fully
convinced that the principles of international law and
order substantially supersede any form of legal
violence.

Convinced that the members of the Council will
devote due attention to these positions, I express to
you, Madam President, my gratitude for having been
able to address this body.

