Ms. Goolab (South Africa): Let me begin by thanking Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Under- Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings on the situation in Syria. I would also like to express South Africa's full support for Special Envoy Pedersen and commend his efforts to resolve the current impasse. While we recognize the right of the Syrian Arab Republic to restore its control over the whole of its territory, South Africa is concerned about the conflict in north-western Syria, particular its impact on the humanitarian situation. We urge all parties to seek a peaceful resolution of the conflict. Such a peaceful resolution requires a cessation of hostilities and a solution that upholds Syria's sovereignty and territorial integrity. In that regard, external support for armed groups must cease immediately. We cannot allow external role players to use the devastating conflict in Syria as a proxy for their own interests. The increase in violence has a direct impact on the humanitarian situation in Syria, with thousands of civilians fleeing the hostilities to already overcrowded refugee and internally displaced persons camps. South Africa reiterates its call for all parties to respect their obligations under international law and international humanitarian law, particularly with regard to the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure. In addition, we call on the relevant authorities to ensure the safe, unimpeded and impartial delivery of humanitarian aid and assistance to all who require it. The severe winter conditions have given further impetus to the need to provide essential humanitarian aid, including winterization and shelter packages. Civilians must also be assured access to humanitarian corridors. With regard to the political process, the only sustainable option is the attainment, through an inclusive Syrian-led dialogue, of a political solution that is reflective of the will of the Syrian people. In that regard, we welcome and encourage the active participation of women and religious groups in such peace talks, as all groups have unique perspectives to offer. South Africa welcomes the formation of the Constitutional Committee, as well as the drafting committee, as arepresentation ofall Syrian people - the Government, the opposition and civil society - in carrying out their mandate to draft a new constitution for Syria. South Africa urges all members of the Constitutional Committee to make a concerted effort towards agreeing an agenda for genuine discussions on the drafting of a constitution that would form anessential component of a sustainable solution to the conflict in Syria. The work of the Constitutional Committee is but one aspect of the larger political process in Syria, as set out in resolution 2254 (2015), which must be fully implemented and respected by all parties. For it to be sustainable, the political process must be Syrian-owned and Syrian-led. External interference in that process is detrimental to its success. In order for such peace negotiations to make credible progress, the parties must have confidence in each other. In that regard, South Africa encourages all side to undertake trust and confidence-building measures. Those could include progress in the release of detained civilians, particularly vulnerable groups such as women, children, the elderly and those with disabilities. My delegation has noted the recent meeting of the Working Group on Detainees and Missing Persons in Geneva and looks forward to its outcome. We urge the Working Group to make every effort to achieve real progress on the matter. As part of such confidence-building measures to promote progress, the easing of economic measures imposed on Syria should be considered if there is progress on the political front. In conclusion, South Africa firmly believes that the humanitarian and political situations in Syria are interlinked, with credible progress in one area leading to credible progress in the other. We must do all we can to promote progress on those two tracks in order to achieve a comprehensive and peaceful settlement to the conflict. The Syrian people deserve nothing less.
