Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The result of the latest Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Summit, held on 17 August,
which concluded with the signing by faction leaders of
the revised timetable to implement the Abuja Agreement
on national reconciliation in Liberia, has revived hopes
once again that the faction leaders will this time fulfil
their commitments and rise above personal differences
and narrow ambitions, and that national interests and the
interests of the people of Liberia will prevail over all
other considerations.

Despite some positive indicators, most importantly
respect for the cease-fire and the redeployment of the
ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) in Monrovia,
the record of the peace process in Liberia is still replete
with well-known setbacks, most seriously the
interfactional combat last April. These regrettable
incidents, which have frustrated the international
community, prevent us from having a great deal of
optimism or hope today, and from counting on the
seriousness or good intentions of the faction leaders. We

 

were pleased that some days ago Mr. James Jonah, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, firmed that the ECOWAS
countries have taken a number of measures to ensure the
good conduct of the faction leaders, including the creation
of a list of sanctions that may be imposed on their factions
and their families in the event they renege on their
commitment to elaborate a code of conduct to govern
relations between factions. We are also pleased at the
election of Ms. Ruth Perry to preside over the Council of
State, which will ensure its autonomy and enhance its
authority.

The measures taken by the ECOWAS countries, which
are in harmony with similar measures taken by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the clear position
the OAU took on this subject, emphasize the extreme
importance of the African regional arrangements aimed at
restoring peace and stability in Liberia.

During the last six years ECOWAS countries have
made efforts that deserve encouragement and support. The
latest resolution to increase the strength and effectiveness
of ECOMOG, despite the difficult circumstances in which
these countries find themselves, furnishes ample evidence
of their determination to proceed in their endeavour to
establish peace in Liberia.

In this context, we must thank the countries that
provided technical and financial support to ECOMOG and
the United Nations Trust Fund for Liberia. We must also
express the hope that ECOMOG and the Fund will receive
further financial contributions to help them in future tasks.

The Egyptian delegation supports the draft resolution
before the Council and will vote in favour of it. We are
convinced that the Liberian people need another chance. As
has been rightly said by many, this may be its last chance.
We hope that future developments will reinforce the hope
that elections will take place on the 30 May 1997, as
decided, and that the Liberian leaders will cooperate in
preparing appropriately for the elections, including by
establishing an independent national committee similar to
the one successfully established in Sierra Leone.

In conclusion, I would like to note that Liberia has a
long way to go, even after elections. Daunting tasks lie
ahead, the most important of which are the reintegration of
demobilized soldiers into civilian life and the reconstruction
of the country's structure and infrastructure, which have
been devastated by the war. However the international
community, which stood by Liberia's side in its plight and
during the war, will surely lend support in time of peace
until Liberia' s regional and international status is restored.

