Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Mr. President, I
congratulate you on your assumption of the Security
Council presidency this month, confident of China's
skilled leadership and guidance of the Council's
important work. I also wish to thank the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing to the Council
this morning.

Before proceeding, we also renew our deep
appreciation to Bolivia for its wise leadership of the
Security Council in June, including its convening on
20 June of the meeting of the Council (see S/PV.7977)
to sombrely mark and reflect on the fiftieth year of
Israel's occupation of Palestinian and Arab lands since
1967. As reflected in the statements made by Council
members that day, the international consensus is firm
and clear that the two-State solution, on the basis of
the pre-l967 borders, remains the central pillar of a
just, comprehensive and peaceful solution based on
the relevant resolutions, the Madrid principles and the
Arab Peace Initiative.

Also clear are the responsibilities of the Council
under the Charter of the United Nations to act to
advance a solution to the conflict, which continues to
impact international peace and security. And yet, we
continue to face the tragic consequences of the illegal
occupation and the rapid deterioration on all fronts, and
the absence of a credible political horizon to end the
occupation, end this injustice and realize the Palestinian
people's rights, including to self-determination.

We come before the Council today amid escalating
tensions and instability in our homeland and a profound
sense of worry. The fragile situation in occupied East
Jerusalem has been inflamed yet again as Israel, the
occupying Power, presses forth with its reckless and
destructive agenda against our people and holy sites,
especially Al-Haram Al-Sharif, which houses the holy
Al-Aqsa Mosque, in absolute contempt for international
law and the will of the international community. The
situation that we have repeatedly warned against - the
stoking of a religious conflict - is rapidly unfolding
as Israel persists with its illegal actions in occupied
East Jerusalem, including its aggressive behaviour
and provocative violations of the historic status quo at
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, aggravating religious sensitivities
to the point of eruption. We are clearly at the tipping
point. We must therefore again warn against the
dangers of such provocations and incitement and the
fueling of yet another cycle of violence, which will
surely have far-reaching consequences in this already
volatile climate.

We condemn the closure of Al-Aqsa Mosque
by Israel and all other related provocative and
inflammatory measures and we do not accept, under
any circumstances or pretexts, the closure of that
holy site to worshippers. At this time, occupied East
Jerusalem is a city besieged from within and without
by military checkpoints, occupation forces, settlements
and armed and violent settlers. The Palestinian people
in the city face negation, subjugation, discrimination,
armed demolitions and violence, with the aim of forcibly
transferring them out of their city. Israel openly and
shamelessly pursues discriminatory plans and policies
based on religious and national affiliation.

The Palestinian people are resisting the recent
provocative measures, including the closure of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, the banning of the Friday prayers
and restrictions and access to the holy sites by praying
in the streets. They are peacefully - and I emphasize
peacefully - expressing their rejection of the illegal
measures against their rights and their holy sites.
Yet, peaceful demonstrations and steadfastness in
preserving the character and identity of the city are
being met with violent repression. Such aggression,
provocations and violations must be immediately
halted in order to avert the complete destabilization and
collapse of the situation.

We recognize the efforts undertaken thus far
by concerned parties in the region and across the
international community to de-escalate the situation
in Jerusalem and affirm the Palestinian leadership's
readiness to cooperate with such efforts. In that context,
we recognize the important role and supervision of the
Islamic Waqf at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, the first kibla
and the third holiest site in Islam, and recall the special
role of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan as custodian
of the Muslim and Christian holy sites in the city. Yet,
Israel continues to ignore the international community.

A clear unified message must be conveyed to Israel to
cease and reverse all such illegal actions and policies.
Furthermore, explicit calls must be made for an end to
Israeli incitement and inflammatory rhetoric, including
by Government officials, regarding the city and the
holy sites, such as remarks by Israel's Public Security
Minister who brazenly declared that:

"Israel holds sovereignty over the Mount, no matter
what other countries' positions are, and if we decide
that a certain move has a certain advantage, then it
is carried out".

Such declarations are aimed at illegally asserting
Israeli control over Al-Haram Al-Sharif in the heart
of occupied East Jerusalem, which remains an integral
part of the Palestinian territory occupied by Israel
since 1967. De-escalation is urgent. We appeal for the
continuation of all efforts to restore the historic status
quo at Al-Haram mosque compound and achieve calm.
That requires the lifting of all measures in violation
of the historic status quo, including any hindrances or
obstructions violating the access by Palestinians to that
holy site and their freedom of worship. We recall the
Council's press statement (SC/12052) of 17 September
2015, in which it was underscored that

"Muslim worshippers at the Haram al-Sharif must
be allowed to worship in peace, free from violence,
threats and provocations".

We also recall the numerous relevant Security
Council resolutions on Jerusalem from 1948 to 1967 to
the present day, the most recent being resolution 2334
(2016), which explicitly underlined the non-recognition
of any changes to 4 June 1967 lines, including with
regard to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the
parties through negotiations. We call for the full respect
and implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions. The Council has not only the power to
enact the law, but a duty to uphold it. Its credibility and
authority in this case and all cases depend on it. The
question of Palestine cannot remain the exception to
every rule.

The de-escalation of this perilous situation
is contingent on respect for the law, including as
enshrined in the relevant resolutions and that, in turn,
is what will preserve the sanctity of the holy sites and
preserve fleeting prospects for peace. The protection of
human life is equally urgent. The protection of civilian
Palestinians in the occupied territory, including in East
Jerusalem is very urgent and important. International
humanitarian law and human rights law must be
respected, without exception. We deplore the killing
and injury of all innocent civilians. I repeat, we deplore
the killing and injury of all innocent civilians, including
innocent Palestinian civilians.

Israel, the occupying Power, must be held
accountable for its violations and negligence, including
with regard to the terror inflicted by its settlers on the
Palestinian civilians under its occupation; it cannot
continue to be absolved of its legal obligations. We
mourn the loss of five of our youth, who were brutally
killed last week by the occupying forces, and pray for the
recovery of the more than 1,000 peaceful demonstrators
who were injured. In that connection, we commend the
European Union, the Secretary-General and others who
have asked for investigations into such crimes. We also
deplore Israel's ongoing military raids and arrest of
Palestinian civilians, including children, adding to the
thousands of Palestinians unlawfully imprisoned and
abused by the occupation.

We must remind the members in the Chamber that
the Palestinian people are an unarmed, defenceless
people. We must also remind members that Israel is
the occupying Power and is not the sovereign in any
part of the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, and cannot be permitted in any way
to act as sovereign, whether in practice, policy or
rhetoric. This occupation, entrenched and sustained by
Israel's illegal policies and practices over the decades,
is the context and harsh reality in which all of these
disturbing developments are taking place. And all of
it is happening against the backdrop of the Council's
adoption of resolution 2334 (2016) - a resolution
that was unequivocal as to the occupied status of the
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, since
1967 and the illegality of all measures aimed at altering
the demography, character and status of that territory.

Resolution 2334 (2016) determined a clear path
away from conflict and towards peace. We must not
allow the occupying Power to continue dragging us in
the opposite direction. In the absence of serious steps to
implement resolution 2334 (2016), and in the absence of
any consequences for Israel's flagrant disrespect of the
resolution, the occupying Power has not only persisted
with its violations - committing thousands since the
resolution's adoption - but has also been encouraged
and emboldened to accelerate its reckless colonization
and annexation campaign.

The occupying Power's actions continue to
endanger Palestinian civilians' lives and risk further
destabilizing the situation on the ground, with
potentially dramatic consequences for Palestinians
and Israelis, for the region and the prospects for peace
and security. We should not underestimate the risks.
Despair, anger and tensions throughout Palestine are
running extremely high, especially among our young
people, who have not known a single day of freedom or
dignity under this abhorrent occupation.

An hour from Jerusalem and the rest of the
occupied West Bank, 2 million Palestinians in the Gaza
Strip remain under Israel's illegal blockade in an act of
massive collective punishment. For a decade, an entire
population has been imprisoned f denied freedom of
movement and access to livelihoods, basic supplies
and even vital medicines; deprived of clean water and
energy and forced to live in the ruins of war, even as
reconstruction continues to be obstructed and at least
40,000 people remain displaced. That is the reality of
their lives. This man-made catastrophe is deepening
by the hour and requires urgent remedy through
humanitarian, humane and political solutions. Gaza
is unlivable for humans. That does not mean a decade
from now, or even a few years or months. It is unlivable
now, as we speak. While Palestinian unity is vital and
a priority that we are working very hard to accomplish,
only an end to the Israeli blockade can bring life back
to Gaza. We therefore appeal once again for immediate
action to save its Palestinian civilian population from
this inhumanity and avert another explosive crisis.

Seventy years after the United Nations was first
seized of the question of Palestine, the denial of the
Palestinian people's right to self-determination still
continues. How many Palestinian generations will
have to endure the suffering caused by their persistent
dispossession and exile and by the colonial and military
Israeli occupation in all its manifestations? How many
more years and decades do we have to wait? Here,
before the Council, I have to say that if affirming and
defending the Palestinian people's rights is equated
with being anti-Israel, the logical conclusion is that
only a negation of Palestinian rights can be considered
pro-Israel. That is not just offensive and unacceptable;
it constitutes an existential matter for the Palestinian
people. Moreover, it implies that a just peace - one
that recognizes the legitimate national aspirations
and rights of the Palestinian people - is not possible
and that somehow our collective pursuit of peace is
anti-Israel. We reject that equation and continue to
believe that peace is possible, not by negating our
rights but rather by ending the Israeli occupation of
our land, securing Palestinian rights - including
the right to self-determination and freedom - and
ensuring a just settlement for Palestinian refugees, in
conformity with international law, the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab
Peace Initiative.

The Palestinian leadership will continue to engage
positively with every peace effort. We say that even
at a time of great pain and turmoil for our people and
our land, for we firmly believe that the path of peace
and international legitimacy will rectify this grave
injustice and ensure that one day the Palestinian people
will live in dignity, freedom and sovereignty in their
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, side by side with Israel and all of its other
neighbours, in peace and security within recognized
borders. We appeal to the Council and all those present
to uphold its role and responsibilities under the Charter
in this urgent hour. We need the Council, and we need
it to act.

