Mr. Annabi: I should like to point out first to
Council members that we have a couple of fact-sheets
on the results of the elections, which contain useful
statistics and which we will be happy to make available
to members who may wish to have it.

I will also be happy to convey to Mr. Haekkerup
the words of appreciation expressed around this table
today for his work and the work of his colleagues on
the ground in the preparation and successful conduct of
the elections.

I think that there was only one specific question.
Ambassador Mahbubani of Singapore asked whether
there was an explanation for the reduction in the
number of those voting within the ethnic Albanian
community. The participation of the Albanian
community in the voting was around 65 per cent, as I
indicated, which is somewhat lower than the
participation in the municipal elections last year, but is
still of course a very respectable percentage and higher
than what we see in a number of countries whose
democratic credentials are well established. The overall
number of voters was also significantly higher than last
year. We had 1,250,000 this year, as opposed to just
under or around 1 million voters last year.

Having said that, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) believes
that the lower percentage in the participation of the
ethnic Albanian community in the recent elections can
be accounted for in part by the fact that a number of
Kosovo Albanians returned to register for the elections
during the summer, but then did not come back to vote
in November. There are, of course, probably other
reasons for the somewhat lower turnout, but I think that
what is important is the fact that all communities
participated in the voting in the recent elections. That
lends credibility to the electoral process itself and to
the efforts of UNMIK and the international community
to establish real and sustainable institutions for
provisional self-government, which is, of course, a
major objective under resolution 1244 (1999).

The elections themselves were not an end in
themselves, but an important milestone in the process
of establishing these provisional institutions, which, if
it is to be sustainable, is a process that will require time
and further efforts by UNMIK and the international
community.

