Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to join those who have taken the floor before me
in thanking the Secretary-General for his informative
briefing.

I would also like to reiterate the deep concern
of my delegation in the light of the proliferation and
intensification of military activity in eastern Aleppo,
which has cost the lives of many victims, including
numerous children, and has forced many people to flee.
My delegation calls for light to be shed on the atrocities
that have allegedly been committed, particularly the
death of 82 persons, as reported today.

We reiterate our condemnation of the ongoing
destruction of public infrastructure, such as markets,
schools and the water supply system, but also of medical
facilities, which is a flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and
resolution 2286 (2016). That leads us to call once again
for a cessation of hostilities, namely, compliance with
the humanitarian pause, which would allow medical
and humanitarian personnel to assist those in need in
Aleppo. We also recall the responsibility incumbent
upon the warring parties, especially the Government,
in terms of respecting international humanitarian law
and human rights law.

The humanitarian aspect ofthe crisis is symptomatic
of the political crisis. We renew our calls to the members
of the International Syria Support Group, particularly
the co-Chairs, to redouble their efforts so as to breathe
new life into the negotiation ofa cessation of hostilities,
which is crucial for humanitarian assistance to be
provided and for the relaunching of the political process.

On its part, the Security Council must continue to
play its role as the guarantor of international peace and
security in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations. We must also live up to our responsibilities in
the light of the ongoing deterioration of the situation on
the ground. In that regard, our efforts must be focused
on ending violence, and in particular on ensuring a
resumption of the cessation of hostilities across Syria
by implementing resolution 2268 (2016).
In addition to contributing to building pragmatic
responses to the catastrophic humanitarian situation in
the city of Aleppo, we believe that a global approach
to the Syrian crisis is more necessary than ever, which
involves in particular addressing political and security
aspects as part of a broader discussion on terrorism,
radicalization and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction.

