Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation takes this opportunity to congratulate
you, Sir, on your speedy and effective assumption of
the presidency for the month of August. Our thanks go
to Ambassador Arias of Spain and his delegation for
their effective work last month and for their good
temper and sense of humour throughout our difficult
work. We too welcome the presence of Secretary-
General Kofi Annan at this meeting.

The Government of Mexico has decided to
abstain in the vote on draft resolution S/2003/784. My
country would have preferred a paragraph-by-
paragraph vote, but the sponsor of the draft resolution
was opposed to that procedure, which is contemplated
in rule 32 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure. We requested a paragraph-by-paragraph
vote in order to make it clear that the one and only
reason for our abstention is our disagreement with the
content of paragraph 7 of the draft resolution and that,
like the other members of the Council, we fully support
all the other provisions of the text.

In the course of the negotiations, Mexico proposed
the omission of that paragraph, because it is essentially
irrelevant to the objective of restoring security and peace
in Liberia; it is unnecessary for the purposes of this draft
resolution. Like other delegations, Mexico submitted
various other formulations in a quest for consensus.
Unfortunately, consensus was not achieved. Paragraph 7,
to which Mexico has an objection, would set a serious
precedent by doing away with the prerogatives of States
whose legislation provides for the exercise of criminal
jurisdiction in cases where crimes are committed against
their nationals abroad. Mexico cannot support that; it is
in specific contravention of our laws: article 4 of
Mexico's penal code clearly establishes that crimes
committed abroad by a foreigner against a Mexican shall
be prosecuted in Mexico, provided that the accused has
not been the accused of a definitive trial in the country
in which the crime occurred.

Likewise, we express our concern at the fact that
paragraph 7 fails to provide guarantees for the
attainment of one of the international community's most
dearly held objectives - the elimination of impunity -
since it does not establish an obligation for troop-
contributing countries to try officials or personnel who
have committed crimes or other offences.

It was for all those reasons and in order to uphold
the laws of Mexico and the principles of international
law that Mexico decided to abstain in the vote. The
Mexican Constitution imposes an absolute obligation
upon the head of the Executive branch - whom I
represent - to respect and ensure respect for the laws
emanating from the Constitution.

We regret that we must abstain, because ever
since it joined the Security Council Mexico has been
particularly attentive to the issue of peace in Liberia
and to the humanitarian situation there. Our
chairmanship of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1132 (1997)
concerning Sierra Leone has given us an opportunity to
look closely at the critical situation of Liberia in recent
years and to gain an understanding of the responsibility
of the international community and of the Security
Council to address the situation in that country.

Mexico never agreed with the strategy of passive
containment that was for so long adopted towards
Liberia; its only outcome was the deterioration of the
humanitarian and human rights situation for the
majority of Liberians. Further, Mexico has worked to
ensure that the Security Council devotes particular
attention to the problems of West Africa, employing a
comprehensive regional approach. Here, peace in
Liberia is a key component of peace and security
throughout the region.

In the course of the July 2002 visit by our
delegation to assess compliance with the Sierra Leone
sanctions imposed by the Security Council, we met
with Liberian authorities, civil society and with United
Nations officials and staff. As a result of those
meetings we advised the Security Council to abandon
passivity and adopt an approach of constructive
engagement so that, through the active participation of
the United Nations and with the leadership of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) we would be able to achieve political
agreements between the Government of Charles Taylor
and the armed rebels, leading to a ceasefire and, thus,
to an end to the violence whose innocent victims are
women and children. In that spirit, over the course of
several months, the delegation of Mexico advocated a
presidential statement, which was ultimately issued on
13 December 2002 (S/PRST/2002/36). In that
statement the Security Council expressed its grave
concern about the humanitarian situation and stated the
urgent need to adopt a strategy of constructive
engagement. Unfortunately, the ensuing efforts were
inadequate for want of political will.

Despite repeated appeals by Mexico and other
countries, the violence continued, instigated from
within Liberia and from outside it, and the
humanitarian situation became critical. Following the
Accra agreement of 17 June 2003 establishing a
ceasefire in Liberia and securing Taylor's commitment
to leave power, Mexico supported the proposal to
dispatch a multinational stabilization force to Liberia
and the subsequent deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation, which would guarantee a
transitional political process culminating in free and
fair elections.

The need for such a multilateral peacekeeping
force was dramatically emphasized by ECOWAS and
eloquently expressed by the Secretary-General himself.
On 18 July 2003, Mr. Kofi Annan made an urgent
appeal to the Security Council, particularly to some of
its permanent members, to adopt, in accordance with
the Charter, the measures necessary to put an end to
violence and to ensure the supply of basic humanitarian
assistance to the civilian population of Liberia,
concentrated mainly in Monrovia because of the war.

During the Security Council mission to West
Africa, which took place from 26 June to 5 July 2003,
the Mexican delegation reiterated once again its belief
that it was necessary and urgent that the Council and
the international community lend their full support to
ECOWAS so that the proposed multinational force
could be deployed to Liberia in order to make the
parties comply with the ceasefire to which they had
committed themselves.

Finally, in recent weeks Mexico continued to
insist that the Security Council act, given the repeated
acts of violence and criminal attacks against the
civilian population carried out mainly by the rebel
groups. My delegation is convinced that, if we had
acted in time, many lives would have been saved and
the great suffering of the Liberian people would have
been lessened.

While this draft resolution comes a bit late, the
action it proposes must serve as a point of departure to
begin a transitional political process to restore peace to
Liberia. The draft resolution states, and my delegation
agrees, that it is imperative that there be respect for the
ceasefire, on the basis of which all parties involved,
including the political parties, civil society and all
those who have been forced into exile, can agree on
measures that will lead to the election of a Government
that represents all Liberians.

We also agree that President Charles Taylor must
honour his commitment to abandon power in order to
allow this process to move forward, and we fully
support the position of the African Union and
ECOWAS that no force that aspires to gain power
through armed force can achieve such power
legitimately. We hope that in the coming days the
Liberians will finally regain hope.

