Mr. Takasu (Japan): I should like to welcome
you, Sir, as you preside over today's debate. I would
also like to express my sincere appreciation to the
delegation of Mexico for having taken up the very
important issue of the rule of law. We are also grateful
to the Deputy Secretary-General and to Ms. Patricia
O'Brien, Legal Counsel of the United Nations, for their
thoughtful statements.

The rule of law is one of the most important
norms for ensuring the peaceful coexistence of human
beings. It is a fundamental principle to which the
United Nations must always adhere. It is especially
important for the Security Council to honour the rule of
law in discharging its responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

We are able to concretely see the operation of the
rule of law first in the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The law serves both to prevent disputes and to provide
means to resolve them when they occur. It is desirable
to make active use of international judicial frameworks
for the peaceful settlement of disputes, including the
International Court of Justice (ICJ). It is therefore
important to universalize acceptance of the compulsory
jurisdiction of the ICJ. I should like to call upon States
that have not yet done so to accept it as early as
possible.

When efforts to seek peaceful solutions to
disputes do not bear fruit, the Security Council may
resort to sanctions as an important tool to reduce
threats to peace and security. Once decided upon by the
Council, it is important that all States fully implement
sanctions to ensure their effectiveness. Securing due
process and transparency and giving due consideration
to the human rights aspect in implementing sanctions
will lead to the strengthening of their effectiveness.
Japan therefore attaches great importance to the
establishment, under resolution 1904 (2009), of the
Office of the Ombudsperson for the Al-Qaida and
Taliban sanctions regime.

Japan also attaches great importance to the
promotion of the rule of law for forging a peaceful,
free and orderly international society. The rule of law
is in fact at the core of the nation-building process, in
particular in post-conflict situations. At the Security
Council debate on post-conflict peacebuilding under
Japan's presidency in April, the Council emphasized in
its presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/7) that the rule
of law was a requisite element of sustainable
peacebuilding, along with political reconciliation,
security, development, social stability and human
rights. An integrated approach is essential to
strengthening coherence among those elements.
Preventing the recurrence of conflict by promoting and
strengthening the rule of law is indispensable for
effective peacebuilding strategies.

The rule of law in international society has
developed not only among the relationships between
States, but also in the area of the responsibilities of
individuals. In that regard, the Security Council has
played a pivotal role in creating international criminal
tribunals, such as for Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia. But the establishment of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) to punish the perpetrators of the
most serious crimes of international concern was
epoch-making in the development of the rule of law.
The Review Conference of the Rome Statute held
recently in Uganda adopted a draft amendment on the
crime of aggression. In order for the ICC to better
discharge its mandate, it is imperative for States parties
to make steady progress on effectiveness, universality
and institutional sustainability.

The rule of law is also an essential component of
the social framework in the process of post-conflict
nation-building. In particular, the legal system is
treated as a key soft infrastructure, similar to physical
and hard infrastructure such as roads, electricity and
other networks. Once created, however, law is neither
complete nor able to function automatically, any more
than other types of infrastructure. It is a responsibility
of all of us to constantly re-examine how the law may
best be disseminated, understood and utilized by
people.

In that regard, Japan attaches importance to the
United Nations Programme of Assistance in the
Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation of International Law. The United Nations
Audiovisual Library of International Law, which is part
of that Programme and to which Japan has contributed,
is an innovative system that enables anyone in the
world with Internet access to study lectures by eminent
international scholars. We urge everyone to support the
programme.

The raison d'etre of law lies in implementation
and compliance. Every State must implement law and
enforce the rule of law within its domestic affairs.
States also have the responsibility to observe
international law and to be ruled by it. To promote and
strengthen the rule of law at the international level,
each State must constantly confirm its adherence to the
fundamental principle of pacta sunt servanda. Member
States are bound by the Charter of the United Nations,
including Articles 25 and 94, to faithfully implement
the decisions of the Security Council.

Together with dissemination and awareness-
raising efforts, we need to build judicial institutions
and human capacity to ensure implementation and
compliance, particularly in developing countries. To
facilitate compliance with the law of the international
community, Japan will continue to help in capacity
building efforts by developing countries, such as in the
areas of drafting laws, creating legal institutions and
training legal professionals.

