Mr. Tarrisse da Fontoura (Brazil): First, I wish
to thank the Presidents of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
Judge Theodor Meron and Judge Erik Mose, as well as
Prosecutors Carla Del Ponte and Hassan Bubacar
Jallow, for their thorough reports on the level of
progress achieved in the work of the two Courts and on
the prevailing difficulties.

Almost ten years after the establishment of both
Tribunals there is no doubt about the importance of
their contributions to international law. They can be
seen as an example of the commitment of the
international community to ensure that those
responsible for the most heinous crimes that offend the
very essence of human dignity answer for those crimes
in public trials.
It is necessary that the Tribunals remain
committed to the goals set forth in resolution 1534
(2004) while concentrating resources and efforts to
make sure that the most senior suspects are prosecuted.
Regarding the ICTY, the increase of 50 per cent in the
number of persons awaiting trial - now 51, as
compared to 34 in the last report (S/2004/897) - can
have an impact on the implementation of the
completion strategy. In this regard, Brazil would like to
reiterate that insisting on rigid deadlines as set out in
the completion strategy may frustrate justice rather
than assist the international community in ending
impunity. In this respect we support, whenever
possible, the referral of the non-senior suspects to
national courts in order to expedite trials.

My delegation has always supported the
appointment of ad litem judges as a means to maintain
the current phase of work of the ICTY, and we hope
that the adoption of amendments to its Statute through
resolution 1597 (2005) can enhance the level of
participation of ad litem judges in the work of that
Tribunal. Judge Meron informed us that since the
submission of the last report the number of fugitives
remaining has been cut in half. While we welcome that
major advance in the Court's recent history, we urge
States in the region to continue to cooperate with the
Tribunal. It is not acceptable that Members of the
United Nations disregard obligations under the Charter,
the Tribunal's Statute and rules of procedures and the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

With regard to the ICTR, Brazil welcomes the
progress accomplished so far. Judge Mose informed us
that in addition to the 50 accused whose trials have
been completed or are in progress, there are 16 other
detainees awaiting trial in the detention facility in
Arusha. My delegation also welcomes the decision of
the Prosecutor to refer non-senior suspects to national
jurisdiction whenever the country's judiciary structure
so allows. The Prosecutor considered that more than 40
suspects could be tried under national jurisdiction. To
enable this referral, cooperation with neighbouring
countries and other interested countries is fundamental.

As the workload of the Trial Chambers decreases,
the focus will shift to the Appeals Chamber, where an
increase in the workload is anticipated. My delegation
agrees that the number of judges will need to be
reviewed at some stage. Brazil will follow the Courts'
periodic reports to the Security Council in order to
follow up the evolving scenario.

Considering the prospect of the completion
strategies for both Tribunals, Brazil understands that it
is essential that the Tribunals continue to be able to
rely on adequate resources and personnel to perform
their functions. Financial difficulties present a threat to
the accomplishment of their duties and ability to meet
the completion strategies.

The Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda constitute a remarkable achievement in the
fight against impunity, and we are convinced that such
experience will contribute to strengthening the activity
of the International Criminal Court.

