We thank Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Mr. Geir Pedersen for his briefing. We welcome the third round of the small body of the Syrian Constitutional Committee held in Geneva last month. The most important achievement of that meeting was the constructive approach of the Syrian delegations. The credit for this belongs to the United Nations team working on Syrian settlement, led by the Special Envoy, as well as to all international players who are interested in stabilizing the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic. Syrians showed their readiness to continue working together to find common denominators and establish principles for discussing the future of their country. We highly appreciate the level of preparation of the event against the backdrop of the coronavirus restrictions. At the same time, it is important to ensure safety and health of the Syrian delegates, as well as Mr. Pedersen's team and the host country officials when planning next rounds. The Syrians, with the help of the Special Envoy, should agree on the agenda and dates for the next meetings. It is important to help them lead this political process on their own without external interference. The work of the Constitutional Committee does not and should not have artificial time restrictions or be synchronized with any events, including electoral process within Syria. The latter is an internal matter of the country. The guarantors of the Astana format - Russia, Turkey and Iran - held a meeting on the sidelines of the Syrian dialogue in Geneva. This is symbolic; the Constitutional Committee itself was formed thanks to our effective trilateral cooperation, as well as the decision of the Congress of the Syrian National Dialogue, held in Sochi in 2018. The Astana participants also met with Syrian representatives and the Special Envoy. We circulated the joint trilateral statement that was adopted in Geneva as an official document of the Security Council. Its key elements are reaffirmation of commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria, determination to confront the terrorist threat, rejection of the illegal seizure of oil fields, condemnation of unilateral sanctions that undermine the socioeconomic situation in the country, and the need to increase humanitarian aid to all Syrians without politicization or discrimination. Russia will continue to provide the Special Envoy and the Syrians with all necessary support, including within the framework of the Astana format. As for the situation on the ground, it can be described as generally calm. Instability has been registered in Idlib, controlled by terrorists from Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, and territories in the north-east. In the Idlib de-escalation zone, militants sabotage Russian-Turkish patrols. The shelling of positions of Government troops and nearby settlements continues, causing civilian casualties and deaths. Terrorists are also active in other parts of Syria. All attacks by militants will be resolutely suppressed. It is obvious that the achievement of lasting calm in Idlib and other Syrian areas is possible only if the terrorists of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and their affiliates are neutralized and their support from abroad is stopped. The implementation of resolution 2254 (2015), adherence to which is asserted by all members of the Council, provides for respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria. We urge our colleagues not to be selective in this regard. The illegal occupation of a part of the Syrian territory by the United States and the policy to isolate the Kurdish regions from the rest of Syria lead to ethnic and sectarian hatred, and this is a factor in the delay in the political settlement in Syria. The plundering of oil resources, secured by exemption from United States sanctions, as well as the illegal unilateral sanctions themselves, which are used as an instrument of collective punishment and aimed at inciting social discontent, also hamper the efforts of those who want peace in Syria. We heard recently about plans to assassinate a head of a sovereign State, President Al-Assad. What is this if not a policy of regime change? We call on all who preach respect for international law to abandon these practices and even their designs for political assassination and interference by military or economic means in the internal affairs of sovereign countries - even those that they do not like. We have long heard calls from our Western colleagues for the establishment of a nationwide ceasefire in Syria. We would like them to clarify what exactly they mean. First, the ceasefire in Syria holds. Secondly, who should sign such an agreement? The information coming from Syria, including through the United Nations, proves that only terrorists provoke violence in the country. Do we have to sign an agreement with them? Must we legalize them? We also see Israeli strikes at Syria. In this regard, we call on our Western colleagues to stop exploiting these calls but rather exert their influence on those who really continue to wage war in Syria. Unilateral coercive measures negatively affect the stabilization of the situation, suffocate the economy and cause suffering for ordinary Syrians. Humanitarian exemptions do not work, according to humanitarian non-governmental organizations (NGOs) themselves. The Secretary-General has called for the lifting of sanctions, specialized United Nations structures talk about the negative impact of sanctions, humanitarian NGOs and Western journalists write about this. Unilateral coercive measures also impede the return of refugees, as they block the efforts of the Syrian Government to rebuild homes and infrastructure for the benefit of the people. The Syrian Government is ready for the return of citizens who fled the war; neighbouring countries are also interested in this. Resolution 2254 (2015), by the way, provides for the return of refugees and the rehabilitation of the affected areas for this purpose. In this regard, we are disappointed that during the Security Council's meetings on Syria, primarily on the humanitarian situation, we have heard no United Nations assessment of the negative impact of sanctions, including on the Syrian Government's fight against the pandemic; nor we hear any analysis of the environmental threat to Syria and Iraq in light of the barbaric oil extraction methods in the north-east.
