The Secretary-General: I thank the United
States for using its presidency of the Council to draw
attention to the important issue on today's agenda.

Across the globe, insufficiently protected borders
enable the trafficking of drugs, weapons, contraband,
2

terrorist funding, materials related to weapons of mass
destruction, conflict minerals, wildlife and people.
Such illicit flows undermine the sovereignty of States,
destroy communities and individual lives, threaten
peace and security and are rightly the focus of the
Security Council's close attention.

Countering those illicit flows requires action on
many fronts. Strengthening border security is crucial.
Member States are obligated under international law to
secure their borders against illicit flows. But fragile
and vulnerable countries - some of them devastated
by war, others struggling to transform themselves -
often lack the capacity to overcome the conditions that
allow such criminal activity to flourish. The United
Nations is thus hard at work, helping many States to
build that capacity. In Africa, Latin America and the
Caribbean, the Airport Communication Project, known
as AIRCOP, has been set up to strengthen controls at
international airports. Project AIRCOP's maritime
equivalent is the Global Container Control Programme.
Although more than 500 million maritime containers
move around the world each year and account for
90 per cent of international trade, only 2 per cent are
inspected. Strengthening customs and immigration
systems is essential.

Border strengthening is effective, but not if done
in isolation. We also need to give priority to
establishing public institutions that deliver a sustained
level of security and justice for citizens. Border
security can never come at the expense of migrants'
rights. Nor can it be used to legitimize inhumane
treatment.

The United Nations Task Force on Transnational
Organized Crime and Drug Trafficking, co-chaired by
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Department of Political Affairs, is developing
comprehensive approaches. Regional cooperation is
key to addressing both illicit flows and human
trafficking, as are legal tools. I urge Member States to
ratify and implement the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and the
Protocols thereto, as well as the United Nations
Convention against Corruption and the legal
instruments designed to fight terrorism.

Countering illicit flows also requires us to do
more to prevent money laundering. We need systems
that can detect and monitor the enormous flows of
12-31426
illicit money generated by cross-border crimes, most of
which is laundered through the global financial system.

Illicit flows are directly linked to terrorism. Our
counter-terrorism strategies rely on States adopting
measures on the cross-border movement of people,
goods and cargo, small arms and light weapons,
nuclear, chemical, biological, radiological and other
potentially deadly materials. We are helping Member
States to strengthen their institutional and legislative
frameworks in that area. The Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force's Working Group on
Border Management relating to Counter-Terrorism is
compiling a comprehensive compendium of
international instruments, norms and best practices.

The illicit flows that pose the gravest threat are,
of course, those related to the possible terrorist
acquisition of weapons of mass destruction. Efforts to
address that challenge include the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) through the
activities of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

Trafficking in firearms and ammunition also
helps to fuel terrorism, violence and armed conflicts,
while hindering social and economic development. We
are helping Member States to strengthen their
institutional and legislative frameworks in that area by
developing technical guidelines for the safe
management of ammunition and international control
standards for small arms and light weapons.

There are no quick solutions to illicit flows.
There is only a long-term process that requires the
sustained commitment of all. Our watchtowers must be
accompanied by the watchwords: information,
intelligence, data collection and analysis. It is an area
where the United Nations, with its ability to provide
objective and balanced information, can play a key
role. We will continue to identify new threats and bring
them to the attention of the Security Council, so that
the international community can respond.

As the Council knows, prevention is one of my
priorities. Preventing illicit flows is beneficial to
countries, communities and individuals. It is important
for security, development and human rights. In six
months, I will return to the Council with a report
providing a comprehensive assessment of the United
Nations work to help Member States counter illicit
flows.
12-31426
Thank you again, Madame President, for
addressing the aforementioned matters and working to
improve our work in this crucial area.

