Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We have before us draft resolution 8/2019/186,
submitted by the United States of America. We have
finally reached the culmination of the spectacle of the
United States' double standards in Venezuela. During
the Security Council meetings a month ago and then the
day before yesterday (see S/PV.8452 and S/PV.8472),
it has become totally obvious that regardless of their
political preferences, a majority of the countries in the
western hemisphere support a resolution of Venezuela's
problems through dialogue among Venezuelans
themselves. An inclusive, nationwide dialogue is now
needed above all else, but unfortunately Washington
is stubbornly marching towards its goal of escalating
the tensions and achieving its own scenario through an
unconstitutional change of Government.

Let us take a look at the text of the draft resolution
to see exactly what the United States is proposing that
the Security Council vote on, which is that we should
recognize the Venezuelan National Assembly's, and I
quote, "constitutional authority", and the presidential
elections held in May of last year as "neither free nor
fair" - and this almost a year after they took place.
That is why the United States has prepared this draft
resolution. Its hypocritical concern for the humanitarian
situation in the country is merely a smokescreen. But
perhaps the United States has another goal - making
history. If this draft resolution were to be adopted,
it would be the first time in history that the Security
Council had removed one President of a sovereign
country from office and installed another. Is that
world democracy in action? I am not even talking here
about the politics at issue or the question of Maduro
versus Guaido. Do the members of the Council really
not understand that this is legally illiterate, null and
void? What is this thinly veiled trolling and mocking
of Council members? Do those planning to support the
Americans' draft resolution understand that they will
be participating in a legal theatre of the absurd?

The United States delegation cannot possibly
be unaware that its draft resolution has no chance of
being adopted and yet has deliberately submitted it to
the Council so that afterwards it can point fingers at
those who it claims are obstructing the "restoration
of democracy" in Venezuela. It is now deliberately
undermining the Council's unity. But does it need
it? Our American colleagues seem to have forgotten
what international law is. All they have left in their
diplomatic arsenal is ultimatums, sanctions and threats
of the use of force.

Needless to say, we realize that all of this has been
undertaken solely in order to accuse dissenting States
of obstructing the delivery of aid to Venezuelans. But
it is just another example of shameless propaganda.
On 26 February (see S/PV.8472), we spoke in detail
about the fact that Russia and China were delivering
humanitarian aid to the Venezuelan people freely and
without any problems. It was only the United States
that had failed to do so because it had disregarded a
State's sovereignty and the inviolability of its borders.
I said this the day before yesterday and I will say it
again now. If the United States really wanted to help the
people of Venezuela, it would be operating officially
through any of the United Nations-accredited agencies
there. But that is not the goal. It is merely a pretext. Its
goal is regime change. This is probably the clearest and
most direct case we have seen of the implementation of
the infamous concept of humanitarian intervention, an
intervention with humanitarian components and under
humanitarian pretexts. That is the so-called rules-based
order, rather than international law, that our Western
colleagues are proposing and constantly talking about.

That is why we have prepared an alternative draft
resolution (8/2019/190), designed not to encourage
political intrigue and regime change but to provide
Venezuelans with real help in their efforts to normalize
the situation in their country. In the draft resolution
we emphasize that any international assistance should
be based on the principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality, independence and the consent of the
country's legitimate Government. We also express
support for international mediation initiatives,
including the Montevideo Mechanism, which would
help Venezuelans to achieve what is the most important
thing right now, a political settlement. There is
simply nothing like this in the United States draft
resolution, because it is not aimed at solving any of the
problems involved.

Yesterday, we held expert consultations on our text
and listened to the views of Security Council members,
including the representative of the United States. We
heard not one concrete comment. The Western experts
said only that they would not work on our text, and
our American colleagues immediately presented their
draft for a vote. What is the point here of diplomacy
or the quest for a compromise? This whole scheme is
a propagandist public-relations stunt dictated in large
part by domestic political concerns, and we are sorry
that the Security Council has been dragged into it
once again.

We are seriously worried that today's meeting
could be exploited as a stage for preparing not a
humanitarian intervention but a real one, an excuse for
outside interference based on the Security Council's
alleged inability to resolve the situation in Venezuela.
We want to appeal once again to those members of the
Security Council who genuinely want to help rather than
pandering to this political show. We urge them to vote
against the United States draft resolution and in support
of our document, which has been specifically written
to avoid language that could create disagreement and
focuses entirely on giving Venezuelans real help in the
form of international assistance and mediation.

