Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Special Envoy De Mistura and
Director John Ging for the briefings. We commend their
efforts to facilitate the political process and alleviate
the humanitarian situation in Syria.

China has been closely following the political
process and humanitarian situation in Syria. We note
that some areas in Syria are rebuilding hospitals and
schools and repairing transportation, power and other
infrastructure. Refugees and internally displaced
persons are gradually returning to their homes. The
international community should further scale up its
humanitarian assistance by providing much-needed
help to all the areas in need within Syria.

That said, the situation in Syria remains challenging.
The political process is faltering, coupled with rampant
terrorist activities and high tensions in some parts of
Syria, especially Idlib. Given the current situation, we
call on all the relevant parties to step up their diplomatic
efforts, address issues through dialogue, and facilitate
de-escalation through dialogue. The international
community should pool its efforts and continue to
resolutely combat terrorism and consolidate the gains
achieved to date.

Meanwhile, we call on all parties to do everything
possible to avoid harming innocent civilians. All parties
are duty-bound to adhere to the purposes and principles
ofthe Charter ofthe United Nations and other recognized
basic norms governing international relations, fully
respect Syrian sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity, and avoid the wilful use of force or
threat of force.

China has always stood for a political settlement
to the issue of Syria, which represents the only path
to peace and stability in Syria. The international
community should provide steady support to the United
Nations as the main mediator and to Special Envoy De
Mistura in his efforts to facilitate the resumption of
the Geneva peace talks. The international community
should act on the principle of a Syrian-owned, Syrian-
led process and on resolution 2254 (2015) in pushing all
parties in Syria to engage in inclusive political dialogue
in search of a solution that responds to the realities on
the ground, while accommodating the concerns of all
parties. Special Envoy De Mistura will hold discussions
with the relevant parties on the establishment of a
Syrian constitutional committee. All parties should
exert their influence and push the Syrian Government
and opposition groups to move towards each other
with a view to achieving early results and adding new
momentum to the Syrian political process.

