Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We pay tribute to the
United Nations Mission of Assistance in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for its important work under the dynamic
leadership of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Jan Kubis. It needs the Council's continued
support and greater resources.

We have heard the perspective of the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Zahir
Tanin. The people of Pakistan consider the people
of Afghanistan their brothers and sisters. Prime
Minister Mian Nawaz Sharif has declared Pakistan's
commitment to strengthening ties with Afghanistan
covering the entire spectrum of political, economic,
defence, educational and cultural relations. Pakistan's
newly elected leadership has reiterated its resolve to
fully support Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and
national reconciliation processes. Peace and stability in
Afghanistan are a key constituent of Pakistan's foreign
policy, which is supported by all State institutions. The
success of that policy requires reciprocity, trust and
good will.

We thank the United States Government for
acknowledging publically Pakistan's genuine and
constructive support for the Afghan peace process.
Over the past 10 years, the people of Afghanistan,
Pakistan, the United States and other countries have
paid a high price in blood and resources. All of those
efforts and sacrifices should not have been in vain.
The people of Afghanistan must succeed and we must
succeed with them.

I thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his statement
that the Government of Afghanistan looks forward to
working with the new Government in Pakistan. We
will respond in full measure. We respect Afghanistan's
sovereignty and support its Government's efforts to
uphold it. I reject most emphatically - root, trunk and
branch - Ambassador Tanin's argument that terrorist
sanctuaries exist in Pakistan and that some elements
continue to use terrorism as an instrument of foreign
policy. That is not true, and he knows it. This is not
good diplomacy. By using such arguments, he casts
aspersions on our sincerity. In Pakistan, we operate not
as elements but as a whole, as a State. All institutions
of the State are in consensus that terrorism is a threat
to both Pakistan and Afghanistan, and therefore both
countries should work together to eliminate this
scourge.

I have not rebutted Ambassador Tanin's argument
as a tit-for-tat response or to settle scores; I have said
what I have to highlight that terrorists operate on
both sides of the porous border. Many attacks against
Pakistan are planned on Afghanistan's soil. That is why
we need more aggressive policing and surveillance of
the border. This would also help to stop the shelling.
We must not allow terrorists to manipulate and divide
the people of Afghanistan and Pakistan. This kind of
contentious polemic is disingenuous as Pakistan and
Afghanistan continue to communicate through multiple
political and military channels to address all bilateral
issues.

Pakistan's own stability and prosperity depend on
peace and security in Afghanistan. This sense of shared
destiny drives our ties with Afghanistan. Stability in
Afghanistan will also usher in a new era of cooperation
and connectivity in the region. We must build political
trust. The joint commission chaired by Pakistan's
Prime Minister and the President of Afghanistan is the
best forum for pursuing this objective. The tripartite
commission comprising Pakistan, Afghanistan and the
International Security Assistance Force met earlier
this month Rawalpindi to discuss border controls
and coordination along the international border. The
stability and sanctity of the Pakistan-Afghanistan
border is a shared responsibility. The robust deployment
of Pakistani troops on our side is meant to interdict
terrorist and criminals. For optimum results, this must
be matched from the other side. Bilateral channels,
including military and intelligence contacts, to resolve
issues relating to the border posts should be made more
effective and any misunderstandings addressed through
real-time communication and dialogue.

We assure the Secretary-General that Pakistan is
doing its utmost to build trust and prevent confrontation.
We agree with him that enflamed public sentiment is
not at all helpful.

Two days ago, three very significant developments
took place. Afghan security forces formally took over
security leadership, the Taliban opened an office in
Doha and announced their readiness to negotiate.
We congratulate the Government and people of
Afghanistan on the transfer of security responsibility to
the Afghan forces. Pakistan welcomed the opening of a
Taliban office in Doha and the announcement of talks
between the United States, the Taliban and the Afghan
Government. After several initiatives, this was surely a
flicker of hope for peace in Afghanistan. Subsequently,
problems arose. We hope that in the greater interests of
Afghanistan, misgivings can be removed and tensions
defused. This is a time for diplomacy and statesmanship.
A compromise must be explored to move forward.

We have urged an early end to the war. The
conflict in Afghanistan can be resolved only through a
negotiated settlement. Pakistan has released a number
of Taliban prisoners in good faith and after giving prior
intimation to the Afghan authorities. We hope that this
measure will facilitate the peace process.

We wish the people of Afghanistan success as they
negotiate wrenching but momentous political, security
and economic transitions. We should work to avert an
economic vacuum after the withdrawal of international
forces. Donors must fulfil their pledges in accordance
with the Mutual Accountability Framework.

Finally, Pakistan supports the role of the United
Nations in Afghanistan. The United Nations should
prepare itself to play an even more significant role
after 2014 in promoting institution-building, economic
self-sufficiency, peace and reconciliation, counter-
narcotics efforts and the rehabilitation of refugees. In
that context, the good offices and political outreach of
the United Nations are critical.

