Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): Let me first of all
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. We wish you every
success. I also seize this opportunity to commend the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation
for the excellent manner in which he conducted the
work of the Council last month.

I thank you, Sir, for organizing this public
meeting to further discuss the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. Since our last
public meeting, there have been a number of
developments on the ground.

The month-long siege of Chairman Arafat's
Ramallah headquarters has now been lifted and the
leader of the Palestinian people can at last move freely.
We see this as a very important development that
should now ease the tension on the ground and pave the
way for the resumption of a meaningful political
process. My delegation wishes to acknowledge the
various high-level diplomatic efforts of the past few
days and commends the efforts undertaken by the
United States and the United Kingdom that made the
lifting of the Ramallah siege possible. At the same
time, we deplore the fact that the appeal made by
President Bush for an immediate withdrawal of Israeli
troops from the occupied Palestinian territories has not
been heeded.

The lifting of the siege on Chairman Arafat and
the withdrawal of Israeli forces from Ramallah can by
no account be an occasion for celebration. We have
seen various media reports showing the high degree of
devastation sustained by the Palestinian Authority over
the past weeks. The infrastructure of Palestinian
civilian life has been destroyed, as have many of the
institutions set up by the Oslo Accords. It is no
exaggeration to say that Palestinian society has been
reduced to ruins. The international community should
step up its efforts and solidly engage in the rebuilding
of Palestinian society, so that normalcy can soon return
to the lives of the Palestinian people.

Mauritius understands the security concerns of
Israel, including its right to protect its people from
terrorist attacks, but it should be clear to Israel and to
all that self-defence is not a blank cheque. Responding
to terrorism in no way frees Israel from its obligations
under international law, nor does it justify any violation
of human rights and humanitarian laws in the occupied
Palestinian territories.

It is unacceptable that the siege of the Church of
the Nativity has now entered its second month and that
around 200 people are still caught in there. We also
condemn once again the use of the Church as a
sanctuary by militants. We call upon Israel to
immediately lift the siege of the Church, which would
prevent a real human tragedy in a site holy to the
Christian faith. We also call upon the international
community and world leaders to exercise all their
influence on the Israeli authorities to put an end to this
cr1s1s.

Another area which continues to monopolize the
attention of the international community is the situation
in the Jenin refugee camp. After the outcry of the
international community over the devastation and
possible massacre perpetrated in Jenin, Secretary-
General Kofi Annan, in all his wisdom, set up a fact-
finding team that would have produced an accurate
report on the recent events in the Jenin refugee camp.
The international community had full confidence in the
distinguished personalities chosen by the Secretary-
General to lead the fact-finding team.

The Security Council, through its resolution 1405
(2002), supported that important and bold initiative of
the Secretary-General, which initially had the support
of the Israeli authorities. Even the Foreign and Defence
Ministers of Israel had assured the Secretary-General
that Israel would cooperate fully with the team. Israel
even stated that it had nothing to hide over what took
place in Jenin. We were relieved that at last the
international community would know the facts about
Jenin and whether or not there were civilians
massacred.

However, we are now faced with the situation in
which the Secretary-General has disbanded the fact-
finding team because of the uncooperative attitude of
Israel. We are all aware that, over the past 12 days,
Israel has constantly created obstacles and raised
concerns related to the composition of the team, the
scope of its mandate and various other procedural
matters. This Israeli challenge of the Secretary-General
and rebuff to the Council is unacceptable and should be
condemned. Israel's behaviour is tantamount to
intolerable arrogance and defiance of the international
community. The uncooperative attitude of Israel and its
non-compliance with various Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 1405 (2002), put in
peril the whole architecture of the United Nations. It is
a further blow to the credibility of the Council. Each
Member State should feel duty-bound and both legally
and morally responsible to uphold the principles
enshrined in the Charter of our Organization. Israel
cannot be an exception.

Ever since the setting up of the fact-finding team,
Israel has constantly shown obvious signs of non-
cooperation with it. The Council should have moved
collectively and decisively to ensure the
implementation of resolution 1405 (2002) by Israel. We
should have adopted stronger language forcing Israel to
accept the fact-finding team without conditions.

The disbanding of the fact-finding team today is
or may be the price we have to pay for our reluctance
and hesitation in the Council. Our inability to take
appropriate and timely action has raised several
questions about our role as the organ responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The questions are indeed legitimate. What we have
seen over the past 12 days constitutes a dangerous
precedent in the Council, which will surely be used by
other countries in any similar situation, thereby
weakening the credibility of the Security Council as
well as the authority of the Secretary-General. It is the
integrity of the international system which is imperilled
by not having a level playing field and having double
standards. We believe that the Arab Group was right in
submitting its draft resolution for a vote yesterday in
the early hours.

The lead figures of the "quartet" held an
important meeting yesterday in Washington, and we
welcome the announcement on the holding of a Middle
East peace conference later this year. We urge all the
parties to fully seize such a historic opportunity, which
could eventually fulfil Israel's aspiration and great
need to live within secure and recognized borders and
give the Palestinian people their long-overdue
homeland. We believe that the proposal presented by
Saudi Crown Prince Abdullah and endorsed by the
Arab leaders constitutes an important basis for
deliberation by the conference.

Finally, Mauritius welcomes the statement made
by the Israel Minister of Defence requesting a
resumption of the peace negotiations. We believe that
the success of the Middle East peace conference
depends on numerous factors, and that one of them is
full respect for the recently adopted Security Council
resolutions. Israel should also immediately withdraw
from the entire West Bank. It is important that as from
now, all the parties, as well as the international
community, start preparing the ground for the
conference. Both Prime Minister Sharon and President
Arafat have a heavy responsibility. They should stand
ready to guide their people in this trying moment.
History will not excuse them for any failure.

