Mr. Christian (Ghana): I wish to commend you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on the
situation in Darfur. The Ghana delegation wishes to
thank Mr. Kofi Annan, the Secretary-General, for his
presence and for the statement that he delivered at this
meeting. We also join other delegations in
remembering the several thousand people who perished
on 11 September 2001, and we share with the
Government and the people of the United States their
grief and sadness on this occasion.

We take this opportunity to express our
appreciation for the presence of the representatives of
the African Union, the League of Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
Government of National Unity of the Republic of the
Sudan. We trust that their participation in today's
meeting will bring new dynamism into the peace
process and will further strengthen the resolve of the
international community to seek a comprehensive,
peaceful and speedy resolution of the crisis in Darfur,
in accordance with the Darfur Peace Agreement of 5
May 2006 and relevant Security Council resolutions.

In that connection, we wish to stress the goodwill
and spirit of international partnership that underlie
resolution 1706 (2006), and we call for the timely and
full implementation of that resolution in order to
alleviate the suffering of the people of Darfur. In view
of the volatile situation on the ground, only the
expansion of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
into Darfur can best guarantee the safety of the
millions of displaced Sudanese and preserve the
sovereignty, unity and stability of the country for the
benefit of all its citizens.

We further express our full confidence and trust
in the assurances that have been repeatedly given to the
Sudanese Government, that the proposed deployment
of a United Nations mission in Darfur is a
humanitarian mission and a call to partnership, not
confrontation. We therefore urge the Government to
open the doors of Darfur to the existing United Nations
Mission in the Sudan so that together we can halt the
chaos and death and create real opportunities for a
better life for all of the Sudanese people.

