Mr. Castellon Duarte (Nicaragua) (interpretation from Spanish): On behalf of the delegation of Nicaragua
and in our capacity as Secretary pro tempore for Central
America, we welcome with great interest this meeting of
the Security Council on demining as a demonstration of
the special interest of Germany and of the international
community as a whole in the worldwide problems caused
by land-mines and the disastrous effects their
indiscriminate destruction have on civilian populations
and on the economic recovery of countries after conflicts
and in the obstacle they place in the path of peace-
keeping operations.

It is estimated that there are more than 110 million
land-mines scattered through more than 60 countries.
None the less, 2 million to 5 million more mines are
planted every year. To mention only a few of the
countries where this is truly a priority problem, where
there are millions of mines, we have Afghanistan, Angola,
Bosnia, Cambodia, Laos, Mozambique, Rwanda and
Somalia. The demining programmes that have been
established in those countries will for a long time require
international assistance, and we express our solidarity
with them.

The cruelty of these weapons is shocking: thousands
of dead and maimed, along with damage to the economy
and infrastructure of the countries that have the

 

misfortune to suffer from this scourge, its indiscriminate
effects and the prolonged consequences of war in time of
peace.

In the face of this alarming situation, the international
community has begun efforts through the application of
restrictive measures adopted by many Member States
regarding the transfer, production and reduction of current
land-mine stocks and other unexploded devices.
Nevertheless, the results of the Review Conference of the
States Parties to the Convention on Prohibitions or
Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to
Have Indiscriminate Effects show the lack of political will
to achieve agreements regarding the establishment of an
effective and binding verification mechanism. Furthermore,
the existing extensions should pave the way for stronger
negotiations to achieve a complete ban on anti-personnel
land-mines.

This is why we have stated our country's position on
this serious problem in many forums. The solution is the
complete eradication of this kind of weapon from the face
of the Earth. To this end, widespread and persistent
political efforts are required to achieve a complete ban and
sustained international cooperation for mine clearance.

In this spirit, on 28 and 29 May 1996, a regional
seminar was held in Managua, Nicaragua, on anti-personnel
land-mines, demining and rehabilitation. Anti-personnel
mines were defined as a violation of international
humanitarian law. Mexico and the countries of Central
America expressed their will to establish on their territories
an anti-personnel-mine-free zone and reaffirmed the will of
the Governments of the region to promote national policies
fostering the complete and immediate prohibition of the
production, possession, transfer and use of anti-personnel
land-mines. They invited national parliaments to pass
legislation to prohibit and sanction the manufacture,
possession, transfer and use of such mines and to establish
a set of norms to guarantee job opportunities to the victims
of such devices.
The seminar also encouraged Governments and the
communications media to disseminate relevant information
among populations exposed to the danger of anti-personnel
land-mines so that they would not become victims, and
urged the international community, the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and non-governmental
humanitarian organizations to contribute to the programmes
undertaken by Central American countries for the
re-education and rehabilitation of victims so as to achieve
their social and occupational reintegration.

Furthermore, at the twenty-sixth session of the
Organization of American States (OAS), held in Panama
in June 1996, a resolution was adopted on support for
demining in Central America. It emphasized the ongoing
and serious problem of land-mines and their effects,
which impede the social and economic development of
vast and rich rural areas and have a serious adverse effect
on the border integration of areas affected by these deadly
devices, and it urged States members of and permanent
observers to the Organization and the international
conununity to continue to cooperate and support the
demining work carried out in Central America. It also
noted with satisfaction the important contributions to the
demining programme in Central America made by States
members, including Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Canada,
Colombia, Peru, the United States of America, Uruguay
and the Permanent Observers to the OAS, including
France, Germany, Japan, the Netherlands, Russia, Spain,
Switzerland and Sweden.

Echoing the agreements made at those meetings, my
delegation, as Secretary pro tempore for Central America,
appeals to the international community to continue and
increase in a sustained way its assistance to demining
programmes in Central America.

We would like to reiterate the point that we have
made in other forums: there is an urgent need to deal with
the larger issue of a ban on the export and production of
anti-personnel mines. We are prepared to support
initiatives to that end. It is in that spirit that we have
co-sponsored the resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly on a moratorium on the export of anti-
personnel mines, until we have a total ban on these
weapons.

We would also like to express our support for the
seven-point programme of action on anti-personnel mines
proposed on 18 July 1996 by Mr. Klaus Kinkel, Federal
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany.

Nicaragua, a state signatory to the Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects,
is aware of the importance of this international instrument
and is taking the steps necessary for its ratification, which
shows the high priority our country attaches to
negotiations to abolish such weapons. We would also like

 

to reiterate the urgency of concluding demining tasks before
the end of this century. To this end the Governments of
Costa Rica, Honduras and Nicaragua are continuing their
efforts within their respective countries.

We would like to take this opportunity to thank
Member States that have made important contributions to
the continuation of the difficult and costly task of demining
in Central America.

With the historic signing of the Treaties of Pelindaba,
Rarotonga and Bangkok, the Antarctic Treaty and the
Treaty of Tlatelolco, there are already four denuclearized
zones on our planet. If this has been achieved in the
difficult sphere of nuclear matters, why can we not declare
a zone free of anti-personnel land-mines in the western
hemisphere? Let us pool our efforts to ensure that the dawn
of the new century sees the beginning of economic and
social development for our peoples, thus making possible
a peace dividend.

