Ms. Nakamitsu: Let me also start by expressing
my sincere condolences to the families of the victims
of the horrific terrorist attack in Manchester yesterday
and my strong solidarity with the people and the
Government of the United Kingdom.

Let me thank the President and members of the
Security Council for this opportunity to brief them, for
the first time in my capacity as High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, on the implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013), on the elimination of the
chemical weapons programme of the Syrian Arab
Republic. I will also provide them with an update on
the activities of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM).

I am pleased to be joined today by Mr. Edmond
Mulet, who was appointed on 1 May by the Secretary-
General as the Head of the JIM's independent
three-member panel. Although I will briefly inform the
Council of the J IM's current activities, Mr. Mulet will
be able to answer any questions members might have
regarding the work of the JIM.

I also note that on 8 May, Mr. Stefan Mogl was
appointed as a member of the JIM. Leadership Panel.
Mr. Mogl will be based in the The Hague.

I will first turn to the progress related to resolution
2118 (2013) and the elimination of Syria's declared
chemical weapons programme. I have discussed these
issues with the Director General of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on
several occasions, and he has provided valuable updates
on and insight into OPCW's activities. The working-
level engagement between the Office for Disarmament
Affairs and the OPCW remains positive and proactive.
I have also engaged with the Permanent Mission of the
Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations, as well
as with most members of the Security Council. These
discussions have strengthened my understanding of the
circumstances and the ways in which they are evolving.

As the Secretary-General's last letter notes, the
situation with regard to the destruction of the chemical
weapons production facilities remains unchanged.
The OPCW Technical Secretariat has verified the
destruction of 24 out of 27 declared production facilities.
However, the prevailing security situation continues
to preclude safe access to three remaining sites,
consisting of one aircraft hangar and two above-ground
stationary facilities.

The work to address unresolved issues related to
Syria's declaration and subsequent amendments had
been expected to move forward with the resumption of
high-level consultations in The Hague. Three rounds of
such consultations had previously taken place between
April and June 2016, with the aim of resolving all
outstanding issues related to Syria's declaration. The
OPCW Director General then submitted a report to the
OPCW Executive Council in July 2016, which noted
that those issues remained unresolved and which urged
a change in approach by the Syrian Arab Republic.

In March, the Director General sent a letter to the
Deputy Foreign Minister of the Syrian Arab Republic,
His Excellency Mr. Faisal Mekdad, inviting him and
his delegation to resume these high-level consultations
in early May. However, it was decided that these
consultations should be temporarily postponed in order
to ensure that the discussions would be as fruitful and
productive as possible. New dates for the resumption
of the high-level consultations have not yet been
decided upon. The Secretary-General has repeatedly
encouraged cooperation between the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic and the OPCW on resolving
these outstanding issues.

I turn now to the work of the OPCW Fact-finding
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic (FFM) in Syria.
Since the time of the last briefing to the Council on this
issue (see S/PV.7915), two reports of the Fact-finding
Mission were transmitted to the Secretary-General by
the Director-General and subsequently circulated to the
Security Council.

First, on 2 May, the Director General transmitted
the report of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria
regarding the incident of 16 September 2016. This
report was produced further to an investigation by an
FFM. team into an allegation of the use of chemical
weapons in the area of Um-Housh, in the Aleppo
countryside, on 16 September 2016. Following a request
for an investigation, by the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic, an OPCW FFM. team deployed to
Damascus on two occasions: from 11 to 19 December
2016 and from 6 to 12 January 2017. During these two
deployments, the team conducted interviews, collected
testimonies and reviewed documents and other
information provided by the Syrian authorities. Owing
to the prevailing security situation, the FFM. team was
not able to visit the site of the alleged incident.

The FFM. team also reviewed blood-sample
analyses of two female casualties reported to have
been involved in the alleged attack. In addition, the
FFM. team conducted a non-destructive evaluation
and sampling of a mortar reported to be connected
to the alleged incident. This mortar was handed over
to the team by experts of the Russian Federation's
chemical, biological, nuclear and radiological team.
Laboratory analysis indicated that the mortar contained
sulfur mustard.

The Secretary-General has also circulated to the
Security Council a letter from the OPCW Director
General (S/2017/440, annex)), attaching a status update
of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic regarding a reported incident in Khan
Shaykhun on 4 April.

After having undertaken a preliminary assessment,
an FFM. team was mobilized to investigate the incident.
The team was deployed to a neighbouring country,
where it conducted interviews with casualties and
witnessed the collection of biomedical samples from
casualties from the alleged incident. The team also
received biological-environmental samples from dead
animals reported to have been close to the site of the
incident and received environmental samples from
close to the suspected impact point. The team attended
the autopsies of three alleged victims, witnessed the
extraction of biomedical samples from those bodies and
received the autopsy reports. As the Director General
has announced already, the analysis of samples showed
exposure to sarin or a sarin-like substance.

This is not a final report; there is still work to be
done. The FFM. team has collected information and
conducted interviews, and all materials and information
are currently being analysed. The Director General also
indicated to me that the FFM. team is planning for a
possible visit to Khan Shaykhun. As Council members
are aware, Khan Shaykhun is not under Government
control. In an exchange of letters, the OPCW Director
General requested, on 29 April, the support of the
United Nations in the form of security, logistical
and operational assistance. On 4 May, the Secretary-
General, in his letter of reply, indicated his willingness
to provide such support and indicated that planning
within relevant offices of the Secretariat was already
under way. In this regard, I remain in regular contact
with the Director-General in order to help ensure
that any visit to the site by the FFM. team would be
accompanied by the most stringent security assurances.

I will speak very briefly on the work of the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism.
Since our recent respective appointments, Mr. Mulet
and I have been in regular contact, and we intend to
ensure a smooth coordination between the Office for
Disarmament Affairs and the JIM. The Office for
Disarmament Affairs fully supports the work of the
JIM. and fully respects its independence.

The JIM. has been provided with the two recent
reports of the OPCW FFM. of which I have just spoken.
I am informed that the Mechanism is now studying
these reports and will keep the Security Council
informed of its next steps. In addition, the Mechanism
will be reaching out for information of interest to its
investigation, as was done in the past. In his letter
to the Security Council of 28 April, the Secretary-
General called upon all States to support the critical
OPCW FFM. and the OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism. I likewise call on all to
support the Mechanism's important task and extend
their full cooperation.

We must not allow ourselves to become inured to
the ongoing allegations of the use of chemical weapons.
This is an issue about which the United Nations
cannot be neutral. The use of chemical weapons by
any party, Government forces, terrorist groups or
armed opposition groups, for that matter, cannot and
will not be justified regardless of provocation or any
circumstances. Their re-emergence is indefensible and
cannot be Viewed as anything other than a violation of
the most basic international law and a serious deviation
from the internationally agreed broader path towards
the goal of a world free of chemical weapons. As such,
this is not an issue to be politicized. The international
community must have confidence that this goal is one
that remains within our reach and that those who stand
in its way will be identified and held accountable. Its
importance is greater than ever.

