Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Pakistan welcomes this
open debate on the protection of civilians and health
care in armed conflict. We thank the Secretary-General
and the Vice-President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross for their insightful briefings.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
a basic tenet of international humanitarian law. The
1949 Geneva Convention and its Additional Protocols
contain specific rules to protect civilians. Yet, despite
an established normative framework, compliance is
unfortunately sporadic and accountability mechanisms
are weak or, in many cases, nonexistent. Non-combatants
continue to be treated as fair game by warring parties
seeking to further their strategic interests. Collateral
damage is still considered a regrettable but inevitable
byproduct of conflict. As a result, the tapestry of armed
conflict is increasingly being coloured by the suffering
of civilian populations.

As the seething fires of armed conflict rage across

the world, the international community has confronted
the grim reality of growing civilian casualties as well
as an ever-greater need for humanitarian assistance
and the protection of people displaced by conflict.
The plight of the vulnerable, including women and
children, remains particularly acute. As the Secretary-
General notes in his latest report (S/2017/414), more
than 20 million people in conflict situations, including
1.4 million children, are on the brink of famine. This
tragedy is compounded by a less-than-adequate global
response to the need to address the suffering of civilians
in armed conflict.

Amid the dark shadows of war and conflict,
essential health services, including hospitals and
medical personnel, play a critical role both as providers
ofvital life support and sustainers ofhope and optimism.
Any attack on medical facilities and staff puts lives at
risk and exacerbates suffering. It is therefore not only
an egregious breach of international law but a betrayal
of humankind itself. It is unfortunate that we have
witnessed a spate of recent attacks on medical facilities
in conflict situations by both State and non-State actors.
The culture of impunity for such crimes must end.

The Security Council's landmark resolution 2286
(2016) speaks to that imperative by unequivocally
condemning attacks or threats against medical and
humanitarian personnel who are exclusively engaged
in medical duties. The task we have now is to translate
that political resolve into tangible action. As a first step,
all parties to an armed conflict should unequivocally
affirm that health care must be protected in compliance
with their obligations under international law, in
particular humanitarian law. Criminal prosecutions
and other forms of accountability for the perpetrators
of attacks on health-service providers are equally
essential. The parties to an armed conflict should
also ensure safe, unimpeded passage and sustained
access for humanitarian personnel. Human misery
cannot be mortgaged or sacrificed at the altar of
political objectives.

The protection ofcivilians must also be prioritized in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. As one of the
world's leading contributors of troops to United Nations
operations, my country has proudly and conscientiously
performed the task of protecting civilians in various
parts of the world, including in missions in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Darfur, the Central
African Republic and Liberia. Based on our diverse and
rich experience, we underscore the critical importance
of troop-contributing countries to the process, not just
in designing mandates but also in their implementation,
review, renewal or change, especially in cases where
the situation on the ground has deteriorated rapidly.
While the fundamental principles of peacekeeping are
not an impediment to mandates for the protection of
civilians, the primary responsibility for protecting all
civilians nonetheless rests with the host countries. The
clear distinction between the established norm of the
protection of civilians and the evolving concept of the
responsibility to protect must therefore be maintained.

Above all, the goal of protecting civilians is best
served by preventing the outbreak of armed conflicts in
the first place. That entails addressing the root causes
of conflicts, finding inclusive political solutions to
disputes and seeking peaceful settlements. We believe
that the Secretary-General's call for a surge in diplomacy
for peace represents a reinforcement and strengthening
of that approach. A culture of prevention is, after all,
the best assurance we can have for sustainable and
enduring peace and security.

