Mr. Sahovic' (Yugoslavia): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July. I would also like to thank you for convening this
meeting, where we are discussing extremely important
issues that transcend the item on the Council's
agenda - the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Those who spoke before me, Council and non-
Council members, described very eloquently the
problem that has preoccupied the Council and the
Organization as a whole in the past few weeks. Indeed,
the question is whether a solution can be found that
will avoid jeopardizing the role of the newly
established International Criminal Court (ICC) before
it has even started its work, as well as the United
Nations concept of peacekeeping.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was among
the first 60 countries that ratified the Rome Statute,
which brought the ICC into being. We share the belief
that the Court is the cornerstone of the international
legal system. Everything should be done to enable this
institution to perform its envisaged role.

Every month I come to this table to discuss the
performance of the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo and Metohija. Now, of
course, this debate is immediately connected to the
United Nations presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
a few days, the Council is scheduled to review and
extend the mandate of the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Prevlaka. Later this month, the President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia is scheduled to address the Council, and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, Mr. Steiner, will again submit his
periodic report to the Council. This, of course, is a
consequence of the decade-long tragic conflicts in my
country and its surroundings.

At the same time, that is also a manifestation of
the continued involvement of the international
community and the United Nations in particular in our
region. True, important progress has been made in
stabilizing the Balkans and in rebuilding our post-
conflict societies. All countries involved have been
contributing to the achievement of the region's lasting
peace and stability. In fact, next Monday, the same day
that the fate of UNMIBH is to be decided, the
Presidents of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Yugoslavia will meet in Sarajevo, demonstrating their
determination to work towards that goal.

However, while that positive process is
irreversible, it is not yet complete. The presence of the
international community is still very much needed. The
European Union, through its stabilization and
association process, is playing the pivotal role. At the
same time the United Nations, through the Security
Council and its peacekeeping capabilities, is an
irreplaceable actor in the equation.

While, as I mentioned, the process towards peace
and stability is under way, there are still forces in our
area that would like to see the process fail. These
forces have been politically defeated, but they have not
yet been buried in history. They will certainly look
forward and try to take advantage of the withdrawal of
the United Nations from our region and the failure of
the ICC to stand on its feet. There is no need to
elaborate on the serious consequences that such
developments may entail.

Of course, it is not only peacekeeping in the
Balkans that is at stake; peacekeeping elsewhere is also
at stake. As already emphasized here today, Africa and
its newly born Union, which we warmly welcome, rely
significantly on the United Nations peacekeeping effort
for their future.

Although the topic of the debate is extremely
complex, the thrust of my message today is very
simple. I appeal to the members of the Council to find
a way out of the present stalemate. We understand that
there are diverging legitimate concerns. However, we
would like to believe that the understanding of the
overall context of the topic we are debating will prevail
and a solution acceptable to all will be found. That
solution will ensure that the Council's credibility is
preserved, that the international rule of law is
maintained and that we all - in particular those of us
in the troubled parts of the world - will be able to
continue to rely on United Nations peacekeeping in our
efforts to achieve genuine peace and security.

