Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): Let mejoin others in thanking
Assistant Secretary-General Taye-Brook Zerihoun
and the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Mauro
Vieira, Permanent Representative of Brazil to the
United Nations, for their comprehensive briefings on
the situation in Guinea-Bissau.

We take note of the overall developments and
political trends in Guinea-Bissau, as well as the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) in the country. We
support the continued role of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and his good offices in
support of efforts aimed at sustaining peace in Guinea-
Bissau, in collaboration with regional, subregional
and international partners, through the promotion of
inclusive national political dialogues, constitutional
and democratic reforms and transparent and peaceful
electoral processes.

It is evident that strong political will and a sense
of ownership remain critical to supporting peace
consolidation in Guinea-Bissau. We take note with
concern of the challenges encountered by UNIOGBIS
in delivering its mandate, and we call upon all Bissau-
Guinean stakeholders to exert collective efforts towards
that end. Currently, the political environment in Guinea-
Bissau is dominated by the electoral process. We note
the postponement of the 18 November legislative
election due to delays in the voter registration process.
However, we underline the need for the holding of timely
and credible legislative and presidential elections,
in accordance with the Constitution and national law
of Guinea-Bissau, in order to consolidate sustainable
peace and national reconciliation.

In this regard, we take note of the Economic
Community of West African States communique
issued on 12 December, which calls upon the Bissau-
Guinean authorities to set a new date for the election by
22 December. The decision ofthe President to implement
a gender-parity law, which establishes a quota of 36 per
cent for women candidates for Parliament and women's
representation in public-sector institutions, is indeed
commendable. We believe that this is a step in the right
direction to enhance women's participation in political
affairs and decision-making processes.

The growing threats caused by drug trafficking
and religious extremism, which undermine the peace
and stability of the country and the region, are a matter
of serious concern. In this regard, we stress the need
for concerted efforts of relevant bodies at the national,
regional and international levels in order to address the
challenge. We express our appreciation to the United
Nations strategic assessment mission for undertaking its
work in consultation with all stakeholders, including the
African Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, the Economic Community of West African
States and the European Union. We believe that the
United Nations engagement in the peacebuilding efforts
of the country is important, and we hope that it will
be taken into account in line with the recommended
United Nations reconfiguration during the renewal of
the UNIOGBIS mandate in February 2019.

We commend all international partners, as well
as subregional and regional organizations, especially
the Economic Community of West African States and
the African Union, for their considerable efforts in
facilitating dialogue and generating collective pressure
for the implementation of the Conakry Agreement.
Finally, we reiterate the importance of the Conakry
Agreement in addressing the political and institutional
challenges the country is facing. Therefore, we call on
all stakeholders in Guinea-Bissau to respect and comply
with the Agreement.

