Mr. Mammadyarov (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank and congratulate the South African
presidency on convening this debate on the United
Nations-African Union partnership. We welcome the
presence at this very important meeting of His
Excellency Mr. Jacob Zuma, President of the Republic
of South Africa. We are grateful for the report
(S/2011/805) of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon. I would also like to welcome the delegation
of the African Union Commission and the chairs of the
African subregional organizations.

Over the past decade, the role of the African
Union and subregional organizations has increased
significantly. Indeed, not all regional organizations can
boast of their ability and political will to understand
the root causes of armed conflicts and to contribute
effectively to their resolution. As a country suffering
from the occupation of almost 20 per cent of its
territory and the forcible displacement of hundreds of
thousands of its citizens, Azerbaijan fully understands
the threats and challenges affecting countries with
unresolved conflicts, including those in Africa, as
indicated just a few minutes ago by Mr. Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union.

The African Union has made great efforts to
promote peace, security and stability on the continent,
and has demonstrated its ability to take the lead. The
launch of the African Peace and Security Architecture
and the establishment of its constitutive elements, as
well as the African Union's peace support operations
authorized by the Security Council, should be
particularly noted.

The challenges that Africa faces today and that
constitute a considerable part of the Security Council's
deliberations can be better addressed through collective
political and diplomatic efforts. The high interest in
today's debate demonstrates the vivid commitment of
the international community to supporting African
countries in bringing stability and ensuring sustainable
development on the continent.

In recent years, we have seen progress achieved
in developing the strategic relationship between the
United Nations and the African Union in the area of
peace and security. At the same time, we have to admit
that challenges remain and that more should be done to
further strengthen this relationship to effectively
address common collective security concerns in Africa.

It is critical that we further strengthen our joint
efforts to prevent conflicts before they occur. Greater
focus on the area of conflict prevention and mediation
has acquired additional significance. The development
of common guidelines by the United Nations and the
African Union as a framework for mediation in Africa
would contribute to achieving this objective. It is
crucial that all Member States strictly adhere to their
obligations, as laid down in the United Nations
Charter, with respect to the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of States. An
important determination in this regard has also been
made by the General Assembly in its resolution 65/283
of 22 June 2011 on strengthening the role of mediation
in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and resolution.
We recognize the vital role of women in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts, peace
negotiations, peacebuilding, peacekeeping,

humanitarian response and post-conflict reconstruction.
The United Nations and the African Union need to
work to ensure that women and gender perspectives are
fully integrated into all peace and security efforts
undertaken by the two organizations, including by
building the necessary capacity.

It is important that the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union, as
well as the secretariats of both organizations, further
enhance their relationship, including through annual
meetings and more intense informal communications
between them. As the Secretary-General points out in
his report, efforts to find a solution to ensure
sustainable financing for African Union peace support
operations need to be continued. While the steps taken
by the African Union in developing its own financing
mechanisms are commendable, other means and
options provided by the United Nations and the
international community should also be available in
this regard, including in the prevention, management
and resolution of conflict, as well as in peacebuilding.

In recent times, Azerbaijan has significantly
developed its cooperation with the African Union and
its member States. Obtaining the status of observer
with the African Union has allowed my country to
advance mutually beneficial relations and dialogue.
Azerbaijan is actively participating in implementing
various assistance programmes for Africa. We
responded to the appeals of the respective
Governments and international organizations to
provide urgent aid aimed at addressing the
humanitarian crisis in the Horn of Africa and elsewhere
on the continent. Furthermore, we have contributed to
supporting the institution and capacity-building
programme of the African Union Commission and
offered scholarships for diplomats from African
countries to study in the Azerbaijan Diplomatic
Academy.

Azerbaijan has also joined the work of one of the
Peacebuilding Commission's country-specific
configurations, and looks forward to pursuing its
efforts in this regard. We have started consultations
with the relevant stakeholders to apply in Africa our
rich experience in the field of demining, provided by
the Azerbaijan National Agency for Mine Action. We
look forward to advancing our cooperation with the AU
Commission and African countries and are planning to
host in Azerbaijan, in cooperation with the United
Nations and the African Union, a high-level
international conference on the issues of concern to
Africa.

In conclusion, I would like to express our full
support of South Africa's draft resolution (S/2012/25),
aimed at developing effective partnership relations and
cooperation between the two organizations. Last but
not least, I would also like to take this opportunity to
stress the importance for the Council to monitor the
implementation of its existing resolutions, in particular
those related to the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts.

