Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome the new Chair
of the Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), Mr. Gustavo Mesa-Cuadra Velasquez,
Permanent Representative of Peru. We are grateful to
him for his very detailed report.

Today the threat of terrorism has expanded on a
huge scale, including geographically. Terrorists take
advantage of gaps in our border control systems to
travel across frontiers; they use modern technologies
to recruit followers and search for sources of income;
they exploit captured enterprises in conflict zones and
increasingly invest in legitimate businesses, as we
discussed a few days ago (see S/PV.8178). However,
infrastructure facilities - airports, oil refineries,
communication networks, banks - continue to be
extremely attractive targets for terrorists. The situation
is complicated by the fact that the elements of critical
infrastructure are deeply interconnected, and they
frequently operate in more than one jurisdiction. We
firmly believe that in these circumstances, the exchange
of information and best practices between specialized
international and regional platforms, under the central
coordinating role of the United Nations, is particularly
essential, and we welcome the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
in that regard. As Mr. Mesa-Cuadra rightly noted, the
interaction of the CTC and CTED with organizations
such as the Collective Security Treaty Organization,
the Anti-Terrorism Centre of the Commonwealth of
Independent States and the Regional Anti-Terrorist
Structure of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.

The Security Council has in its arsenal a whole range
of decisions aimed at protecting critical infrastructure
from the threats of terrorism, centred around its
founding anti-terrorism resolution 1373 (2001). In our
view, the premise, affirmed in this toolkit, that it is
States that have the primary responsibility in the fight
against terrorism and, correspondingly, in protecting
their lands and infrastructure from terrorist threats, is
of fundamental importance.

For our part, we prioritize issues related to improving
the legal framework and implementing practical tasks
for protecting critical infrastructure. One of the main
targets of terrorist attacks in Russia are fuel and energy
facilities. In that regard, as long ago as 2011 we created
special commissions responsible for inspecting energy
infrastructure facilities for anti-terrorism protection.
We conduct joint counter-terrorism exercises and
training sessions on a regular basis, including with the
participation of the private sector. After the March 2010
terrorist attacks in the Moscow metro, we established
a complex programme for the transport security of
the population, under which transport infrastructure
facilities are equipped with modern protection devices.
Incidentally, according to our data, as many as 70
percent of terrorist attacks around the world occur
either on transportation or through the use of vehicles.

Besides this, in 2012 we established our Centre
for Cyber Incident Response in Information Systems
of Government Authorities. We are ready to share the
experience we have accumulated in implementing these
and other anti-terrorism security initiatives with the
CTC and all interested partners.

