Mr. Kalomoh: Most armed conflicts eventually
come to a physical end. However, many such conflicts
linger on in the minds and hearts of the parties and
their victims. Every armed conflict is a human disaster,
and its real ending requires genuine reconciliation.
Post-conflict reconciliation is closely related to the
broader discussion of the rule of law and to addressing
in all seriousness the root causes of the conflict. An
important debate on this issue was begun in September
of last year under the Security Council presidency of
the United Kingdom. That debate clearly identified the
need to more systematically incorporate rule of law
concerns in the activities of the United Nations. The
Secretary-General looks forward to presenting his first
report on this matter to the Council later this year.

Reconciliation, most simply understood, is about
allowing people who share a painful and divided past
but who are united in a common future to resume
harmonious relations and to live together once more.
Often this requires more than simply the laying down
of arms and the shaking of hands. To be lasting,
reconciliation may require the settling of the past, an
accounting of prior wrongs and an acceptance of
responsibility for abuses.

How this is achieved, though, varies according to
specific national circumstances. The pursuit of justice,
accounting for past atrocities, restitution for Victims
and the regeneration of the severed bonds of trust and
civility - these are daunting tasks in a shattered
society, but they must not be overlooked when we deal
with the pressing matters of restoring stability and
bringing violence to a definitive end. In particular, they
must be borne in mind when peace agreements are
being negotiated. Peace agreements tend to frame the
context for national reconciliation. Often the
imperatives of the present, especially the need to
restore stability and the rule of law, triumph over the
long-term need for justice. Tensions between peace and
justice are common in post-conflict societies. Helping
war-shattered people to resolve those tensions is a key
role that the international community can and should

play.

The international community has employed a
number of instruments in post-conflict situations to
address the important issue of reconciliation. I will
mention but a few. Some, such as tribunals, seek to
contribute to reconciliation by trying and punishing the
perpetrators of crimes. Others, such as truth and
reconciliation commissions, seek to contribute to a
better future by establishing an official accounting of
past violations of human rights during a specific
historical period. Knowing the truth and accepting
responsibility, whether judicial or not, is an important
basis on which reconciliation can rest.

In addition, amnesties, except for genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity, reparations and
targeted assistance programmes designed to promote,
inter alia, communal harmony have constituted
important tools for international efforts to support
national reconciliation processes. The return of
displaced populations in post-conflict situations also
often provides critical opportunities to sustain a peace
process through the promotion of measures conducive
to national reconciliation. To be successful, these
instruments need to be combined in a social process of
catharsis.

Our experience has shown that it is indeed
difficult, even impossible, to set in stone prescriptions
for reconciliation that would apply to each and every
situation. What may work in one case may not be ideal,
or ideally suited, in another. The process of catharsis
that I mentioned earlier is assisted by different means
in different places. Today, during the course of this
debate, we are likely to hear specific examples of
combinations of measures that have been successfully
applied in some circumstances and not so successfully
in others.

Nonetheless, irrespective of national specificities,
some general observations should inform the
international community's activities. First, peace
without reconciliation is hardly ever durable. Secondly,
it is difficult to achieve reconciliation without a
significant measure of justice. Thirdly, there are some
crimes that are so heinous that they require that justice
be done. Fourthly, the pursuit of justice should not
become an obstacle to establishing or maintaining
peace.

Ending the climate of impunity in conflict, post-
conflict and transitional situations is vital to restoring
public confidence and normalcy. The particular
formula for any given country should be determined on
the basis of appropriately facilitated national
consultation. It is for each society to decide its own
best approach to address past crimes and the violation
of domestic or international law. The international
community can offer assistance, outline options and
provide information about what other countries in
similar circumstances have done regarding, among
others, prosecution, truth-seeking endeavours,
reparations and apologies.

While amnesties may sometimes be seen as the
price to be paid for peace agreements to succeed or for
stability to be maintained, the United Nations cannot
condone agreements arrived at through negotiations
that violate Charter principles. Amnesty clauses in
peace agreements must exclude amnesties for war
crimes, genocide, crimes against humanity and other
serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law. Blanket amnesty clauses are
inconsistent with the twin goals of justice and
reconciliation. As the Secretary-General has stated, this
Council must attempt to balance the demands for peace
and justice, conscious that they often compete and
aware that there may be times when they cannot be
fully reconciled.

When reconciliation does not involve providing a
sense of justice for the worst crimes, the wounds of the
past have a way of resurfacing. An essential part of
reconciliation is to isolate those who are most
responsible and have committed the most egregious
violations in order to bring them to justice. To ensure
that justice is done in post-conflict societies, the United
Nations has established, or helped establish, a number
of courts and tribunals to try those responsible for
serious violations of international humanitarian law
committed during the preceding or ongoing conflicts.
In doing so, the United Nations has explicitly pursued a
number of objectives that have included the provision
of justice to the victims of violations and the promotion
of national reconciliation within societies affected by
conflict. At the international level, the International
Criminal Court seeks to ensure that egregious
violations do not go unpunished.

The establishment of tribunals, however, has not
been problem-free, and working with domestic courts
when possible is often a wiser course. Criminal courts
are the instrument needed to try and punish the guilty.
No matter their design, however, they are unlikely to
be successful at fully meeting the objectives of
providing justice to victims and promoting national
reconciliation. They are intended to ascertain the fate
of missing persons. They are ill-suited to ensure
compensation to a larger number of victims. They are,
then, by their nature, ill-adapted to granting "moral"
forms of reparation. Whereas criminal courts are
intended to resolve the problems of individual
accountability for specific alleged crimes, they are ill-
suited for establishing official historical accounts. For
these reasons and others, additional non-judicial
mechanisms, such as truth and reconciliation
commissions, may be useful in fulfilling some of these
tasks and can complement judicial instruments.

Finally, efforts to promote justice need to
accompanied by reconciliation and peace-building
strategies that will address the root causes of the
conflict, be they ethnic, social or economic. Formal
legal processes and processes to bring about truth and
justice should go hand in hand with economic and
social measures to fight the inequalities and exclusion
that may have fuelled the conflict in the first place.

Reconciliation is a complex, often difficult
process in which contradictions may be inevitable. It
involves accounting for the past and meeting demands
for justice and the degree of forgiveness that will allow
for the reconstruction of a social fabric that has been
rent by conflict. It is a process that involves striking a
balance between the aggrieved and the aggressors, the
pursuit of justice and stability. It is a long-term,
difficult process, the conclusion of which cannot be
clearly identified in advance. The difficulties of the
process have been captured in the words of Hannah
Arendt, who, when referring to atrocities committed
during the Second World War, spoke of how we are
unable to forgive what we cannot punish and unable to
punish what has turned out to be unforgivable.

Our collective experience has shown that the
right combination of measures will depend on the
specific conditions in each post-conflict situation. In all
cases, domestic enlightened leadership can be a
catalyst for the creation of the social consensus
necessary for reconciliation. At the very least, the past
and reconciling with it should offer hopes for a better
future. In the words of Maya Angelou, "History,
despite its wrenching pain, can not be unlived, but if
faced with courage, need not be lived again."

