The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now make
a statement in my national capacity and will try to
limit it to five minutes, as was recommended by the
representative of Japan.

During the month of January, the Security Council
has held 17 meetings, 12 consultations, 2 open debates,
1 closed meeting and 1 mission to Burundi and Addis
Ababa. We have adopted 4 resolutions and 12 press
statements. If we based our productivity on numbers
of resolutions and meetings, I am not completely sure
what percentage that would constitute. My colleagues
have prepared some notes for me concerning which
they will probably only be annoyed with me, as usual,
because I usually ignore them and do not keep closely
to them. But I do not want to repeat everything that
has already been said in this Chamber, and I would
therefore like to touch on a few specific points that
include some positive aspects.

First, there was some good news from Mali and
C6te d'Ivoire, and we saw meaningful progress made.
The mandate of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus was renewed, and while that in itself is not
really important, what is important is the progress
that has been made by the Greek and Turkish Cypriot
leaders in advancing a process that we can only hope
will be crowned with success.

As a Latin American, the adoption of resolution
2261 (2016) on Colombia, which other colleagues have
touched on, is a source of great satisfaction to me, first
because I am sure that it will help to move forward the
negotiating process for peace, and secondly the Security
Council was able to act unanimously by adopting the
resolution because under our presidency.

We also believe that the two open debates held on
the protection of civilians (see S/PV.7606) and on the
Middle East (see S/PV.7610) were positive developments
because they once again drew the attention of the Council
and its members to those urgent issues. Moreover, the
issue of protecting civilians is deeply rooted in other
problems with which the Security Council is seized,
such as the terrible humanitarian situation unfolding in
the Middle East.

With regard to some points of concern, it has been
rightly pointed out that we are all concerned over
the North Korean nuclear test. This is a very serious
problem. We can only hope that the Security Council
will adopt a resolution on that issue in a few days.

As Latin Americans, we are very seriously
concerned by another suspension of elections in Haiti.
That is a real cause for concern because the political
establishment in Haiti is displaying an apparent lack
of responsibility for complying with the time lines
and its obligations to its own society to establish a
Government and to carry out the reforms and processes
that the people of Haiti have been yearning for. Haiti
is one of those places where the Security Council has
a clear presence through its peacekeeping operation.
To that end, I wonder whether now would be the right
time to consider conducting a visit to Haiti in the very
near future because we must do our utmost to get the
political process back on track in Haiti.

From the humanitarian perspective, the situations
in Syria, the Sudan and Yemen, where sieges and
hunger are being used as weapons of war and hospitals
and school facilities are being attacked, are of grave
concern to us. As a new member ofthe Security Council,
we are experiencing a certain degree of frustration
because, on the one hand, we see the Council fail to
ensure that one member meet its obligations and, on the
other hand, that non-State actors are ignoring its pleas.
As a new member of the Security Council, I must say
that we experience some degree of frustration which I
hope will wane with time.

With regard to methods, I should like to share a
single consideration. As a new member, I am struck by
the fact that the Council has its own momentum and
rhythm in dealing with different issues. We often talk
about collective wisdom, but I am struck by the fact
that we have plenary meetings here - "open meetings",
as they are known - where we hear briefings, discuss
them and head to the consultation room next door. And
that is where we actually read out documents setting
forth national positions. Almost no debate takes place.
I cannot judge too clearly as I have only been here for
30 days, but we always hear the national positions in the
consultation room. We could hear the national positions
in the Chamber. Everyone who attends these meetings
could hear the statements, and real consultations could
take place in the consultation room on how problems
can be resolved and what we can accept as a body. This
may be a case of my speaking out of turn, but I was
keen to share these thoughts with Council members.

I thank all the delegations for their words of
congratulations, but those congratulations go to the
hard-working team that supports me. Any merit in
our leadership goes to the team, and I accept all the
responsibility for any faults.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

lformallythankalldelegationsfortheircooperation,
and the Secretariat, the interpreters and translators for
all their unfailing support. I wish Mr. Abelian the best

going forward and thank him directly for his constant
support to us.

On behalf of the Council, we wish our brothers
and colleagues from Venezuela every success in their
presidency which they will take up in February.

The meeting rose at 12. 05pm.
