Mr. Akram (Pakistan): We congratulate Ghana
on its assumption of the Council presidency for this
month. We are confident, Sir, that, under your
country's leadership, the Council will find its way to
silencing the guns in the Middle East and elsewhere.
May I also felicitate Ambassador De la Sabliere and
the French delegation on last month's intense and
important presidency of the Council.

We welcome your presence here, Sir, to preside
over this important meeting of the Security Council.
We also welcome the participation of other dignitaries
in this meeting.

Africa, afflicted for years by conflict, disease and
poverty, justifiably occupies a significant segment of
the Security Council's work. Today's discussion is
relevant and timely, especially in the context of
significant strides that have been made in recent years
for peace and stability in West Africa. Sadly, that is not
the case when it comes to some other situations around
the world, such as in the Middle East.

Sierra Leone is a United Nations peacekeeping
success story. It is now engaged in peace consolidation.
We trust that the Peacebuilding Commission will
reinforce this process.

Liberia is on the road to recovery and stability
from the horrors of the cruel conflict and crimes we
witnessed three years ago. Liberia and its leadership
deserve the full support of the Council and the world
community in sustaining stability, reviving its economy
and respecting human rights.

We hope to see similar progress in Cote d'Ivoire.
That would enable this important African country to
serve once again as the economic hub of West Africa.

Pakistan enjoys friendly and fraternal relations
with the countries of West Africa. We have made our
modest contributions to the United Nations
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts in West Africa.
Pakistan takes pride in its participation in the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). We now
look forward to contributing to Sierra Leone's
reconstruction through our membership in the
Peacebuilding Commission. Our troops are serving in
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) in
support of peace in that country. We are also
participating in the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI).

During this meeting, our African brothers have
expressed their perspectives and priorities regarding
the problems of West Africa. The Security Council
should heed their voices. Indeed, the important issues
outlined in the presidency's non-paper for this debate,
have been the subject of frequent discussions in the
work of the Council.
During Pakistan's tenure on the Security Council,
we were able to acquire a greater understanding of the
situation in West Africa. In May 2004, Pakistan, as
Council President, organized a public meeting on
complex crises and the United Nations response. A
summary of the important ideas and suggestions
advanced in that debate was circulated as document
S/2004/723 and may be worth revisiting.

Most of the situations in Africa are complex
crises. They require a combination of actions -
conflict prevention and resolution to begin with, and,
later, peacemaking, peacekeeping, and peacebuilding.
In View of the linkage between security and
development, the newly established Peacebuilding
Commission will, we hope, be able to focus on the
multifaceted aspects of recovery and peacebuilding in
country-specific situations. Pakistan will contribute
actively to its work.

Despite the progress achieved in West Africa,
considerable work remains to be accomplished,
especially in addressing the root causes of conflicts.
What we have often referred to as the "politics of
poverty and scarcity" characterizes most of these
internal conflicts. The politics of scarcity and poverty
must be ended. In this context, greater political will is
required to break the link between the illegal
exploitation of natural resources and the illegal trade of
arms, which so often spark and sustain the conflicts in
Africa. More attention must still be given to
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and
reintegration (DDRR) and to security sector reform.
And it is clear that laying the foundation for
sustainable development will require, apart from direct
international assistance and debt relief, better terms of
trade, larger trade capacity and greater trade access.

A heartening feature of the West African
developments is the regional approach being adopted
to address its problems, especially cross-cutting
issues - small arms, mercenaries, refugees, migrants,
et cetera. The Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) has proved itself a competent and
reliable partner for peace in this region. Its leadership
merits acclaim. Pakistan fully supports your call, Mr.
President, and that of Executive Secretary Ibn
Chambas, to address the capacity and resource
constraints of ECOWAS.

A comprehensive regional approach could also
open greater possibilities for the resolution of security,

06-46 124
peacebuilding and development challenges in other
parts of the world that are today riven by rampant war,
occupation and destruction.

