Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Humanitarian issues have long figured prominently on
the Security Council agenda, and it is regrettable that
several African countries remain sorely beset by
humanitarian problems.

In some areas of Somalia, violence is on the
increase, and piracy runs rampant. That situation poses
a threat both to local livelihoods and to the safety of
international navigation. In the Sudan, the continuing
conflict in the Darfur region has had a serious impact
on humanitarian relief and assistance efforts. In Chad
and the Central African Republic, the refugee problem
has become a threat to safety and stability. In Uganda,
although the Government has resumed talks with the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) and the humanitarian
situation in the north is improving, the country still
faces the problem of a lack of funding.

In our View, a holistic approach is needed to
address both the symptoms and the root causes of
humanitarian problems. Such problems are normally a
direct consequence of the exacerbation of a region's
hot-spot issues, and crises are closely linked with
political, security and development problems. To deal
with humanitarian problems, it is necessary to
undertake emergency relief measures that will yield
immediate results. It is also necessary to adopt robust
policy measures aimed at eliminating the root causes of
cr1s1s.

We believe that the following elements are
needed in order to find a fundamental solution of
Africa's humanitarian problems: Vigorous advocacy
and promotion of social harmony and unity; assistance
for African economic development; poverty
eradication; and improvement in the livelihood of the
general population.

Secondly, any improvement in the humanitarian
situation in Africa depends on joint efforts by the
countries concerned and the international community.
In recent years, with the active support of the
international community, African countries have
worked tirelessly to resolve their own hot-spot issues
and eradicate the root causes of humanitarian crisis.

We commend the Government of Uganda for
resuming talks with the LRA, and we hope that
progress in the political process will help further ease
the humanitarian situation there. We support the
international community's diplomatic efforts to find a
political solution to the problems of the Darfur region.
We call on the international community to provide
assistance to Chad and the Central African Republic to
help them deal with internally displaced persons. We
believe that the international community should
continue to pay attention to the humanitarian problem
in Africa, bringing into play the advantages to each
party involved, and should adopt a holistic approach to
the problem so as to secure a gradual improvement in
the situation.

Over the years China has participated actively in
the international efforts to ease the humanitarian
situation in Africa. We have worked through
multilateral and bilateral channels for a proper solution
to the hot-spot issues. We have participated actively in
the peacekeeping operations in Africa and have
provided assistance, within our ability, to help with the
social and economic development of Africa. Looking
forward, China, together with the international
community, will play its part for the cause of peace,
stability and development in Africa.

