Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Let me
express how pleased we are to see you, Sir, in your
current position of leadership. It is most fortuitous for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also welcome the format
and substance of this meeting. We think it serves our
purposes well.

We have two statements to make, and then I would
like to offer to answer any further questions and
comments from those participating in this debate. Now,
let me very briefly comment not so much on the
substance of the report that has been provided, but on the
methodology at work here.

 

The Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina has most
recently forwarded a progress report on the implementation
of the Peace Agreement, in particular the New York
Declaration. This should stand on its own, although I am
prepared also to answer questions on this point. Regarding
the methodology of the report provided to the Security
Council, let me first make the following points.

First, it is most constructive that the issues are
addressed in such detail, with the problems being
specifically outlined. This moves us away from the
placement of collective guilt or responsibility, from
generalizations and from the entrenching of unhelpful and
illegitimate stereotypes. I hope, too, that Mr. Annabi will
have the opportunity to acknowledge that, besides the
Obstructionists, there are also many - maybe even the
majority - from all ethnic backgrounds who are supportive
of the efforts of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) and who are the backbone of the
growing success of peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In this spirit, I am most proud to ask the Council to
take note, only briefly and without the fanfare and
congratulations that have been offered in some instances,
that the Mission of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the United
Nations is fully integrated, with all entities and ethnic
groups represented. Our work here at the United Nations
reflects goodwill and a professional commitment to peace
in our country.

Secondly, consistent with Ambassador Greenstock's
comments regarding an exit strategy, I think we need to
review the effectiveness of the numerous international
factors operating in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Certainly,
without them the implementation of the Dayton/Paris
accords would not be possible. Nonetheless, with the
maturing presence of a variety of international factors, we
would be wise to evaluate - and certainly we would
encourage such an evaluation - the effectiveness of such
factors in fulfilling their mandate within Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

The representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina are
held accountable by the international community and, most
importantly, by the constituency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina- that is, its voters. I think it is also
appropriate that those international factors be held
accountable by a body such as the Security Council.

Coincidentally, we would also agree with Ambassador
Greenstock's view of the Judicial System Assessment
Programme (J SAP). A change in the methodology of the
work of the local institutions, particularly the judicial
institutions, is as critical as any change in ideology.

Before I surrender the floor, I would also like briefly
to address some of the other comments made by other
members of the Council, Ambassador Lavrov in
particular. The Dayton/Paris accords have constitutionally
enshrined Bosnia and Herzegovina' s full cooperation with
the International Criminal Tribunal. The accords,
particularly in the annexes, in fact also adopted the
mechanisms of the arrests that have been performed. The
Dayton/Paris accords continue to enjoy the full support
and confidence of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Despite the numerous arrests that have been
carried out by the Stabilization Force (SFOR) and other
legal forces within Bosnia and Herzegovina, the sovereign
authority of Bosnia and Herzegovina - that is, the
Presidency - has not sought fit to challenge such arrests.

Secondly, the Mission of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
the United Nations will make a sincere effort to provide
to this Council and this international body as a whole the
accepted positions of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Government as a whole, and sometimes the views, even
if controversial, of important political leaders within
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We do this to inform the
Council rather than to advocate. In that sense, the Council
will in fact soon receive a proposal by a member of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Ante Jelavie.
I must emphasize that this is not necessarily something
that the Mission would agree with, but it is for the
purpose of information and making a helpful contribution
to the debate regarding the accords and their
implementation.

But here, let me offer a very personal View. The
success of the implementation of the Dayton-Paris
Accords, and in particular needed initiatives - or
infusions if you will - such as the New York
Declaration, will be the best counter to those who believe
that the only option for progress is to change the Dayton-
Paris Accords.

Thirdly, although I am not here to defend the words
or actions of any member of the Presidency, I do not
believe that it is either accurate or helpful to characterize
President Izetbegovie's words as stating that the members
of another ethnic group, as such, are enemies. I believe
that Ambassador Lavrov is mistaken in his reading.
However, most important, I do not believe that any - I
emphasize "any" - member of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina sees members of another ethnic group,

 

purely by their ethnicity, as enemies. That would be to
perpetuate the dangerous stereotypes of a vicious cycle of
ethnic hatreds in Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is not the
history of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
To paraphrase the words of the representative of
Jamaica, all of us in Bosnia and Herzegovina know that our
greatest resource is all of our people, and of course our
diversity. I thank that representative for those words.

Let me conclude on a promising note. I thank the
Council for a most constructive debate and for its continued
support. In particular, let me express our appreciation for
the efforts of Mr. Jacques Paul Klein and the entire staff of
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. We are
now partners, with the added benefit of Bosnians of all
backgrounds participating in United Nations police and
peacekeeping efforts. That is good for the United Nations
and for us, and we look forward to enhancing such efforts
and opportunities. In that context, the representative of Italy
will enlighten us all about some further helpful efforts in
that direction.

