Mr. Annabi: Members of the Council have
before them the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK)(S/2004/6l3), which is dated 30 July
2004 and covers the activities of UNMIK and
developments in Kosovo from 1 April to 15 July. I
wish to thank the Council for the opportunity to brief it
on the main highlights of the report.

Following the widespread violence of mid-
March, efforts in Kosovo have focused on creating an
environment in which confidence among Kosovo's
communities can be strengthened and dialogue among
Kosovo's political leaders can move forward. Efforts
have centred on the reconstruction of property
damaged or destroyed during the violence, on creating
conditions for the safe and sustainable return of those
who were forced to flee their homes during the
violence, on establishing the basis for the reform of
local government in Kosovo and on moving forward
the standards implementation process. While there
have been encouraging and concrete developments in
those and other important areas, overall progress
remains fragile and serious concerns persist.

The overall security situation in Kosovo has been
calm and stable, with few significant security
incidents- none of which have been attributed to
extremist groups. While instances of intimidation
against minorities have continued - in particular
against Kosovo Serbs - there has only been one
serious incident that appeared to be ethnically
motivated, namely, the murder on 5 June of a Kosovo
Serb teenager in the village of Gracanica, just outside
Pristina. That murder should be condemned in the
strongest terms. However, we are encouraged by the
rapid apprehension and arrest by Kosovo Albanian
officers of the Kosovo Police Service of two Kosovo
Albanian youths only hours after the murder. Those
arrests have contributed to preventing the escalation of
that incident into wider inter-ethnic violence.

Kosovo's non-majority communities, and in
particular Kosovo Serbs, continue to live in precarious
security conditions. Their freedom of movement and
access to public services and facilities has been further
curtailed by the events of last March. Regrettably, there
have been few signs of tangible improvement since
then. Only through improved security conditions and
freedom of movement can Kosovo's minorities be
confident that their future lies in Kosovo. Only then
will the internally displaced feel confident enough to
return to their homes.

Although there have been important steps
forward in the reconstruction of houses damaged or
destroyed during the March violence, some 2,400
people remain displaced as a result of the unrest.
Limited returns have taken place to temporary
accommodations next to sites where homes are being
reconstructed. But the overall returns process was dealt
a severe blow by the March violence. The effect on
returns to urban areas that had been planned earlier in
the year has been particularly damaging. Despite the
major setback to the returns process caused by the
March violence, UNMIK is working with Kosovo Serb
representatives to identify priority areas for the return
of Kosovo Serbs this year.

Following a slow start, the reconstruction of
damaged or destroyed properties moved forward
significantly during the reporting period. Kosovo's
Provisional Institutions are responsible for post-
violence reconstruction efforts, and an inter-ministerial
Reconstruction Commission has been entrusted with
managing and implementing the reconstruction
programme. As of 30 July, 331 of the 935 damaged or
destroyed properties had been rebuilt, and 277 were
under reconstruction. Contracts for a further 36
properties are about to be awarded, and technical
documentation is currently being prepared for an
additional 160 properties. While those results are
noteworthy, clearly much more needs to be done in this
area. A further acceleration of reconstruction efforts
will be required to ensure that all homes are rebuilt
before the onset of winter and that the reconstruction
of all schools is completed before the start of the
school year.

There have been encouraging steps by Kosovo
Albanian leaders to begin to mend the damage caused
to inter-ethnic dialogue and reconciliation by the
March violence by reaching out to Kosovo's minorities
through visits to their communities. Those actions are
important, but they must be followed by sustained
public commitment and concrete action aimed at
rebuilding trust between Kosovo's communities in
order to ensure that the difficult process of
reconciliation truly takes hold. Following the violence,
a resumption of political dialogue among the leaders of
Kosovo's communities is of paramount importance in
order for Kosovo to make progress.

Despite the Kosovo Serbs' continued non-
participation in Kosovo's Provisional Institutions, the
signing of a joint declaration by Kosovo Serb and
Kosovo Albanian leaders on 14 July, in which leaders
of the two communities committed themselves to
cooperate in a number of areas, was a significant
development. That important statement of intent of
course needs to be followed up by concrete actions.

The recent period has also seen progress in the
standards implementation process. Following the
launching of the revised Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan on 31 March, Kosovo's
Provisional Institutions have shown a renewed
readiness and commitment to move that process
forward. Within the Provisional Institutions, detailed
assignments and timelines for the achievement of
targets set out in the Implementation Plan have been
drawn up, and a monitoring and assessment mechanism
is in place. Those are important steps forward, but
clearly the challenge is for the Provisional Institutions
to effect concrete change in line with the Plan's
requirements, particularly in the areas of minority
protection and the promotion of minority rights, as well
as returns and freedom of movement. Kosovo Serbs are
called upon to engage in the standards implementation
process in order to address their concerns. The
Provisional Institutions should, in particular, focus on
implementing all of the priority actions included in the
Plan following the March violence.

There has been significant progress in joint
efforts by UNMIK and the Provisional Institutions to
initiate a process of reform of local government in
Kosovo. Following extensive deliberations by a joint
UNMIK-Provisional Institutions working group, on
23 July an agreed framework document on local
government was presented, setting out the principles
and framework for the devolution of responsibilities to
the local level. The document, which was approved in
principle by the Kosovo Government, is an important
step forward in developing the recommendations on
possible new institutional arrangements requested by
the Security Council in order to allow for more
effective local government through the devolution of
responsibilities.

The consultation process has been transparent and
inclusive and has benefited from the constant support
of the international community. Although they did not
formally agree to the document, representatives of the
Kosovo Serb community participated in an observer
capacity in the final four meetings of the working
group and contributed substantively to the agreed text.
UNMIK continues to consult with Kosovo Serbs, with
a view to exploring their position on the document. We
urge all stakeholders to continue their active
involvement in this process, with a view to achieving
practical results soon. In due course the Council will
receive recommendations from the Secretary-General
as requested.

Kosovo's Provisional Institutions, and in
particular the Kosovo Government, continued to make
progress in improving their efficiency and
effectiveness. However, the Kosovo Assembly has
continued to focus on symbolic issues to the detriment
of concrete standards implementation and legislative
work aimed at improving the daily lives of all of
Kosovo's residents. This was most evident in the
Assembly's move to propose a comprehensive package
of amendments to the Constitutional Framework.
Despite UNMIK's repeated warnings that such a move
went beyond the Assembly's competence, and despite
the issuance of a press release by UNMIK on 8 July
reiterating that position, Assembly members voted on
28 July to propose a package of 38 amendments to the
Constitutional Framework and to forward those
proposals to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his approval. The proposals,
which have yet to be formally presented to the Special
Representative, impact on a number of areas that are
reserved for the Special Representative under the terms
of the Constitutional Framework. UNMIK's position
on this is clear: it remains open to considering specific
proposals for amendments, provided that they are not
within the reserved powers of the Special
Representative.

Technical preparations for the Kosovo-wide
elections in October have begun, and to a large extent
operational responsibilities for running the elections
will rest for the first time with the people of Kosovo.
There have been difficulties in obtaining the required
level of cooperation and information from the
competent authorities in Belgrade, and as a result the
by-mail operation for the internally displaced outside
Kosovo has encountered serious difficulties. UNMIK
has therefore decided to proceed on the basis of the
information currently available.

While the technical groundwork for inclusive
elections with the participation of all of Kosovo's
communities is being laid, the participation of Kosovo
Serbs in the elections remains unclear. Indications by
some representatives of the Kosovo Serb community of
a willingness to participate are encouraging, and
UNMIK continues to work with the Kosovo Serb
leadership with a view to ensuring their participation.
Participation in the democratic electoral process and a
re-engagement in Kosovo's provisional institutions is
in the interest of Kosovo Serbs, and the international
community's concerted support for efforts to ensure
their participation is crucial.

Overall, one can say that the period since the
violence in March has seen limited and encouraging
progress in Kosovo, but clearly Kosovo's leaders and
population face an uphill challenge in moving Kosovo
forward along the path of normalization, ethnic
reconciliation, strengthening of still fledgling
democratic institutions and creation of a tolerant,
inclusive society. Consistent progress in implementing
the standards for Kosovo is central to the creation of a
democratic and tolerant Kosovo. We are encouraged by
the commitment shown by Kosovo Albanian and
Kosovo Serb leaders to the creation of a multi-ethnic
Kosovo and by efforts to move the political process
forward. Developments since March have shown that,
although responsibility for progress ultimately rests
with Kosovo's representatives and its people, the
international community's and, of course, the
Council's, consistent support and active engagement in
our joint effort in Kosovo remain indispensable.

