Mr. Sadykov (Kazakstan): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), Mr. Kobler, and Ambassador Olof Skoog
for their briefings.

My delegation would like to make the following
observations and recommendations. Kazakhstan
reiterates its commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national
unity of Libya and its institutions under the Libyan
Political Agreement, which must be Libyan led
and Libyan owned. There is no military solution to
the crisis. Rather, the solution involves inclusive
political dialogue, confidence-building measures and
national reconciliation.

We commend the ongoing mediation efforts of the
Special Representative, UNSMIL, the African Union,
the League of Arab States and the European Union.
Moreover, we fully endorse the Secretary-General's
recommendations, which should be fully implemented
in cooperation with regional actors, as well as
neighbouring countries, including Egypt, Tunisia and
Algeria, to support the Libyan political process.

We express our deep concern over the renewed
military escalation and the fragile security situation,
which can undermine the political process and create
a breeding ground for terrorist and violent extremist
groups, including affiliates of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham and Al-Qaida. What is necessary
is to immediately focus on the largely unaddressed
structural political issues and the multiplicity of armed
actors on the group with conflicting agendas. Therefore,
every effort must be made to build and strengthen State
structures, the armed forces and the security sector,
which will in turn enhance political stability.

Regarding the economy, the vulnerabilities of
Libyan society can be overcome only with investments
in sustainable development to ensure socioeconomic
stability and meeting basic needs to support the
political process.

The deteriorating humanitarian situation in Libya is
in urgent need of our attention. Combating transnational
crime, especially in illegal migration, human and drug
trafficking, with the support of UNSMIL, the United
nations system and other international partners, is
equally critical, and we call for coordinated and
comprehensive actions in that regard.

The Security Council should therefore play a
more urgent and proactive role in the resolution
of the Libyan issue, which must not be lost among
other pressing crises. It is necessary to send a clear
message to all parties for the immediate cessation of
military operations, the de-escalation of tensions and
engagement in political dialogue.

Finally, it is increasingly important that all
countries fully implement all sanctions measures
imposed by Security Council resolutions on Libya with
regard to an arms embargo, the travel ban, the assets
freeze and the illicit export of crude oil. Kazakhstan
is ready to work with Council members in support of
peace, security and stability in Libya.

