Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first of all like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this briefing. I am also grateful
for the comprehensive presentations on peacekeeping
operations and inter-mission cooperation provided
by Mr. Herve Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Ameerah Haq,
Under-Secretary-General for Field Support.

The situations where there are peacekeeping
operations are complex and diverse in nature. While
operations must be designed in such a way as to ensure
coherence between the established mandates and the
resources allocated, at times circumstances arise that
exacerbate existing tensions and that present such
operations with unexpected constraints in appropriately
implementing their mandate.

In the current situations, inter-mission cooperation
is a tool that, in the short term, facilitates the exchange
or joint use of resources between peacekeeping
operations and that provides flexibility and timely
support at times when critical gaps are identified.
As part of a coordinated and coherent strategy in
response to shortages or difficulties on the ground, it is
important to be able to temporarily turn to inter-mission
cooperation, taking into account financial and staff
limitations and authorization with regard to assets and
services.
However, in order to ensure effective operational
interaction, cooperation in areas such as exchanging
information and experience gained must be sustained
and coordinated, taking into account the needs identified
by the countries concerned or by the missions in the
region. Effective cooperation between missions must
therefore be part of the planning and implementation
of mandates so as to improve the understanding of
the situation on the ground, in particular when facing
common challenges in areas with a regional dimension.

Activities such as the regular exchange of detailed
reports on the military situation, establishing joint
analysis centres and convening regular meetings
between missions are important in developing
integrated subregional strategies to promote regional
peace and security.

Inter-mission cooperation should take into
account financial and staff constraints and should
be implemented without undermining the original
mandate of each mission. In order to ensure smooth
implementation and positive outcomes, a coherent
planning strategy must be developed that depends on
the coordinated participation of the United Nations
system, with contributing countries approving the use
of troops and equipment and with the political will of
the Governments of the host countries.

An example of inter-mission cooperation is the
stabilization of the border area between Cote d'Ivoire
and Liberia, where the United Nations bodies present
there enhanced their cooperation. We welcome the
increased deployment of the United Nations Operation
in Cote d'Ivoire's uniformed troops along the border
with Liberia. We also acknowledge the significance
of the measures announced by the United Nations
Mission in Liberia, such as the increase in joint patrols
and aerial reconnaissance missions. Those deployed
missions should continue to enhance cooperation,
information exchange, coordination and joint efforts so
as to improve security in the border area.

Institutional coordination and coherence are the
bases for ensuring a credible presence and optimal
results. In that regard, the coordination processes among
the Department of Political Affairs, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office must be strengthened
still further, if possible. In addition, joint processes
among Special Representatives, representatives, Force
Commanders, United Nations offices and country
teams must also be continued.

We also encourage troop- and police-contributing
countries to consider using staff and equipment in
neighbouring missions or cross-border operations,
which should be set up in joint agreements with the
United Nations.

The continuing exchange of logistical resources,
experienced staff and transport, as well as establishing
mechanisms such as joint working groups or
coordination and storage bases, are cooperation
activities that should be carefully considered in order to
ascertain the capacity available and its possible impact
on each specific region.

In conclusion, allow me to point out that in
addressing this topic, the Security Council can help to
improve the coordination of activities and the efficient
use of the logistical and administrative resources
available to the various missions so as to control crises
and stabilize complex situations more effectively.

We underscore the need to carry out an analysis,
from the time of drawing up mandates, of possible
temporary and unforeseen needs that missions may
face. We must continue to promote cooperation between
United Nations missions in order to strengthen political
consistency and to improve the effectiveness of United
Nations operations at the regional level. In that way, we
will improve the capacity to provide an agile response
without affecting the efficiency of each mission and the
fulfilment of their respective mandates.

