Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Last week,
Mr. President, you presided over an open debate on the
working methods of the Security Council (see S/PV.6300). Contributions to the debate by members
and non-members of the Council were rich and
substantive. Barely one week after that fruitful debate,
we are constrained to express our views on issues of
process and substance related to the draft resolution
contained in document S/2010/216, on the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO).

With regard to process, we are dissatisfied that
the draft resolution was negotiated by a handful - at
best, a minority - rather than by the collective
membership of the Council. That does not measure up
to the expectation of and quest for inclusiveness and
transparency in the work of the Council. Moreover, the
difficulty of incorporating changes to the draft text of
the Group of Friends has really damaged the spirit of
accommodation, flexibility and openness that
10-33760
underpins such negotiations. We feel that this does not
augur well for the reputation of the Council or, more
important, for the preservation of its unity.

There is also a substantive issue at stake. At its
2984th meeting on 29 April 1991, the Security Council
established through resolution 690 (1991) the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara. Central to MINURSO's mandate is the
referendum in Western Sahara as part of a peaceful
negotiated settlement of an intractable problem. In
essence, MINURSO derives its legal basis and
relevance from that resolution. We are deeply troubled
by the lack of reference to resolution 690 (1991) in the
current draft resolution.

All States Members of the United Nations have
emphasized the need for coherence and consistency in
the policies we promote. In 2005, human rights
received a major boost with the establishment of the
Human Rights Council. Collectively, Members
reaffirmed their commitment and obligation to promote
universal respect for and the observance and protection
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
in accordance with the United Nations Charter. This is
all the more true in cases in which parties to a conflict
accuse each other of human rights violations.

Not long ago, we were reminded of the need for
the Council to be told what needs to be said, and not
what needs to be heard. In other words, hard and bitter
truths should be told. In that spirit, we would like to
say that it is a matter of regret that, with respect to
Western Sahara, there is not only an apparent
reluctance of the Council to be coherent, consistent and
forthcoming on the important question of human rights,
but also an attempt to downplay the seriousness of their
abuse. The failure of the Council to address the human
rights challenges in Western Sahara is doing serious
harm to its credibility and commitment to the
protection and defence of human rights.

Only two days ago, more than 30 Nigerian
non-governmental organizations and well-meaning
individuals in Abuja called on the United Nations to
protect human rights in Western Sahara and to enable
the Saharan people to exercise their right to self-
determination and independence. Indeed, in his latest
report to the Council (S/2010/l75), the Secretary-
General has expressed concern over the human rights
challenges in Western Sahara. The minimum this
Council can do is to be seen to promote and vigorously
3
defend human rights as a universal principle in all
circumstances.

The Council should not portray itself as
sacrificing fundamental principles on the alluring altar
of expedience. There is neither a logical explanation
for nor a justification of the fact that all United Nations
peacekeeping missions, except that in Western Sahara,
have human rights components in their mandates. The
Council bears a moral burden and duty to explain the
non-inclusion of a provision in the current draft
resolution calling on the parties to engage in dialogue
with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. We are convinced of
the necessity of such a call to encourage respect for
and the promotion and defence of human rights by all
parties as a universal principle.

Nigeria appreciates the efforts made by all
concerned in preparing and presenting the draft
resolution before us. We take note of the work of the
Group of Friends seized with the matter, and encourage
it to redouble its efforts in that regard. However, it is
Nigeria's abiding hope that, at the end of the day, the
long-suffering people of Western Sahara will come to
know peace and that the logic of peace and respect for
the fundamental freedoms of all the people of the
territory will prevail.

Finally, we strongly suggest that future
negotiations on MINURSO be broadened from the
onset in order to avoid the cumbersome process of
renegotiating the agreements and delicate balances
achieved by the Group of Friends. Perhaps the Council
needs to revisit the role of the Group of Friends, given
the experience of 2009 and the negotiations that led to
the draft resolution before us.

Nigeria will support the draft resolution before
us.

