The President (interpretation from Russian): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Georgia and Germany, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Georgia, His Excellency Mr. Irakli
Menagarishvili.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Menagarishvili
(Georgia) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Henze
(Germany) took the seat reserved for him at the side
of the Council Chamber.

The President (interpretation from Russian): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, documents S/l998/647 and
addendum 1.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1998/699, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by France, Germany, the Russian
Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.

I should also like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to the following other documents:
S/l998/649, S/l998/650, S/l998/655 and S/l998/660,
which contain letters dated 15, 15, 16 and 17 July 1998,
respectively, from the Permanent Representative of
Georgia to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council; and S/ 1998/645, which contains
a letter dated 14 July 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.

The first speaker inscribed on my list is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Georgia, His Excellency Mr. Irakli
Menagarishvili, to whom I give the floor.


