The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Croatia in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it was so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Simonovie
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Prevlaka, document
S/2000/1251.

Members of the Council also have before them
document 8/2001/34, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to the following documents:
S/2000/1235, letter dated 22 December 2000 from
Yugoslavia addressed to the President of the Security
Council; and S/2001/13, letter dated 5 January 2001
from Croatia addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution (8/2001/34)
before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Bangladesh, China, Colombia, France, Ireland,
Jamaica, Mali, Mauritius, Norway, Russian
Federation, Singapore, Tunisia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1335 (2001).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.10 pm.

