Mr. Konishi (Japan): At the outset, I wish to convey
to the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Brahimi, the sincere appreciation of the
Government of Japan for his effective efforts in defusing
the tensions between Iran and the Taliban in Afghanistan
and the surrounding region. Indeed, the easing of tensions
between the two parties is a prerequisite to the resumption
of international efforts to promote the peaceful settlement
of the conflict in that country.

 

Having said that, however, I regret to note that the
parties to the conflict in Afghanistan have not shown any
willingness to heed the voice of the international
community and enter into direct negotiations aimed at a
ceasefire or the achievement of peace. In August, the
worsening security situation forced United Nations agencies
to evacuate their personnel from Afghanistan. The Security
Council responded by convening a meeting later that month
at which it adopted resolution 1193 (1998) and by issuing
a presidential statement in September. That these efforts
have not resulted in any improvement in the situation is a
source of grave concern. Japan hopes that the security
situation in Afghanistan will significantly improve so that
United Nations personnel can return to the region and
resume their work as soon as possible.

Japan concurs with the view expressed in the report of
the Secretary-General that it is now necessary to build upon
the results of the efforts of Ambassador Brahimi by
dispatching a team to investigate the killing of the Iranian
diplomats in Mazar-e-Sharif on 8 August - an inhuman
act that escalated the tensions between Iran and the Taliban.
We also support the Secretary-General's proposal that the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan monitor the
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan, provided that the
safety and security of the members of this new unit are
guaranteed and its mandate is clearly determined.
The Government of Japan continues to believe that, in
addition to peacemaking, the United Nations must play a
central role in addressing a range of issues in Afghanistan,
including by improving humanitarian conditions, providing
assistance for internally displaced persons and refugees and
combating the production and trafficking of illegal drugs.
We thus value highly the efforts of the United Nations in
these areas over the past year, as described in the
Secretary-General's report. Among the efforts being made
by the international community to complement those of the
United Nations are those made by the Afghanistan Support
Group. As a matter of fact, a two-day meeting of the group
concluded just today in Tokyo. At the meeting, which was
hosted by Japan, the Group emphasized the importance of
the early return of international humanitarian personnel to
Afghanistan and the resumption of their assistance
activities. It also called upon all factions, and particularly
the Taliban, to guarantee the safety and security of those
personnel.

Japan supports the "Points of Common Understanding"
of the "six plus two" group, which encourage direct talks
between the parties to the conflict with the aim of achieving
an immediate ceasefire and national reconciliation. In that
context, my Government has steadfastly and repeatedly
called upon the parties concerned to exercise maximum
restraint and strive to reach a peaceful settlement. On 23
September, Foreign Minister Komura spoke with Foreign
Minister Aziz of Pakistan, asking that he relay to the
Taliban Japan's strong View that the situation cannot be
stabilized by military means, but only through a political
solution. Two days later, on 25 September, he conveyed
the same message to Foreign Minister Kharrazi of Iran.
During the month of October Japan repeated that message
to the Taliban directly and called upon it and the other
parties to the conflict to heed the call of the international
community to make good-faith efforts to protect human
rights, halt the cultivation, production and trafficking of
illegal drugs, and suppress international terrorism. It
hopes that all the countries concerned will take active
initiatives to address these issues.

On this occasion, permit me to reiterate Japan's
concern at reports that the great Buddhist statue in
Bamyan has been damaged and to call upon all parties to
ensure that this precious cultural artifact is protected for
future generations.

In closing, I would like to express the Japanese
delegation's strong support for the draft resolution, which
has been submitted at the initiative of the Russian
Federation.

