Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Indonesia would like to
thank Special Envoy Said Djinnit for his comprehensive
briefing. Let me also take this opportunity to commend
Mr. Djinnit's tireless efforts in and resolute commitment
to creating peace in the Great Lakes region. We wish
him well and every success in his future endeavours.

I will focus my comments on three pertinent points.

First, the root causes of the conflict should be
addressed. The Great Lakes region has been marred
by conflicts, distrust and humanitarian difficulties
for years. The Secretary-General's report (S/2019/229)
notes that insecurity in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Central African Republic and Burundi have
had a negative impact on peace and stability in the Great
Lakes region, which remain fragile, in particular with
regard to threats by armed groups, illicit exploitation
and trade of natural resources and the outbreak of Ebola
virus disease in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The lack of development is also one of the leading
causes of instability in the region. Nevertheless, we
recently saw peaceful general elections and a peaceful
transfer of power in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the signing of a global peace agreement in
the Central African Republic. That forward momentum
is indeed an improvement in the political situation of
the Great Lakes region. I echo the Secretary-General
in recognizing the importance of a comprehensive
approach to addressing the root causes of conflict in
the region. Trust is important and partnership is key.

Secondly, relief for the humanitarian situation
must be prioritized. At the end of last year, about
11.2 million people in the Great Lakes region were
forcibly displaced and more than 22.7 million people
needed food assistance. However, in 2018, the funding
of humanitarian responses in the region was at less
than 50 per cent of requirements and in one country
was as low as 33 per cent of requirements. That cannot
go on much longer. We cannot hope for a peaceful
Great Lakes region while failing to provide the means
of assistance. That is like expecting a tree to grow
while there is a drought and no rain. The international
community should honour its commitment to assist the
countries of the region and improve its humanitarian
assistance to them in a timely fashion, including
through the work of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Peacebuilding Fund.

Thirdly, the work of regional organizations and
United Nations missions in the region should be
supported by the Security Council. We recognize the role
played by the regional and subregional organizations,
such as the African Union, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern Africa
Development Community, who, together with the United
Nations, are the guarantors of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, which was signed by 13
countries of the region.

Indonesia welcomes the cooperation among the
countries of the Great Lakes region in responding to
the threat from armed groups and encourages those
countries to promote disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. Nevertheless, assistance is needed to
enable them to do it.

United Nations peacekeepers, through engagement
with local communities, are able to disarm and
demobilize members of armed groups, as evidenced
by Indonesian peacekeepers on the ground in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
who have received weapons from armed groups in
recent weeks. United Nations peacekeeping missions,
such as MONUSCO, the United Nations Mission in
the Republic of South Sudan and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic, play crucial roles in
the region. We call on the members of the Council
to continue their support for the United Nations
peacekeeping missions in the Great Lakes region.

Addressing the complex peace and security
challenge in the region is not easy, but let us strive to
reach that goal together to ensure that peace will not
merely be a pipe dream but a reality for all.

