Ms. Rice (United States of America): Last
Saturday, I had the great honour of heading the United
States delegation to Juba to celebrate South Sudan's
independence. It was a deeply moving day. After half a
century of war, at a cost of more than 2 million lives,
the Republic of South Sudan can now finally determine
its own future. The United States salutes the courage
and the sacrifice of the people of South Sudan, who
never abandoned hope.

After so many years of bitter conflict, South
Sudan's independence occurred peacefully and
democratically through a referendum - a heartening
way for the world's newest nation to be born. I
welcome Vice-President Machar and congratulate the
people of the Republic of South Sudan. We are
delighted that Vice-President Machar Teny-Dhurgon
was here to represent his new Government at a meeting
at which the Security Council unanimously
recommended that his country be admitted as the
United Nations 193rd Member State. We also
commend the Government of the Sudan's decision to
be the first country to recognize South Sudan's
independence. We welcome all efforts to forge a
relationship between the Sudan and South Sudan that is
rooted in mutual respect and cooperation, and that
strengthens the viability, security and prosperity of
both States. By continuing on the path of peace, the
Government of the Sudan can redefine its relationship
with the international community and secure a brighter
future for its people.

The Security Council remains fully engaged in
helping both countries towards their shared goals of
peace and stability. On 8 July, the Council unanimously
authorized the new United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS). UNMISS will
assist the Government as it builds a new nation,
including on issues of peacebuilding, development,
security and protection.

But as we all know, this moment of promise is
also fragile and fraught. The Sudan and South Sudan
must work hard to secure an enduring peace and two
viable States coexisting as peaceful neighbours. It is
vital that both countries work with the AU High-Level
Implementation Panel to swiftly resolve all outstanding
issues. The parties need to finalize arrangements on the
border, citizenship, oil and other issues if they are to
forge an enduring peace.

A permanent resolution of Abyei's status remains
elusive. Despite the Agreement on Temporary
Arrangements for the Administration and Security of
the Abyei Area and the imminent deployment of the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei, the
situation in Abyei is still extremely volatile. An
estimated 100,000 people remain displaced from their
homes. Meanwhile, brutal fighting between the

Sudanese Armed Forces and the troops of the Sudan
People's Liberation Army (SPLA)-North has displaced
more than 70,000 people in Southern Kordofan. The
Sudanese army is continuing and intensifying aerial
bombardments that are killing civilians.

On 28 June, the Government of the Sudan and the
SPLA-North agreed to a framework of political and
security principles for Southern Kordofan and Blue
Nile states, but the Government of the Sudan's
commitment to that agreement has wavered. Both
parties need to agree immediately to a cessation of
hostilities. The Violence, the human rights abuses and
the deliberate obstruction of access for humanitarian
agencies must end.

Given the ongoing hostilities and abuses in
Southern Kordofan and the vulnerability of
neighbouring Blue Nile, we deeply regret the
Government of the Sudan's decision to compel the
United Nations departure from those two states. The
United Nations should be allowed to maintain a
presence in those areas to help distribute humanitarian
aid, protect civilians and implement any cessation-of-
hostilities agreement.

The challenges are great, but they are by no
means insurmountable. The Security Council has done
its utmost to support this process, and the Council and
my Government will remain deeply engaged in
supporting the Republic of South Sudan at this critical
juncture and into the future.

My own country's history has taught us that it
takes moral courage to attain freedom and make
freedom's promise real for all citizens, and we have
learned that this work is never done. We have great
faith in the people of South Sudan. We expect that they
will create a Government that works for the good of all
people and for the stability of the region, and thereby
create a country that strengthens this community of
sovereign nations.

As I said in Juba on Saturday, a nation born from
conflict need not live in conflict. In this spirit, and with
great hope for the future of the world's newest nation,
the United States wholeheartedly supports South
Sudan's application for membership in the United
Nations. Congratulations, and we look forward to
welcoming South Sudan.
