Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me,
first of all, to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting, which gives us an opportunity to discuss
in the Security Council a matter of great importance
and relevance for the international community as a
whole with representatives of various regions, namely,
the role of the United Nations in post-conflict
situations. This meeting also serves as an appropriate
culmination of the President's excellent guidance of the
Council in the month that ends today. We would also
like to express our gratitude for the participation of the
Secretary-General and the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council in
today's meeting.

The maintenance of peace and security, the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the achievement of
general and complete disarmament are universally
recognized principles of the United Nations. As has
been repeatedly stated this morning, one of the most
important functions that the United Nations has carried
out with increasing intensity in this area in recent years
has been its work in post-conflict situations, which has
acquired particular momentum, gravity and frequency
in the various regions of the world. In that regard, it is
worth keeping in mind the generic, underlying
character of every post-conflict situation.

We must start with the supposition that the pre-
existing order has either been shut out or obliterated
following the death, destruction of property and social
trauma resulting from the resort to violence of the
parties involved in a clash of interests. Affected
societies require that a new order be built that will,
above all else, impede a return to conflict. Such an
undertaking necessities the emergence of a legitimate
centre of power that expresses the self-determination of
its people. It also requires international recognition that
enables its full integration into the community of
nations. Such a society, regime or new order will
therefore have to have international legitimacy.

It is in such cases that the United Nations has, in
its brief history, endeavoured to play a decisive role
through the Security Council. It has sought to do so by
monitoring ceasefire agreements and by establishing
peacekeeping forces, as well as by setting up more
complex and demanding operations, including the
administration of territories experiencing conflict in
every aspect. In some cases that has included
developing the foundations necessary to establish the
institutional capacity of a State. The United Nations
has done such work on the basis of its nature as the
unique and irreplaceable institution operating on behalf
of the entire international community under the
authority and mandate stemming from a Charter
universally accepted and respected and in the name of
the entire international community.

However, we are well aware of the fact that
results have been mixed over the years. From the
deployment of peacekeeping operations in the post-
colonial world after 1958 to the 40 peacekeeping
operations deployed between 1988 and 1999, the
United Nations has experienced success and failure in
equal measure. The cases of Angola, Mozambique and
Timor-Leste - which just two days ago we were
pleased to discuss around this table - illustrate the
fact that the contribution of the United Nations to
peacemaking, and even to the building of a new State,
can indeed be very successful. At the same time,
however, the debacles in the former Yugoslavia,
Somalia and Rwanda are still in recent memory.
There are also situations of protracted
complexity. While we can today take note of the
stabilization, creation of institutions and beginnings of
a real political process in Kosovo, we must also
acknowledge the difficulties in controlling violence
and the ethnic harassment and obstacles to domestic
dialogue that exist there. In other words, the difficulty
and complexity of the task do not guarantee a process
of ongoing improvement, but rather a permanent and
inevitable learning process in which every situation has
its own particular character.

Throughout the years, we have observed that
some situations seem to guarantee that there will be
serious problems. When action is undertaken under
conditions of an unstable ceasefire; when the Security
Council adopts unclear mandates or establishes
missions lacking adequate resources; when the Council
does not follow up its own mandates - in short, when
there is not the necessary political will to act
multilaterally in utilizing the mechanisms and
provisions established by the Charter, problems will
emerge that will be difficult to overcome.

On the other hand, having the participation of the
populations concerned and their prompt embrace of the
principle of self-determination, as well as the existence
of cooperation and dialogue with regional agencies and
bodies - which, as we saw yesterday with the example
of Africa, are capable of taking the initiative to
strengthen and back up local efforts - and, above all,
the resolve of the members of the Security Council to
act in concert on the basis of concrete and responsible
agreements that are rooted in the belief that multilateral
action is indispensable - all this may not necessarily
guarantee the absence of problems, but it will establish
a stable foundation for peace.

Notwithstanding the enormous problems in
Afghanistan, we can today denote a legitimate power
base there that will make it possible to build a country
different from what it used to be. In order for that to
occur, however, the United Nations must possess the
determination and political will I have just mentioned.

In addition, the United Nations made a significant
contribution in the Americas in the early 1990s in
El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua, where it helped
to end the war that was destroying those societies. The
appointment of a permanent representative of the
Secretary-General, the establishment of military
observer missions, the creation of human rights
commissions and later the electoral process itself made
it possible for the United Nations to orchestrate the
dialogue between the various factions, put an end to
violence and, above all, turn that process, the last
conflict of the cold war, into a legitimate solution that
involved the entire region, while, at the same time,
preserving the interests involved and launching the
democratic process in those countries.

It seems to us that these experiences could be
extremely useful for the Council as it considers the
grave problems that it needs to resolve in coming
weeks, to which the Secretary-General so rightly
referred at the beginning of this meeting.

If we look ahead at the situation in Iraq, it would
seem necessary to collate and learn from these
experiences. They may help to ensure that the vital role
of the United Nations in the rebuilding of that country
is secured - something that all members of the
Council have stated that they wished to see.

