Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Undoubtedly, the decision to convene this
meeting as an open meeting was appropriate and
timely, as it has enabled the international community,
on whose behalf the Security Council acts, to see and
hear the Council working openly, not behind closed
doors, a format that is in contravention of the
admittedly provisional rules of procedure. That,
however, is an issue that we might take up in a
different context at another time.

At the outset, allow me to welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Somalia and to wish him every
success in his mission to the Security Council. This is
his first personal visit following the formation of the
Transitional National Government in his country.

In considering the Secretary-General's report, we
note that it undertakes a comprehensive review of
various issues and warns of many problems. The
conclusions reached in the report, however, do not
actually follow from the comprehensive review. For
example, in paragraph 35, the report states that "The
humanitarian situation in Somalia remains grave."
Then, in paragraph 41, it refers to a complex challenge
in the humanitarian sphere resulting from the security
situation in the country. The report also states that the
continuing situation in Somalia might turn the country
into a haven for terrorists or a launching pad for
terrorist organizations. It also reminds us, in paragraph
61, that "The Security Council has noted that the Arta
peace process is the most viable basis for peace and
national reconciliation in Somalia."

What has Arta produced? It has produced the
Transitional National Government. Obviously, it
follows that if the Arta process is the most viable basis,
it must be built upon in order to complete the peace
process and achieve national reconciliation in Somalia.

What, then, has been done by the Security
Council, the ultimate body responsible for international
peace and security? In fact, it disturbs us Africans that
there are double standards in the work of the Security
Council. When the issue concerns another continent,
the Council even calls meetings on weekends. For
example, when the issue is East Timor, the Security
Council has met on a weekend. Many other issues
receive the same treatment. Decisions are made and
there is much ado; implementation is monitored daily,
if not hourly. That is not the case with the situation in
Africa, and we wonder why. Is Africa not a part of the
United Nations? The Group of African States
comprises 52 States, almost one third of the
Organization's membership. Is it not enough for that
continent to have endured such a long period of
colonialism, with not only its natural resources but also
its human wealth pillaged for centuries?

To those who say that the Organization's greatest
expenditure is on peacekeeping operations in Africa, I
would reply that three quarters of the Security
Council's activities pertain to Africa. Three quarters of
the Council's agenda, as stated by previous and current
Council members, is devoted to Africa.

In order for Somalia to find stability, the Arta
basis must be built upon. It would be illogical to say
that we ought to leave it to the Somalis themselves.
The people of Somalia, or at least some of them, are
responsible for the situation in Somalia as it stands
today. How can we expect the warlords, who lined their
pockets as the result of wars, to relinquish benefits that
they are convinced will continue as long as the current
situation lasts? With peace, stability, a unified land and
people and a strong central authority in Somalia, they
will lose all of what they see as the benefits of the
current situation.

The international community must stand shoulder
to shoulder with the Transitional National Government,
truly chosen by the majority of the people of Somalia.
There is no alternative. The Security Council cannot
remain neutral. Neutrality only strengthens the hand of
the warlords or sends them an indirect message that the
Security Council does not really care and that they may
continue their warring activities in the country.

The shortest route to regaining stability in
Somalia is to support the Transitional National
Government and enable it to exert and extend its
authority throughout Somalia. Ultimately, it is indeed
transitional: it is not a permanent Government. When
the transitional period ends, the people of Somalia will
be able to elect their representatives and their
legitimate Government at the ballot box. Unless we
support the Transitional National Government through
decisions and resolutions of the Security Council, how
can we expect stability to return to Somalia?

The Security Council's situation reminds me of
one man asking another, "Where is your ear?" and the
other replying, "There it is", forgetting the closer of his
two ears. The Security Council is doing the same thing:
it is looking for a way, but one that is a dead end. The
shortest and least costly way to restore stability to the
Somali people is before the Council. As I said during
the Council's meeting on the situation in Africa, my
country had done its utmost, in cooperation with our
brothers in Somalia, even before the Transitional
National Government was formed. We summoned all
the factions, and they met for the first time in Libya.
We supported our brothers in Djibouti. We are now
supporting the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the neighbouring countries,
because we are confident that our brothers in Djibouti,
Ethiopia and Kenya have a major role to play in
restoring stability in Somalia. We are confident that
they will spare no effort in achieving that goal.
Stability in Somalia means stability for them.
Instability in Somalia also means instability in
neighbouring countries. Libya has given much and will
continue to do so. During President Hassan's recent
visit to Libya, agreement was reached that Libya would
provide the funds necessary for the Transitional
National Government to buy back weapons from the
people. I hope that those weapons will be burned, just
as they were burned after being collected in Sierra
Leone.

As I mentioned earlier, Libya has set aside $7.5
million, through our foreign exchange bank, in
agreement with our brothers in Mogadishu. We have
also provided assistance of various kinds, including
vehicles. We have helped to train police officers, and
provided them with uniforms. We have assisted in the
operation and expansion of power-generation plants.
We have also lent assistance in the fisheries sector; we
have had a longstanding policy on the import of
livestock from Somalia following that country's
independence; and we have also been cooperating
actively in the area of agriculture.

A Sahelo-Saharan States conference was held in
my country in which 18 countries participated,
including Somalia, which is part of that subregional
group. Indeed, the Minister for Foreign Affairs came
here directly from that meeting in Tripoli.

The Conference expressed its support for the
Transitional National Government in its efforts to
rehabilitate and rebuild the State of Somalia. An appeal
was made to the international community as a whole, to
the United Nations and to African groups in particular
to pool their efforts to promote dialogue aimed at
reconciliation in Somalia and durable peace in the
country.

I have transmitted to the Council today the
resolutions of the conference. We hope that they will
be issued as a document of the Security Council,
whether relating to Somalia or to other regional issues.

Let me conclude by saying that I was truly
delighted to hear the statements made by many
members of the Security Council. For example, those
by Singapore, Syria and France were more than
encouraging and very important. Even if only a portion
of those statements is implemented and followed up,
the Security Council will have taken a first step on the
right track as far as Somalia is concerned.

We hope that we will not find ourselves
compelled to express our bitterness anew vis-a-vis the
use of double standards. We Africans are very sensitive
to this issue.

