Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this briefing and for giving us
an opportunity to take the floor.

We appreciate the efforts made by the Security
Council to visit Bangladesh and Myanmar to witness
at first hand the evolving Rohingya humanitarian
crisis. It has been generally acknowledged that the
visit left indelible impressions on those who were part
of the team. The Council reaffirmed its custodianship
of this issue through its meaningful engagements and
pronouncements during the visit. We thank in particular
the Permanent Representatives of Kuwait, Peru and
the United Kingdom for leading the visit and for their
respective briefings this afternoon.

Our Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina
reaffirmed Bangladesh's steadfast commitment to
providing humanitarian assistance to the Rohingya and
to remaining engaged with Myanmar in good faith to
implement the bilateral agreements concluded between
our two Governments. Yet, mindful of the limits of our
bilateral engagement with Myanmar under the present
circumstances, the Prime Minister and other dignitaries
conveyed four expectations to the Council, which I
now paraphrase: first, continued and decisive action to
ensure the safe and sustainable return of the Rohingya;
secondly, adoption of a Security Council draft resolution
building on the presidential statement adopted last year
(S/PRST/2017/22); thirdly, prevailing on Myanmar to
unconditionally implement the recommendations of the
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State; and, fourthly,
ensuring accountability and justice.

We note that the Council's press statement adopted
following the visit (SC/13331) makes reference to some
of those issues. For those of us used to the dynamics of
the intergovernmental processes at the United Nations,
it may be somewhat comprehensible that a consensus-
based press statement can be circumscribed in its
aspirations. However, it is difficult to explain such
dynamics to the hundreds of thousands of Rohingya who
unequivocally voiced their concerns and expectations
to the visiting Council members.

We are aware of the Council's scheduled
programme to hold consultations immediately after this
briefing. I shall therefore limit myself to making four
specific points.

First, there should not be any doubt that the
voluntary, safe and dignified return of the Rohingya to
their homes in Myanmar's Rakhine state is an objective
shared among all Member States. But voluntary
repatriation does not only entail the formation of a few
high-profile committees without any demonstrable
outcome and the erection of some reception centres
almost in the middle of nowhere. In their briefings, the
Permanent Representatives of Kuwait and the United
Kingdom clearly alluded to the prevailing uncertainty.
The issue of incomplete forms shared with the Myanmar
side is but one manifestation of that.

The Rohingya need to get concrete answers to
some of the fundamental questions about the Myanmar
authorities' immediate-to-long-term plans with regard
to their citizenship, freedom of movement, human rights
and socioeconomic development. It would facetious to
claim readiness for repatriation to start at the soonest
while there is no plausible response yet for the ways the
Rohingya can be assured of an end to their systematic
persecution, dehumanization and dispossession in
Myanmar. The aerial views of large tracts of burned
villages and obliterated homes in nearly 400 villages
in northern Rakhine state hardly evoke confidence
among the Rohingya about the prospect for return
to their homes in Rakhine state. On their behalf, the
relevant United Nations agencies should be able to
vouch for a situation conducive to their safe, dignified
and sustainable return.
It is crucial that the provisions of the bilateral
arrangement between the Government of Myanmar
and the relevant United Nations agencies are
transparently shared with the Rohingya and other
affected communities. It is crucial that the 4,000 to
5,000 Rohingya taking shelter along the border, which
Council members witnessed, be repatriated and that
the existing camps for internally displaced persons be
dismantled in order to generate confidence among the
Rohingya regarding their safe and dignified return.

The Myanmar Minister for Social Welfare, during
his visit to the camps in Cox's Bazar, added to confusion
among the Rohingya about prospects for their so-called
resettlement and verification. It is also worth noting
that the Myanmar side refrains from mentioning the
real ethnic affiliation of those it has claimed to have
verified. It is typical of the Myanmar authorities to shift
the blame by twisting narratives. It is unfortunate that
the Permanent Representative of Myanmar continued
that trend today regarding the question of developments
along the border. He also shared some fabricated
narratives about the presence of terrorists and violent
extremists in the camps, which could be considered
evidence of the ongoing attitude of the Myanmar
authorities towards the forcibly displaced Rohingya.

Secondly, the international concern over the
impending monsoon and its potential adverse impact
on the forcibly displaced Rohingya is indeed timely
and useful. We shared with Council members a brief
account of the preparedness measures undertaken so
far. In addition to the 5,800 acres of land allocated for
the Rohingya so far, our Government has allocated
500 acres for the relocation of extremely vulnerable
members of the group. The Government is in the
process of finding more land for safe relocations,
and the local administration remains seized with that
issue. A total of 480 Rohingya have been trained as
volunteers by the cyclone-preparedness programme for
emergency response.

Thirdly, on the question of accountability, we hear
the voices being raised loud and clear. We are following
with interest the request by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for a ruling from
the Court's Pre-Trial Division on the ICC's jurisdiction
over the forced deportation of the Rohingya to a State
party to the Rome Statute. In view of the obstruction
being faced by the Human Rights Council's Special
Rapporteur and the fact-finding mission, there is a
suggestion gaining ground in favour of setting up
a so-called triple-I mechanism - an international,
impartial and independent mechanism - to undertake
an independent and impartial investigation and gather
evidence in a coordinated fashion.

It is evident that the Rohingya have a legitimate
demand for breaking the culture of impunity as a critical
confidence-building measure. My Council colleagues
who visited the camps recently will perhaps recall the
numerous lost, traumatized and emaciated faces they
witnessed on people holding placards and banners
calling for justice and accountability for the egregious
crimes committed against them. We believe that they
would have listened to the Council today about the
Myanmar authorities' invitation to submit allegations
of crimes committed against them to Myanmar courts.
However, that invitation raises the question of how the
Rohingya would be able to gain access to the judicial
system in Myanmar when the issue of their citizenship
remains unresolved.

Fourthly, and lastly, it is perhaps high time for the
Council to consider working towards a resolution on the
situation in Myanmar. The way the crisis has evolved
so far makes it abundantly clear that the Council
should remain engaged with this issue on a regular and
periodic basis. The Myanmar leadership has reportedly
underscored the need for time to address the underlying
root causes of the crisis in Myanmar's Rakhine state.
The Council should certainly recognize the importance
of having a resolution to accompany Myanmar in that
process, including by voicing its support for the work of
the Secretary-General's newly appointed Special Envoy
on Myanmar. We urge Council members to seriously
reflect on this possibility during its consultations later
this afternoon.

The meeting rose at 5p.m.
