Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of my people
and my Government, as well as on my own behalf, I
wish to join the other members of the Security Council
in expressing my sadness at the tragic and unexpected
loss of our good friend, Mr. Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue.
We extend our condolences to his family and friends,
the C6te d'Ivoire mission staff and to the people and the
Government of Cote d'Ivoire. We have all lost a good
friend, a great colleague and an excellent diplomat.
I personally mourn because I feel that I have lost a
brother.

Turning to the subject of today's meeting, Bolivia
welcomes the presence of the Vice-President of the
Republic of Colombia, Mr. Oscar Adolfo Naranjo
Trujillo; the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ms. Maria
Angela Holguin Cuellar; and our sister Ms. Mejia Ve'lez,
Permanent Representative of Colombia. Likewise,
we wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission in Colombia, Mr. Jean Arnault, for sharing
with the Council the quarterly report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia (S/2018/279). We also wish to thank
Mr. Arnault for his excellent work, his commitment,
his dedication to this issue and for his professionalism.
We also welcome the presence at this meeting of the
many ambassadors and representatives from my region
of Latin America and the Caribbean. Their presence
demonstrates the unwavering commitment of my entire
region to the peace process.

In the various missions carried out by the Security
Council during the past two administrations, Bolivia
has seen the peace process in Colombia held up as an
example by several leaders from around the world.
The determination and commitment of both parties
throughout that time has shown that it is possible to
achieve results that many deemed impossible. They
ended halfa century of war and gave hope to millions of
Colombians living in fear. They made it possible for the
members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) to surrender
their weapons and become a political party; and they
have turned Colombia into a point of reference for other
countries going through similar situations.

The participation of the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Comun (FARC) in the 11 March
legislative elections despite the obstacles is a historic
event and a significant step forward in the transition
of Colombia from conflict to peace. The peace process
today is perhaps confronting the most difficult
challenges since its start. Frustration, a sense of
uncertainty and hate speech are on the rise in the face
of the upcoming elections and issues that neither the
Government nor FARC have been able to confront.
In spite of all that, hearing the President of Colombia
and the leader of FARC reiterate their unshakeable
commitment to the process sustains the hope of all
those who trust that Colombia has embraced a path to
peace from which there is no turning back.

There are disagreements that will not disappear
overnight. The war has left consequences that cannot
be easily resolved and that do not allow the people that
have lived in conflict to flourish fully. However, after
seven attempts at dialogue over many years, Colombia
finally reached a Peace Agreement that satisfied
the needs of both parties and turned to the Security
Council to support its implementation. The trust placed
in the Council demonstrates the importance of this
United Nations organ for the world. Ifthe peace process
does not move ahead, it will not be not only a failure
for Colombia but for all of us. It will be a failure for
negotiation, which is one of the most important political
tools that make it possible for humankind to peacefully
resolve their disputes. That is one of the fundamental
values on which the Organization is based.

Six months ago, we began the most complicated
phase of the implementation of the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace, which is the political, economic and
social reintegration into society of former FARC-EP
combatants. We commend the measures devised by
the Government to overcome pending issues in the
areas of legal, security and socioeconomic guarantees.
However, it is important to step up efforts to accelerate
the implementation of those measures.

First and foremost, Bolivia is of the View that to
guarantee appropriate reintegration into civilian life,
it is essential to comply fully with what is set out in
the agreement in terms of legal reintegration. We urge
progress in certifying and applying amnesty measures
for the approximately 400 former FARC-EP members
who remain imprisoned. We also underscore the start
of the activities of a Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
It is important to uphold the scope of the Special
Jurisdiction so that the victims at the centre of these
efforts can access justice and truth.

Secondly, it is essential to strengthen security in
the areas that have been most affected by the conflict.
The increase during the reporting period in the
number of murders of social leaders, former FARC-
EP members and their family members are alarming.
Most of the killings have taken place outside the areas
previously controlled by FARC-EP, which means that
it is important that the authorities provide security
guarantees to surrounding zones.

Thirdly, it is important to implement concrete
measures to make progress in comprehensive rural
reform. We believe that formalizing access to land is
essential to guarantee stable and lasting peace. That
could bolster the trust of the former combatants in the
reintegration process.

With regard to the process of negotiations with
the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional, we would like to
express our support for the resumption of dialogue.
That should lead to the establishment of a definitive
cessation of hostilities and a process that makes it
possible to achieve just and lasting peace.

In conclusion, we would like to highlight the
commitment, dedication and work being carried
out daily by Special Representative Arnault and the
entire Mission team. We would also like to reiterate
the wholehearted support of Bolivia for the peace
process led by the Government of Colombia and
FARC. We underscore the conviction and commitment
demonstrated by President Juan Manuel Santos
Caldero'n and the leaders of FARC to consolidate peace
in Colombia. The peace that is being built is not only
the birthright of the Colombian people; it has become
the heritage of the entire world.

