The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to draw the
attention of Council members to document S/2018/926,
which contains a letter dated 16 October 2018 from
the Representatives of Cote d'Ivoire, France, Kuwait,
the Netherlands, Peru, Poland, Sweden, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
the United States of America to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council, and
document S/2018/938, which contains a letter dated
18 October 2018 from the Permanent Representatives
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia, China, Equatorial
Guinea and the Russian Federation to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

In the light of the views expressed in documents
S/2018/926 and S/2018/938 and the comments made by
members of the Security Council, I intend to put the
provisional agenda to the vote.

Accordingly, I shall put it to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
cote d'Ivoire, France, Kuwait, Netherlands, Peru,
Poland, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

Against:
Plurinational State of Bolivia, China, Russian
Federation

Abstaining:
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan

The President (spoke in Spanish): The provisional
agenda received 9 votes in favour, 3 votes against and 3
abstentions. The provisional agenda has been adopted.

I now give the floor to members wishing to make
statements following the voting.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Bolivia voted against the holding of this meeting
because there is no precedent of a special mechanism
of the Human Rights Council on a specific country
reporting to the Security Council on its activities
without mentioning the fact that such report is not part
of the mandate of the fact-finding mission in question.

The Charter of the United Nations clearly
establishes the functions of and the division of labour
among all the principal organs of our Organization. It
is therefore important to respect the mandates of each
organ in order to avoid any overlapping, duplication,
interference with or weakening of the work being done
in these bodies, be it the General Assembly, the Human
Rights Council, the Economic and Social Council or
the Security Council. With that understanding, the
Charter establishes in unequivocal terms that the
primary responsibility of the Security Council is the
maintenance of international peace and security. This is
therefore not the place to deal with human rights issues,
as such issues have their own space for debate, study
and discussion within the relevant specialized body,
the Human Rights Council. This does not in any way
detract from the seriousness of the issue at stake or the
importance of dealing with it in the appropriate forums.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

As the provisional agenda has been adopted, I
will now suspend the meeting for a brief recess, after
which we will continue our consideration ofthe item on
our agenda.

The meeting was suspended at 3.20 pm. and
resumed at 3.25 pm.

The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Myanmar


The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bangladesh
and Myanmar to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Marzuki
Darusman, Chairperson of the independent international
fact-finding mission on Myanmar, to participate in
this meeting.

The Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

I now give the floor to Mr. Darusman.

