Mr. Kolby (Norway): the situation in the Middle
East is tense and gives us reason to fear a further
deterioration. At this critical time it is important that
the international community, and the Security Council
in particular, behave with caution and in a constructive
manner.
Norway therefore felt it to be of crucial
importance for a unified Security Council to make a
statement with a call for an end to violence, for a return
to normal economic activity and daily life, for a
resumption of peace talks with the aim of reaching a
final agreement and to provide strong support for the
role of the Secretary-General in the quest for peace. It
was this need for the Council to speak with one voice
that made Norway engage with our European
colleagues in a serious effort that we hoped would
receive the support of the full Council.

The situation in the Middle East is an issue of the
utmost importance to Norway, and we were therefore
particularly glad to see that the caucus of the Non-
Aligned Movement and other members of the Council
were willing to participate in a serious discussion with
us. We appreciate the commitment made by everyone
to strive for a result that could find the support of all
members.

The result of these negotiations up to this point is
not what we had hoped for. Our wish was to give the
Secretary-General a strong mandate for his further
efforts, both for his discussions at the Summit in
Amman and for the difficult times in the coming weeks
and months, and to give the Security Council an
important and active role in this issue, which has been
with us since the early days of this Organization.

We were not able to have such unity in the
Council at this time. Norway regrets this, and I am
convinced that all members of the Council share our
feelings. Norway abstained tonight because we do not
believe this resolution would be helpful to the efforts to
get the peace process back on track at this time. The
Security Council must not be a forum only for an
exchange of views, but a constructive actor for peace
and security.

We did not manage to reach our common goal on
making a statement by a unified Council on this
important issue at this time. However, we must not
give up hope for reaching such a result at a later stage.
I would appeal to all members of the Council to not let
our lack of common approach today make us give up
on this noble goal. I would urge all members to keep
alive the spirit of cooperation demonstrated during our
many hours of negotiations and to return to this issue
when we all feel that our efforts can have a positive
impact on the situation in the Middle East.

