Mr. Lewicki (Poland): First of all, let mejoin others
in warmly welcoming Ambassador Craft and wishing
her every success in her new capacity. She can count
on our support. I also take this opportunity to echo
my colleague from Indonesia and thank Ambassador
Cohen and his team for the excellent cooperation we
have had in recent months.

Poland welcomes the adoption of resolution 2488
(2019). We voted in favour of the resolution to express
our appreciation for the achievements made by the
authorities of the Central African Republic thus far in
meeting the necessary security standards and, above
all, in ensuring the safety of the people of the Central
African Republic.

We hope that the casing ofthe sanctions regime will
be a significant incentive for further efforts to ensure
the implementation of the benchmarks established
by the Security Council in April this year. That road
map is necessary for the Central African authorities to
take over full responsibility for the country's security
in future.

Let me reiterate that the sanctions are not a
punishment, but a policy tool aimed at limiting the illicit
flow of arms into the country and ensuring the safety of
the people in the long term. It is worth emphasizing that
the current regime already allows a controlled delivery
of weapons to the national security forces. However,
ensuring real diligence and transparency in the area of
arms management is key, in particular with regard to
compliance with international humanitarian and human
rights standards. The Central African society expects a
clear message from the Central African Government on
the delivery of its security strategy. The restoration of
national security forces, supported by the international
community, gives a promising perspective. The agreed
modifications place even greater responsibility on the
Central African authorities.
It is of the utmost importance whether or not the
Security Council remains in a constructive, honest
and open dialogue with the Government of the Central
African Republic on the evolution of a sanctions regime
in future. The people of the Central African Republic
can count on the support of Poland in that process.

