Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): First, I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, on your country's assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of September. I also thank you for having convened
this important meeting and for your country's steadfast
efforts in support of the people of Iraq, who are at a
decisive crossroads that we hope will lead to stability,
security and prosperity. I would like to welcome
the Iraqi Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Ibrahim
Al-Jaafari. I also thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Iraq, Nikolay Mladenov, for
his briefing. We welcome the presidential statement to
be adopted at the outcome of this meeting.

My country welcomes the formation of the new
Iraqi Government. We hope that the final appointments
will make its composition inclusive, thereby attaining a
political balance conducive to responding to the severe
crisis in the country. It is high time for Iraq to recover
its strength. To that end, the international community
should provide full support to create appropriate
conditions for the success of political reform and for
the enshrinement of rules ofjustice and equality among
all components of Iraqi society.

Since Iraq took its first steps to repudiate
sectarianism, put an end to foreign intervention in its
affairs and return to the Arab world, the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia has held out its hand to all sectors
of the Iraqi people. His Majesty King Abdullah Bin
Abdulaziz Al-Saud, the Custodian of the Two Holy
Mosques, has pledged $50 million in assistance for
Iraqi refugees and displaced persons. Sectarianism,
oppression and repression are factors that have created
fertile ground for the proliferation of transnational and
even transcontinental terrorism, of which the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is a prime example.
ISIL's barbaric terrorist crimes have nothing to do with
Islam, which is completely at odds with such acts.

I wish to convey the words of King Abdullah
Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, alerting the international
community to the danger of transboundary and
transnational terrorism. We need a collective vision
and specific goals to guide our efforts to overcome
terrorism. The timely actions taken by the Government
of Saudi Arabia, which called for the J eddah conference
a few weeks ago and issued a statement afterwards,
are the expressions of our determination to resolutely
continue along this path.

We thank Secretary of State John Kerry for the role
of the United States.

In response to the so-called Islamic State and other
groups that use religion as a justification for their
existence and to propagate terrorist thinking, the ulemas
and other Islamic teachers have condemned the teaching
of ISIL and its adherents and the financing of its acts as
a crime. This is the content of the following statement,
issued by the Ulema Council on 14 September:

"Terrorist acts perpetrated by certain groups,
such as ISIL, Al-Qaida, Asaib Ahl Al-Haq and
Hizbullah, as well as the terrorist actions of the
Israeli occupation and the terrorist criminal acts
perpetrated by groups claiming to belong to Islam,
are all prohibited actions and are deemed to be
crimes."

The statement of the Ulema Council also prohibits
entering the conflict zone and joining the insurrection.
The instigators of these crimes are criminals
themselves. They are leading others into error, and
should be punished.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was one of the first
States in the fight against terrorism by extirpating its
root causes. Moreover, the Kingdom has been a victim
and remains a target of terrorism. In that regard, I
highlight the support provided by the Kingdom of

Saudi Arabia to the United Nations Centre for Counter-
Terrorism (UNCCT) in the amount of $100 million. The
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques has called on other
States to contribute to the UNCCT, which is one of the
most important bodies working against the scourge of
terrorism. So long as the Council and the Organization
lack a wide-ranging comprehensive strategy to address
the root causes, all efforts to counter the scourge will
be in vain.

The ongoing occupation by Israel of the Arab
terrorities in Palestine, Syria and Lebanon is a factor
contributing to the development of terrorist thinking,
which justifies terrorism as contributing to the fight
against occupation. Sectarianism and extremism
fostered the emergence of ISIL, as well as the war
machine of the Syrian regime, which persists in
committing crime after crime against the Syrian
people. All of that has created a vacuum that terrorists
have rapidly exploited.

Terrorist actions should be tracked and counter-
terrorism efforts must be strengthened by putting a
stop to the prime source of all of the violence, namely,
the Syrian regime. ISIL and the Syrian regime are but
opposite sides of the same coin; therefore, concerted
action should be based on supporting the legitimate
Syrian opposition, represented by the Syrian National
Coalition, to enable it to respond both to ISIL and to the
regime, which is supporting ISIL in its own interests.

My country will continue its efforts to stand by the
Iraqi people and to help that kindred country regain its
rightful place in the Arab world.
