Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to commend the initiative
of the Republic of Korea in organizing this high-
level commemoration of the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004). That adoption
reflected the common will to step up the fight against
the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery and, in particular,
to prevent their acquisition by non-State actors.

The contribution of resolution 1540 (2004) to
the non-proliferation regime and the fight against
terrorism is undeniable. The ten-year extension in
2011 of the mandate of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) demonstrates the
shared determination to pursue the achievement of
the resolution's aims, which filled in several gaps in
international law. The proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs) is a threat to international
peace and security. The Kingdom of Morocco shares
the conviction of the international community, which
remains concerned by the threat of terrorism and the
risk of non-State actors acquiring WMDs or their
means of delivery. Morocco welcomes the role of the
1540 Committee in the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and supports its activities aimed at
preventing non-State actors and terrorist groups from
acquiring such weapons.

The Kingdom of Morocco is a State party to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) and the conventions on biological and chemical
weapons. We neither have nor will we develop
any weapons of mass destruction, and we have no
programmes for ballistic missiles or other means of
delivery. We have also subscribed to The Hague Code
of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation.
Morocco plays an active part in international efforts and
initiatives against terrorism and for non-proliferation.
On 26 October 2004, Morocco submitted its report
under paragraph 4 of resolution 1540 (2004) and has
since updated it. Morocco's efforts to complete its
legal and regulatory arsenal relating to combatting
proliferation and trafficking in equipment or material
that could help non-State actors to acquire or use
WMDs shows our steadfast commitment to working
with the international community to combat terrorism
and the proliferation of WMDs. Those efforts have
helped to strengthen our legal and regulatory system
under international norms and to establish a control
system for the export of dual-use materials.

Paragraph 7 of resolution 1540 (2004) recognizes
that certain States may require assistance to implement
the measures of the resolution. Morocco believes that
only active international cooperation based on the
principles of solidarity and shared responsibility, along
with access to resources and the exchange ofinformation
and experience, will make it possible to bring about the
effective and universal implementation of the provisions
of the resolution. Moreover, the legal and technical
obligations, the one-year extension of the mandate of the
1540 Committee and the invitation to States to develop
national action and implementation plans are all aspects
that require more active international cooperation. The
existing assistance mechanism should be strengthened
in order to be able to meet the expectations of States
for appropriate assistance, particularly in Africa, and to
support States in implementing the resolution.

To conclude, I would like to emphasize that
national efforts will not be sufficient without stronger
regional and subregional cooperation. In that regard,
the international community should speed up its efforts
to seek the total eradication of WMDs as the ultimate
guarantee against their use and acquisition by non-State
actors.

