Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first of all to express my appreciation for the
format of this meeting on Somalia. Undoubtedly, the
active and broad participation of the Members of our
Organization will help us find a solution to the conflict.

We also wish to express our thanks for the very
complete information updating the situation in Somalia
and the recent developments in the peace initiative
presented to us by both Under-Secretary-General
Kieran Prendergast and the Permanent Representative
of Djibouti, Ambassador Olhaye.

We are dealing with a complex conflict that has
lasted for too many years despite the fact that Somalia,
unlike other African countries and countries in other
parts of the world, is religiously and ethnically a
homogeneous society whose territory does not have a
particularly uneven distribution of natural resources.
Nevertheless, this has not prevented the violent break-
up of the Somali State, which started at the beginning
of the last decade.

We are concerned that efforts undertaken by the
international community in the past to resolve the
conflict in Somalia have yielded meagre results and
that, as a consequence, its population continues to bear
the burden of this tragedy on its back, with the terrible
humanitarian consequences we are all aware of. We
believe that the time has come to overcome the
"Somalia syndrome", and for the Council to work
actively, together with the other actors involved,
towards a definitive solution. This attitude will also
have positive effects on our approaches to other
African conflicts.

The peace initiative launched by Djibouti last
year must be the main instrument for making progress
towards a peaceful solution of the Somali conflict and
must be supported by the Council. We would like to
associate ourselves with delegations that preceded in
expressing our appreciation to the Government of
Djibouti for the efforts it is making to move the plan
forward, which have cost it considerable financial
resources. The opportunity created by that initiative
must be used to move in a positive direction that is
acceptable to all Somali society, since it is the principal
party concerned and the ultimate beneficiary of all the
efforts for peace.

The task of rebuilding the country, as outlined in
the plan presented by President Omar Guelleh, includes
all of civil society, not only the warlords. We must be
clear on this aspect. Participation in the National Peace
Conference in Djibouti by all sectors from all regions
is necessary for it to be representative and to achieve
results that can be implemented immediately. In this
respect, we urge that participation in the Conference
not be hindered.

Somalia is no stranger to the grave humanitarian
situation confronting the entire Horn of Africa region.
In this regard, I need only cite the statement made by
Ms. Catherine Bertini of the World Food Programme
on 16 May 2000: "The lives of 13 million persons in
the Horn of Africa are at risk."

We also reiterate our concern at recent
information indicating ongoing violence and inter-clan
confrontations, particularly in the southern region, and
at the negative impact of violence on humanitarian
assistance tasks. This assistance is increasingly
necessary, given the ongoing deterioration of the living
conditions of the population. We must pay our sincerest
tribute to the self-sacrificing work of the humanitarian
workers, who, under very difficult conditions, continue
to provide assistance to the Somali people - in some
cases, even at the cost of their own lives. The security
and safety of humanitarian personnel must be
respected.

We wish to conclude by reaffirming our position
in favour of respect for the maintenance of the
independence, territorial integrity and unity of Somalia.

