Mr. Guehenno: Several delegations share the
concern of the Secretariat on the situation in the north-
east. As we reach the conclusion of this briefing, I just
want to reiterate how important it is that there be no
outside interference in a situation that is extremely
volatile and dangerous. We would hope that all
neighbours that can help would encourage the parties
to work with the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) to
put in place mechanisms for the pacification of Ituri.
Of course, the meeting that took place at the initiative
of the President of Angola was a very important step in
that direction. We have to continue the efforts in that
direction. Otherwise, the situation in that part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo could get worse.

Several delegations asked about how MONUC
could strengthen its role in the protection of civilians
and access to civilians. Indeed, ultimate responsibility
for the protection of civilians will remain with the
parties. I do not see how it could be otherwise,
considering the size of the country and the problems at
hand.

At the same time, it is clear that the presence of
MONUC is a reassuring presence wherever it is seen.
In that respect, I would remind the Council that at the
moment we have approximately 4,400 uniformed
personnel in that big country. We are moving as many
assets as we can towards the sensitive areas in the east.
We would like the task forces to be in place as soon as
possible. Those task forces will be all the more
effective as they will be strong and mobile. In that
respect, I would remind the Council that we are still
looking for one small unit of attack helicopters, which
will considerably enhance the operational capabilities
of those task forces.

Several delegations asked about how we can
strengthen our action in human rights. Sergio Vieira de
Mello will answer that in greater detail than I can. But
I would like to say that, as far as MONUC is
concerned, the first effort is to observe wherever we
can. I think that putting the searchlight of the
international community in as many places as possible
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is important
as a deterrent. We have developed multi-dimensional
teams that combine human rights officers, civilian
police and child protection officers. I think those teams
can play a useful deterrent role.

As many Council members have noticed, children
and women are particularly in need of protection. In
that respect, I am pleased to report that the
collaboration of MONUC with UNICEF, for instance,
in taking care of child combatants who are being
disarmed, is very effective because it is of critical
importance that children have good reintegration
programmes. Some reintegration programmes have
been put in place, some of them with the support of the
Government of Norway. We are very grateful for that.
That kind of effort is of great importance - so that
children who are demobilized do not go back to the
army after being demobilized from one of the armed
groups. We have to think of the long term.

Likewise, for women, it is important to take the
gender dimension into consideration as we organize
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes. The Office of Gender Affairs in MONUC
is working precisely to that effect so that the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration centres
that we are establishing, such as the one already being
established in Lubero, take that dimension into
consideration.

The specific question of the role of the
international community with respect to the trial being
organized by the Mouvement de liberation congolais
(MLC) was raised. We fully understand and share the
view of the High Commissioner that, indeed, we cannot
through our actions sanction a tribunal that is a de facto
tribunal. So, we have to reconcile that principle with
the need to report and to know what is happening. We
will be discussing with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights how to reconcile
those two important concerns: concern for that
principle and at the same time the need for MONUC to
be an effective eye for the international community so
that we know what happens everywhere.

The question was asked by you, Mr. President, in
your national capacity, what is the political will of the
leaders to bring perpetrators to justice? I think that the
political process that is developing can be an important
instrument. The political process should not be an
incentive for political leaders to attempt to establish
new positions on the ground so as to strengthen their
hand in the political process. It has to be exactly the
opposite. There has to be an incentive for the political
leaders to build legitimacy and therefore to have
behaviour that is compatible with their future role in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In that respect, looking at the future, the way the
transitional authorities address the issues of human
rights and justice is of critical importance. Already, we
are discussing with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights how exactly MONUC
could support that process. We see the immensity of the
task at hand. It will require accountable police and
accountable military forces that are a reassurance for
the people and not a threat. It will require a functioning
justice system. It will also require effective
investigations so as to be able - as you asked, Sir -
to identify those who have committed crimes. MONUC
has some information, but we need more if there is to
be accountability, an end to the culture of impunity that
was denounced by so many of you around this table.

