Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine): Mr. President, first of all let
me congratulate you on the occasion of your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of April. I should like to express my gratitude to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Ambassador Li Zhaoxing, for his skilful
and fruitful guidance of the work of the Council last
month.

From our point of View, it is deeply symbolic that
the delegation of Ukraine should have the opportunity to
be the first to make a statement at the meeting of the
Security Council devoted to the issue of the provision to
the non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the Treaty on the
N on-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) of security
assurances.

As is well known, Ukraine acceded to the NPT after
thorough and sometimes heated discussions in the
Parliament and in the country as a whole of all aspects of
our participation in the Treaty and, above all, of the

 

consequences of accession to the NPT for the security of
Ukraine. The agreement upon the quadripartite document on
the provision to Ukraine of guarantees of its national
security on the part of the United States of America, Great
Britain and Russia and the unilateral statements on the
matter by France and China were the principal factors and
that had a key role in the Ukrainian Parliament's decision
in favour.

We believe that the Memorandum on Security
Assurances in Connection with Ukraine's Accession to the
NPT, which was signed in Budapest on 5 December 1994,
can form the basis for elaborating a universal, legally
binding document on assurances. It is clear, nevertheless,
that some provisions of this Memorandum, reflecting as
they do the unique situation in Ukraine, cannot serve as a
precedent in all cases. We consider the draft resolution as
a first step towards eliminating the contradictions that exist
between the nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon
Member States of the NPT on the problem of assurances.

At the same time, we welcome the confirmation by the
nuclear-weapon States members of the Security Council of
their commitments to place on the Security Council's
agenda, as a matter of urgency, the question of assurances
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons against
the non-nuclear-weapon States members of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to draft and
adopt decisions aimed at supporting victims of such actions
with all the necessary assistance.

We appreciate the fact that the draft resolution takes
into account the concern felt by the majority of non-
nuclear-weapon States over the possible catastrophic
consequences of the use of nuclear weapons against them,
which would entail huge loss of life alongside the material
and financial losses. This concern is taken into account in
the provision that has been determined to the effect that the
Security Council will recommend proper procedures
concerning compensation to victims of aggression in
accordance with the norms of international law. We should
also like to draw Council's attention to the fact that these
procedures should be extended to third countries that suffer
as a result of actions by an aggressor.

Let me express some specific considerations regarding
the substance of the issue under discussion.

We pay tribute to the realism demonstrated by the
nuclear-weapon States, which have promulgated negative
security assurances to the non-nuclear-weapon States parties
to the NPT in their unilateral statements. Nevertheless, in
our view, it would be better if these assurances could be
given in the form of a joint declaration. This would, on
the one hand, unify the scope of the assurances given; on
the other, it could strengthen the psychological and
political authority, as well as the efficiency, of such
assurances. It is obvious that differences in the substance
of the nuclear sections of the military doctrines of the
permanent members of the Security Council, to our regret,
blocked agreement on such a format of the document.

We believe that the significance of the negative
assurances given now by the nuclear States could be
substantially strengthened if they were supported by the
tools to monitor their implementation.

Given the fact that only five States are officially
recognized now as nuclear Powers, one can assume that
the nuclear security assurances are ultimately directed at
the nuclear nations, to deter each other. It is therefore
logical to come to the conclusion that additional security
assurances for the non-nuclear States would be the
nuclear States' mutual commitment not to use nuclear
weapons first. This, in turn, would lay a solid foundation
for the multi-objective system of measures to strengthen
trust between other nations. There can also be added the
renunciation of the unanimity principle when dealing with
issues in the Security Council on the use or threat of use
of nuclear weapons.

The reaffirmation by the nuclear States of their
commitment to a nuclear-weapon-free world would be a
key stabilizing element of such a system. An
exceptionally positive role in this regard could be played
by the commitment of the nuclear States to pursue the
speediest possible conclusion of a comprehensive nuclear
test-ban treaty, as well as the drafting and signing of an
agreement on the prohibition of the production and
accumulation of fissile materials for military purposes. In
this framework, the international community should also
rely on the immediate ratification by the States parties to
the Non-Proliferation Treaty of agreements resulting from
SALT II, as well as subsequent urgent steps towards
nuclear disarmament and other nuclear States' joining in
this process as soon as possible.

We hope that the Security Council's adoption of this
draft resolution on security assurances to the non-nuclear-
weapon States parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons will play a positive role
in achieving a decision on the indefinite extension of the
Treaty at its 1995 Review and Extension Conference.

 

