Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): My
colleagues have got the written report. I think they
have seen the record of the oral report which was made
to the Council immediately after the visit, so I will not
resume either of those. I shall take them as a basis
which everybody has before them.

May I begin by thanking the countries of the
region - seven countries in eight days - for all the
help they gave to the mission, to the United Nations
teams on the ground in all their manifestations, to the
colleagues who were on the mission and to the
Secretariat, which made it all possible.

In terms of the visit, our intention was very clear:
to underline the Security Council's continuing interest
in and support and concern for developments in West
Africa and, more generally, that of the United Nations
as a whole. We also wished to set our approach in a
regional context, being very clear that there are many
issues which affect most of the countries in one way or
another and that there is a natural knock-on effect as
one tackles an issue in one country but it then passes
across to have a consequence for a neighbour. There is
thus an absolutely imperative need to take account of
the regional dimension, and we tried to do that. That
was why the discussions with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and our
support for ECOWAS were actually so important.

As recommended, and as indeed the non-
governmental organizations had suggested earlier, we

took up lots of horizontal issues - such as child
soldiers, peace-building, governance, small arms
proliferation and so on - on a regular basis, as

opportunity arose. They may not be specifically
referred to in the report, but they were part of the
context at all stages.

We, of course, were impressed by the United
Nations effort on the ground. Anyone who cynically
wonders whether this Organization is relevant ought to
go on the same visit that we went on. In their different
manifestations, the Members of the United Nations
family are doing a great job, and doing it with
sensitivity, we thought, and in cooperation with local
Governments, working primarily as enablers to permit
Governments to better fulfil that which they wish to do
and to encourage a durable independence of action by
Governments. The international community should
have a clear strategy for reducing dependency and
actually helping countries to fulfil their very real
potential.

The conclusions which we came to, I think, are
straightforwardly set out in the report, but they do
include a clear commitment that the United Nations
and the Security Council have to stay the course in
terms of their support for positive developments in
West Africa and of the need to tackle those issues
regionally, to give our support to the good things and to
try and help Governments to tackle those issues which
are the problems. That includes managing post-conflict
situations, which are particularly difficult in the sense
of building peace and durable institutions, creating the
rule of law and having conditions of economic
development which both harness the resources of
countries and offer a prospect, especially to young
people, of meeting expectations.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
are classically important throughout the region; and if
disarmament and demobilization are difficult,
reintegration is much more so, it seems to me.
Reintegration must provide opportunities; otherwise,
idle hands make mischief. It is a simple lesson. There
is also a quite basic need to bring policies to bear
which will actually avoid a resurgence of conflict.

To do all that, we need coherent approaches by
the international community, by the international
financial institutions, by all the organs of the United
Nations and by donors. We must do so across the
spectrum of intervention - and by "intervention" what
I am talking about are the policies one needs to
discourage and prevent conflict right through to what
one does post-conflict to promote the rule of law,
economic development and so on. That spectrum of
activity, by the United Nations Children's Fund, the
United Nations Development Programme and all the
others involved, should be undertaken in a fashion
which meets the aims of countries and provides the sort
of future which West Africa deserves and which its
assets, its people and its resources should permit it to
actually achieve.

That is a quick summary, a snapshot - and by
definition it can only be a snapshot. I think my regret,
which I believe is the same as that of most other
members of the mission, is that we went and had an
awful number of meetings, but we did not see as much
in-country of activities as we would have liked. But
that was the schedule.

