Mrs. Ashipala-Musavyi (Namibia): The South
African representative will soon make a statement in
his capacity as the Chairman of the Coordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), and my
delegation would like to associate itself with that
statement. We also support the statement made by the
Coordinator of the NAM. Caucus for the month of
November, the delegation of Mali.

We thank you, Mr. President, for having called
this timely meeting to deliberate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. Before
my brief remarks, let me express my delegation's
condolences to all the bereaved families and to take
this opportunity to express our thanks and appreciation
to the Arab countries and others outside the region who
have taken into their care the injured Palestinians.

Recently we had the honour and privilege to
listen to a briefing by President Arafat, a briefing that
included, among other things, a request for the United
Nations to deploy an observer force in the Palestinian
occupied territories. As my delegation has stated on
several occasions, we support that request, and we have
also emphasized that it is a request that is in line with
Security Council resolution 904, which was adopted on
18 March 1994 and called for the protection of the
Palestinians. Therefore, we believe that we, as the
Council, have a duty to follow through with the
implementation of our resolutions.

The events occurring in the occupied Palestinian
territories and in the region at large are cause for
severe concern and warrant corresponding and urgent
action by the Security Council. Time is of the essence,
and in view of the ongoing inputs of the Secretary-
General in the context of Security Council resolution
904 (1994), we believe that the deployment of the
United Nations observers will save lives, calm
emotions and pave the way for restoring the peace
process. We must restore the peace process because in
the end we have to deal with the fundamental problem
that is the cause of all this, namely the occupation of
Palestinian territories by Israel.

My delegation concurs with the Permanent
Observer of Palestine that the parties need assistance,
and that is, I believe, why we are here. We are here to
help the parties make peace. In this context, we thank
all those who have continued to contribute to the
search for peace, but we believe that the time has come
for the United Nations to become fully engaged.

Let me reiterate that a comprehensive settlement
of the present conflict can only be achieved by granting
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including their right to self-determination. Full
implementation of Security Council resolution
242 (1967) and resolution 338 (1973) are essential to a
lasting solution to this conflict.

