Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I want to
thank the penholders, Sweden and Kuwait, for their
work, their sacrifice and their time in the negotiations.
As we look at the negotiations, I think it is also important
that we bring the Council some of the voices of the
Syrian people in eastern Ghouta, who have suffered so
much while waiting for the Security Council to act.

A doctor treating patients in a makeshift hospital
described the conditions she is facing: "We are mental
and emotional wrecks. There is nothing more we can
do. We are bled dry." In a haunting video, the doctor
walks into a room with a crying mother as she says,

"I am waiting for my son to die. At least he will
be free of pain. I was just making bread for him
when the roof fell in. He is going straight to heaven.
At least in heaven there is food."

Another message we received yesterday which I
think was relayed to Council members in the closed
consultations, but which I think it is important to repeat
again - was an emergency call from a doctor in eastern
Ghouta, who said:

"We have a horrible situation here. We are
being targeted with all kinds of weapons, non-stop.
We lack everything: water, food, medical supplies,
shelter. This is a disaster. Everyone is just waiting
to die."

Today, the Security Council finally took a step
towards addressing these devastating levels of human
suffering in Syria. The United States wants nothing
more than to see the ceasefire in resolution 2401 (2018)
implemented immediately across the country. It is
critical that the Al-Assad regime and its allies comply
with our demand to stop the assault on eastern Ghouta
and immediately allow food and medicine to reach
everyone who needs it. All of us on the Council must
do our part to press the Al-Assad regime as hard as we
can to comply.

But we are late to respond to this crisis * very
late. On Wednesday, the Secretary-General made an
emotional plea for an immediate ceasefire in Syria to
allow the very basic necessities to get to the people.
Kuwait and Sweden had a version of the resolution
ready to go for a vote, but Russia called for a delay. On
Thursday, in an effort to stall, Russia called for an open
meeting on the humanitarian situation in Syria. At that
meeting (S/PV.8186), 14 members of the Council were
ready to impose a ceasefire, but Russia obstructed the
vote again. And then yesterday, the Council sat around
for hours, ready to vote, only to have Russia delay
it again.

Every minute the Council waited on Russia, the
human suffering grew. Getting to a vote became a moral
responsibility for everyone, but not for Russia, not for
Syria, and not for Iran. I have to ask: why? At least
19 health facilities have been bombed since Sunday.
As they dragged out the negotiations, the bombs from
Al-Assad's fighter jets continued to fall. In the three
days it took us to adopt the resolution, how many
mothers lost their kids to the bombing and the shelling?
How many more images did we need to see of fathers
holding their dead children? All for nothing, because
here we are voting for a ceasefire that could have saved
lives days ago.

And after all of this time, hardly anything has
changed in the resolution except a few words and some
commas. The Syrian people should not have to die
waiting for Russia to organize its instructions from
Moscow or to discuss them with the Syrians. Why did
the Council allow this? There is no good reason we
should not have done this Wednesday, or Thursday, or
Friday. We may not know the faces that we are talking
about. We may not know their names, or these people,
but they know us. And we all failed them this week. I
guess there is unity in that.
Today, Russia has belatedly decided to join the
international consensus and accept the need to call for
a ceasefire, but only after trying every possible way
to avoid it. The resolution marks a moment of Council
unity that we must seize and maintain beyond the
30-day timeframe. We hope that the resolution will be a
turning point, where Russia will join us in pushing for
a political settlement to this conflict and take action to
re-establish real accountability for the use of chemical
weapons in Syria.

Progress starts by adhering to the ceasefire
with no excuses. After so many years of defying the
Council's demands, the Al-Assad regime must change
course. None of us should be so na'i've as to accept that
the Al-Assad regime can continue indiscriminately
bombing schools, hospitals and homes under the fake
excuse of "counter-terrorism". Al-Assad's bombing
must stop. The ceasefire must be given a chance to work.
We look to the Al-Assad regime's backers, especially
Russia and Iran, to address what the Secretary-General
rightly called a "hell on Earth". All eyes will now be on
the Syrian regime, Iran and Russia.

Our goal with this resolution is clear. The Al-Assad
regime needs to stop its military activities around
eastern Ghouta, and for once allow humanitarian access
to all of those who need it. We are deeply skeptical that
the regime will comply, but we supported the resolution
because we must demand nothing less. We owe that to
the innocent people of Syria begging for help.

In the days to come, our resolve to stand by our
demands in the resolution will be tested. All of us must
rise to the challenge of maintaining this ceasefire, just
as we came together today. All ofus must do everything
we can to make the demands of the resolution a
reality. That is the only way to restore the credibility
of the Council. The Syrian people have been waiting
long enough.

