Mr. Ngoh Ngoh (Cameroon) (spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes your initiative, Sir, of
convening a meeting of the Council on the
humanitarian situation in Angola. This is an issue to
which my country attaches the greatest importance.

We were pleased to hear the comprehensive and
very instructive briefing by Mr. Kenzo Oshima on the
matter. We also welcome the presence of Vice-Minister
Georges Chikoti and thank him for his statement and
for the very useful information he provided.

The ongoing deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Angola is of serious concern to my
delegation. Approximately 4.1 million people, a third
of the population of that country, are currently
displaced, while many Angolans are refugees in
neighbouring countries. This situation is due primarily
to the ongoing hostilities in Angola, caused notably by
the persistent refusal of UNITA to engage in the peace
process and to adhere to the provisions of the Lusaka
Protocol. My delegation feels that it is therefore
essential to maintain pressure on UNITA and to
strengthen the sanctions regime imposed on it.

The endless war, which has brought unspeakable
suffering to the people of Angolan for many years, has
claimed many victims and had tragic humanitarian
consequences. Precarious security conditions brought
about by intensified fighting have caused people to
flock to urban centres and stripped them of their
property and employment. The malnutrition, mortality
and morbidity rates are high among the displaced
populations. The situation is even more tragic for those
living in areas inaccessible to humanitarian agencies.
UNITA's deadly attacks on civilians and humanitarian
agencies are indescribable and unacceptable. Last
year's train attack, which claimed so many victims, is
only one horrendous example.

We are very pleased by the efforts of the Angolan
Government to assist the displaced populations and to
facilitate access for humanitarian agencies to people in
need. It is important that those efforts be pursued, in
particular with respect to the rehabilitation of the
infrastructure, the reintegration of displaced persons
and the delivery of humanitarian assistance. We call on
the international community substantially to increase
its assistance to the Angolan Government in order to
alleviate the suffering of the victims of war, inter alia,
through support for the implementation of emergency
plans of action for each province. In that regard, the
fate of populations in inaccessible zones should be the
focus of particular attention. We cannot stress strongly
enough the fact that everything must be done to protect
civilians, ensure the security of humanitarian convoys
and guarantee the safety of humanitarian personnel.

The humanitarian situation in Angola is heavily
linked to its political and security situation, particularly
to the ongoing fighting in that country. We support the
efforts of the Secretary-General and his Adviser for
Special Assignments in Africa, Mr. Gambari, to find a
lasting solution to the conflict in Angola. We are also
pleased by the work of the United Nations Office in
Angola and of the humanitarian agencies on the
ground.

I have one question for Vice-Minister Chikoti. I
should like to know his view on measures that the
Security Council could take to reduce UNITA's
capacity for harm. I should also like to have
information from OCHA on assistance programmes
specifically designed for children, who, we know, are
the principal Victims of the tragic situation in Angola.

