Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would first like to congratulate your country,
Mr. President, on presiding over the Council this
month. I also thank your predecessor for doing the
same last month. We have also followed attentively the
presentations by the Chairs of the Committees in this
meeting, and we thank them for their briefings.

As the Council knows, Syria was one of the first
States to suffer from the scourge of terrorism, which it
fought against using various ways and means. We have
condemned terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, whatever its origins, whoever the
perpetrators may be and wherever they may come
from, whether an individual, a group or a State. Syria
has advocated against linking terrorism with any
particular religion, ethnicity, nationality or civilization,
and has also called for a definition of terrorism under
the aegis of the United Nations. We have called for
analyzing this phenomenon in all its aspects and for
discussing the conditions that lead to its spread. The
Syrian Arab Republic reaffirms the need to distinguish
between terrorism and the legitimate right of peoples to
resist foreign occupation.

We believe that force alone is inadequate in
fighting terrorism. It is essential to look at the
underlying causes, considering that all of the measures
used to counter terrorism must be taken in the
framework of international legitimacy and in
conformity with countries' obligations stemming from
the United Nations Charter and international law. In
that regard, Syria reaffirms its compliance with
relevant international resolutions concerning the fight
against terrorism. We are convinced that the General
Assembly plays a central role in the counter-terrorism
struggle at the international level, as well as in
establishing international consensus.

We believe that the Security Council Committees
responsible for fighting terrorism can also play a role
in coordinating international counter-terrorism efforts
through transparent and neutral mechanisms. We joined
the consensus during the adoption of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in 2006
based on our support for all international efforts to that

end and because we are convinced that the Strategy is
an important tool for facilitating international
cooperation in the fight against terrorism. We did so on
condition that Syria's concerns be taken into account
with respect to the definition of terrorism and the
distinction between State terrorism and resistance.
State terrorism is very serious, perhaps the gravest kind
of terrorism. The greatest example of it are the daily
crimes committed by Israel against the Palestinian
people since their occupation of the Arab territories.
Perhaps the most abject example of this were the
killings that took place during the aggression against
Gaza and the freedom flotilla, which was attacked in
international waters as it sought to deliver
humanitarian assistance to the people of blockaded
Gaza, not to mention the assassination of national
Palestinian personalities in other countries.

Israel has falsified travel documents for its
killers, in flagrant violation of international law, and
threatens the use of nuclear terrorism as it flouts
international resolutions and law. Our citizens in the
occupied Syrian Golan have not been spared terrorism
and brutal occupation. Zionist terrorism victimizes the
people, trees, stones and the very soil of the occupied
Syrian Golan. This is a very clear example of State
terrorism in violation of international law, resolutions
and legitimacy, as well as human rights law. Syria has
also suffered the scourge of terrorism and terrorist acts
on its soil, the most recent of which was the operation
in Al-Kazzaz in 2008, which was condemned by the
Security Council at the time.

Convinced of the central role of the United
Nations in fighting terrorism at the international level,
Syria cooperates fully with the three Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004). We have created national
commissions to ensure the optimum implementation of
those resolutions and to promote cooperation with the
Committees of the Security Council established to
ensure their implementation.

The Syrian Arab Republic is making significant
efforts to fight money-laundering and the financing of
terrorism. We are members of the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF) and the Egmont Group. The
international community has recognized these Syrian
efforts. The report of the FATF mutual evaluation team
highlighted Syria's efforts to that end:

"The Government of the Syrian Arab

Republic has in recent years succeeded in

adopting practical measures and important

legislation to that end, in conformity with
relevant international recommendations".

The mutual evaluation report was a very important step
with respect to the confidence of relevant international
institutions. The work of the Syrian national
commission charged with following up the
implementation of the recommendations of the Middle
East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force has
allowed us to consider amending Legislative Decree
No. 33 of 2005, in line with international developments
and the recommendations of the FATF.

During his visit to Damascus on 13 December
2007, the Secretary General of INTERPOL declared
that "Syria is a pioneer in the fight against terrorism".
He also said that "the INTERPOL office in Damascus
is one of the 10 best in the world". Given that there are
186 such offices throughout the world, this
demonstrates Syria's serious and practical approach to
fighting terrorism internationally.

With respect to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban, we are taking
every measure stipulated therein. With respect to
resolution 1373 (2001), Syria periodically presents
national reports in the framework of international
efforts. With respect to resolution 1540 (2004), in 1968
Syria was one of the first signatories to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
Syria opposed to the possession of nuclear weapons by
any country.

In conclusion, and despite the threat posed to the
Middle East by the presence of an occupier that usurps
other people's lands and resorts to the worst forms of
State terrorism in flagrant disregard of international
law and resolutions and of international appeals to sign
the NPT, Syria calls on the international community to
pressure Israel to comply with international
resolutions, in particular those of the Security Council.

