Mr. Konishi (Japan): I should like to preface my
remarks today by stressing the importance that the
Government of Japan attaches to the maintenance of the
stability of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia for
the peace and security of the entire Balkan region. It greatly
appreciates the role that the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) has been playing in this
regard by preventing conflict from spilling into the
Republic across its borders.

As we take up the question of extending the mandate
of UNPREDEP, it is necessary to consider the situation in
neighbouring areas and countries. Albania is of particular
concern in this respect. While the situation within that
country has stabilized to some degree, owing to the
deployment of the multinational protection force and to the
efforts of various humanitarian agencies, it is anticipated
that the restoration of political, economic and social order
will take some time, even after the election that is planned
for late June. At the same time, there has been an increase
in the number of incidents taking place along its border
with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
demonstrating how fragile the stability in the Balkan region
IS.

The unrest and tension stemming from ethnic rivalries
in Kosovo in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
difficulties in the implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina are, likewise,
sources of concern for the maintenance of regional peace
and security, as is the situation surrounding inter-ethnic
relations in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
itself.

In View of these considerations, my delegation shares
the views of the Secretary-General which are contained in
his report in document S/ 1997/365, and fully supports his
rationale for the renewal of the mandate of UNPREDEP
for an additional six months, until 30 November 1997. I
also welcome his endeavour to ensure the cost-
effectiveness of the Force, coherence in the
implementation of its mandate, greater efficiency in its
operations and increased flexibility in its response to
changing circumstances on the ground.
The importance that the Government of Japan
attaches to the stability of the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia is demonstrated in the bilateral efforts it
has been making to complement those of the international
community. For example, in March of this year my
Government extended to the Government of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia non-project grant aid in
the amount of 500 million yen, and is ready to consider
the possibility of further aid in this direction.

In conclusion, allow me to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Government of Japan, to Mr. Henryk Sokalski, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General; to
Brigadier-General Bo Wranker, the Force Commander of
UNPREDEP; and to all the military and civilian personnel
under their command for the dedication and skill with
which they are carrying out their important tasks.

