Mr. Thaci (spoke in Albanian; English interpretation provided by delegation): I thank you,
Sir, for this opportunity to address the Security Council
once again, and I thank everyone for their support
and understanding.

We cannot deny the past. We know who the victim
was, and we know who the aggressor was. There will
be no rewriting of history. The war took place in the
twentieth century, and we must accept that reality
without theatricality and look forward towards the
future. As unfounded accounts of how events unfolded
were provided, let me state several facts before
the Council.

Whether one likes it or not, the State of Serbia
killed 13,500 Albanian civilians in the Kosovo conflict.
Not one person has been accused. Serbia's State
apparatus - its paramilitary police troops - also
raped approximately 20,000 Albanian women, with no
one accused let alone convicted. One million Albanians
were forcibly expelled from Kosovo, where 40 per cent
of the infrastructure was destroyed by Serbian State
forces. President Milosevic was accused but never
convicted. There were 400 massacres of Albanians,
but not a single person has been indicted or convicted.
One hundred and sixty people were killed in the
village of Izbica alone - men, women, children and
the elderly. Two hundred and fifty civilians were killed
in Krusha - again, men, women, children and the
elderly - and 64 remain missing, with no one accused
or convicted. Three hundred and sixty people - men,
women, children and the elderly - were killed in the
village of Meja, with no investigations, indictments or
convictions. In the village of Studime, 116 were killed;
again, with no one accused or convicted. The same
happened in Racak, Rezala, Gornje Obrinje and all
other massacre sites.

To those who talk aboutjustice we say that fighters in
Kosovo were subject to justice in a number ofinstances,
first with the United Nations Interim Administration
in Kosovo in parallel with the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, and then with the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo. Twenty years
on, Kosovo wants to show the greatest level of State
responsibility by believing in truth and justice. In
partnership with the international community and the
European Union, Kosovo has established Specialist
Chambers and will cooperate with authorities in
a transparent, responsible and credible manner in
the process.

Let me also emphasize that, regardless of the fact
that we are the victims, today in Kosovo there are more
Albanians than Serbs being convicted of war crimes,
while in Serbia not a single Serb has been convicted
in any of the 400 massacres and instances of ethnic
cleansing committed against Albanians in Kosovo.
Moreover, Serbia's Office of the Prosecutor for War
Crimes is no longer operating. I believe in the right and
just war we conducted, just as I do not question that
some fighters might have deviated from the struggle
for freedom.

The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.
