Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Denmark for coming here today to preside
personally over this meeting and for delivering his
statement.

China also thanks Deputy Secretary-General
Frechette and Mr. James Wolfensohn, President of the
World Bank, for their respective statements.

Post-conflict peacebuilding is an essential part of
the process of restoring genuine peace and stability in
countries and regions emerging from conflict. Past
experience shows that, even when agreements are
signed and ceasefires are in place, countries and
regions may yet relapse into conflict or civil violence if
post-conflict peacebuilding efforts lag behind.
Consequently, lasting peace and stability can elude
peoples in conflict regions.

As conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are interrelated and mutually dependent,
post-conflict peacebuilding must be preceded by
peacekeeping. A return to violence must be prevented
by means of peacebuilding to ensure stability and
development in the countries and regions emerging
from conflict.

On the specific question of peacebuilding, I
should like to emphasize, first, that a comprehensive
peacebuilding strategy must be formulated. When
offering assistance to a war-torn country emerging
from conflict and facing full-scale recovery and
reconstruction, the international community should
establish a targeted comprehensive strategy based on
the specific needs of the country concerned. Since
situations vary from country to country, the focus of
such a strategy may range from accelerated reform of
the security sector and the early commencement of
disarmament to the demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants; from the reconstruction of national
institutions and the improvement of governance to the
protection of civilian interests; and from the re-
establishment of the rule of law, the protection of
human rights and ending impunity to the development
of the economy to eliminate the root causes of conflict.
The comprehensive strategy should be designed to
stress all related areas in the process of post-conflict
peacebuilding and to have a balanced approach.

Secondly, the lead role of the United Nations as
the peacebuilding coordinator must be brought into full
play. There are often many players nowadays in the
field of peacebuilding, reflecting the international
community's attention to and involvement in the post-
conflict reconstruction of the countries concerned.
They should therefore continue to be encouraged.
However, given its experience and advantages in
human resources and institutional mechanisms, the
United Nations should enjoy a more central role in the
coordination and collaboration of the specialized
agencies, international financial institutions, troop
contributors, the donor community and civil society in
order to ensure the optimum impact of international
assistance. Moreover, coordination between United
Nations Headquarters and field missions should be
enhanced and better focused in order to avoid
overlapping and duplication.

Thirdly, the United Nations should assist the
relevant regional and subregional organizations in
developing their peacebuilding capacities. As the
African continent is host to most United Nations
peacekeeping operations, the region should also
become a focus of the Organization's post-conflict
peacebuilding efforts. The United Nations should not
only help the African countries concerned to undertake
reconstruction, but also strengthen its logistical,
financial and technical support for the regional and
subregional organizations of Africa in the light of the
particular situation and special needs of the continent
with a View to enhancing their overall capacity to
provide assistance in the field of peacebuilding.

China supports the Secretary-General's proposal
to establish a Peacebuilding Commission, which we
believe would contribute significantly to post-conflict
peacebuilding efforts, and especially to the
achievement of lasting peace and stability in the
conflict areas of Africa. We believe that the
Commission should mainly be responsible for planning
the transition from conflict control to post-conflict
peacebuilding and for coordinating international efforts
in that field.

We are in favour of creating a peacebuilding
support office within the Secretariat that is both
compact and effective. China is ready to join other
Member States in further studying that issue in depth,
so that consensus can be reached at an early date.

China endorses the draft presidential statement
prepared by the Danish delegation. China also
appreciates the efforts made by the Danish delegation.

