The President: I shall now make a very brief
statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United States.

Today's unanimous vote welcomes an important
and historic step taken by the Libyan people. Over
the past year, with the tireless facilitation and support
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), a broad array of members of the Libyan
Political Dialogue have worked together to build an
inclusive and representative Government to lead the
country forward in its transition. That diverse group
included members of the House of Representatives and
the General National Congress, women, civil society
members, leaders of municipalities and political
parties, and independents. Through the adoption today
of resolution 2259 (2015), the Council affirms their
courageous efforts and welcomes the signing of the
Libyan Political Agreement in Skhirat, Morocco, on
17 December. With this resolution, the Council sends a
clear message that the Government of National Accord
will become the sole legitimate Government of Libya,
as set forth in the Agreement.

The United States urges all Libyans to unite behind
the Libyan Political Agreement and to take advantage
of the opportunity presented by the formation of the
Government of National Accord by working together
towards peace, stability and the rule of law. As Special
Representative Kobler has noted, "The door will remain
open to those who wish tojoin on the road to peace". As
to those who reject the path set forward by the Libyan
Political Agreement - who seek to undermine the
Libyan people's hope for peace - the United States
will seek to work with the international community to
hold them accountable.

After so much turmoil, the Agreement offers Libya
a chance - a chance to reclaim the opportunities first
made possible by the 17 February 2011 revolution. We
all know that the new Government of National Accord
will have no shortage of challenges in the days ahead,
but the Libyan people will not face them alone. The
United States and other Member States will work
closely with the Government of National Accord and
its leadership to ensure the full implementation of the
Libyan Political Agreement and to provide support to
the Government as it begins to serve and protect the
Libyan people. As the Government of National Accord
works to improve security, we will work closely with it
to defeat affiliates of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant in Libya and to eliminate the threat they pose to
our collective security.

Through this resolution, we recognize the Libyan
people's enormous accomplishment in forging the
Agrement. We look forward to working together to see
it through, and we thank Special Representative Kobler
and the UNSMIL team for their heroic dedication to
this mission and to all the Libyans from all parts of the
country who worked tirelessly to make the Agreement
possible.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Libya.

