Mr. Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf ofthe Arab Group, I wish to thank you, Sir, for
your concern and prompt response in holding this
emergency meeting to consider the critical situation in
the Middle East. We also welcome the Secretary-
General.

As members know, the Arab Summit in Beirut
recently adopted a new Arab initiative based on
specific proposals made by His Royal Highness, the
Crown Prince of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. This
historic initiative reflects the readiness of the League
of Arab States and all its members to recognize the
State of Israel and to establish normal relations with it
in return for its complete withdrawal from occupied
Arab territories; the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital;
and recognition of the rights of all Palestinian civilians
under international law. We fully believe in the great
importance of this decision, which represents a unique
and historic opportunity to solve the Palestinian
problem and end the Arab-Israeli conflict in a just and
comprehensive manner.

However, Israeli aggression against the
Palestinian people and its leadership continues,
especially in Ramallah. In this regard, we strongly
condemn the recent Israeli actions against Palestinian
President Yasser Arafat and consider them to be a
serious threat to the security of the entire region that
could lead to a total deterioration in the situation and
loss of life. It is clear that this and other aggressions -
such as the policy of assassination, the destruction of
national institutions, homes and the infrastructure,
collective detention, the security and economic
blockade of Palestinian towns and villages and the
killing of countless innocent Palestinian civilians-
will not give Israel security. Furthermore, they
represent a flagrant violation of the agreements signed
between the two parties and of the norms of
international humanitarian law and other international
norms and instruments. We condemn these
unacceptable and unjustified acts. We also condemn the
targeting and killing of civilians on both sides.

We urge the Security Council to assume its
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations
by calling on Israel immediately and totally to
withdraw from all the territories it has reoccupied and
to uphold its commitments under the 1949 Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Times of War.

We also call upon the Security Council to demand
that Israel implement Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), with
a view to putting an end to the Israeli occupation of all
the occupied Arab territories and allowing the
Palestinian people to establish their own State on all
their national territory with Jerusalem as its capital.

