Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
the presidency of Japan for convening this open debate
and the Secretary-General for his briefing.

Indonesia associates itself with the statements by
the representatives of Iran and Kuwait on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, respectively.

The United Nations was founded to pursue
international peace and security and to promote the
equal rights and self-determination of people, among
other things. Much progress has been recorded by
the United Nations in those areas, including by
assisting the liberation of peoples living under foreign
occupation. Yet we must not be complacent. Resolving
prolonged conflicts and ending foreign occupation
remains the greatest challenge confronting the United
Nations, particularly the Security Council, which bears
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The Palestine-Israeli
conflict is one such.

For far too long, the international community has
witnessed inconsistency, and even betrayal, in the efforts
to resolve the Palestine-Israel conflict. The Council
alone has adopted 89 resolutions on the conflict, some
of which call for withdrawal of the Israeli occupation
force. Regrettably, none has been respected, even by the
institution that adopted them. Many times Indonesia has
stated in the Council and many other relevant forums
that ending the Israeli occupation is indispensable to
resolving the Palestine-Israeli conflict. The Palestinian
people must be accorded the opportunity to exercise
their inalienable right to establish an independent State
of Palestine, in accordance with the two-State vision.

In that regard, Indonesia underlines the importance
of the ministerial conference held in Paris last month,
which reflected the enduring international commitment
to peace between Palestine and Israel. As a participant
in the ministerial conference, Indonesia stands ready
to work with all relevant stakeholders on its follow-up,
including in putting together packages of incentives for
the resumption of the peace process. We will also work
to ensure the successful convening of the international
peace conference by the end of this year.

Indonesia takes note of the report of the Middle
East Quartet with respect to the peace process between
Palestine and Israel. While we appreciate the role of
the Quartet in pursuing peace, Indonesia considers the
report to be a disappointment. It fails to capture the
very reason behind the Palestine-Israeli conflict, which
is no other than the Israeli occupation. We should call a
spade a spade. For over 60 years, the Palestinian people
have been without a homeland. They have been robbed
of their dignity and forced to live in subjugation. We
do not condone violence, but failure to recognize the
link between the violence and the prolonged occupation
amounts to a denial of the frustrations of the Palestinian
people. If we are to restart a credible peace process,
the grief, anger and sense of despair of the Palestinian
people must be acknowledged. I reiterate that violence
cannot be condoned, but the longer the occupation takes
place, the more violence the world is likely to see.

It is also disappointing to see the report place
equal blame on Palestine and Israel, neglecting the
fact that Palestine is under occupation. This notion
of equal responsibility between Palestine and Israel
is also inconsistent with the Geneva Conventions and
various United Nations resolutions, including those of
the Council, which assign to Israel the responsibilities
of an occupying Power.

It is regrettable that such conclusions emerged in
the Quartet report. In our view, they run counter to all
the efforts to pursue peace between Palestine and Israel.
However, our disappointment aside, Indonesia agrees
with the Quartet that more efforts must be dedicated
to advancing the two-State solution. A climate of
trust must continue to be forged. The expansion
of settlements must stop 4 not only is it illegal, it
complicates the efforts to build trust. Along that line, it
is very upsetting that the report says nothing about the
illegal nature of the settlements.

On a different matter, all acts that contribute to
the building and strengthening of cordial relations
between Palestinian and Israeli communities must be
promoted. The desire for peace must come from within
both communities for it to be durable. Needless to say,
violence must also be prevented. The Security Council
must engage more energetically in the pursuit of peace.
By continuing to remain on the sidelines, the Council
allows the two-State solution to fade further away.
Worse still, the Council's inaction adds to the sense of
grief and anger of the Palestinian people and further
undermines their belief in a peaceful resolution of the
conflict. We certainly cannot let that happen, as we
owe to the children of Palestine the basic promise of
peace and human dignity that is at the foundation ofthe
Charter of the United Nations.

