Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico commends you, Sir, on your decision to
respond immediately to the request submitted by a
large number of States Members of the United Nations
to convene today's debate. Bearing in mind this
Council's commitment to transparency, we have heard
more than one third of States Members averring their
positions in this Chamber on the war in Iraq, its
immediate effects and its probable consequences; on
the humanitarian needs of the affected populations; on
the responsibilities and duties which international
humanitarian law imposes on the parties; and on the
reconstruction of Iraq.

Two common concerns have been expressed in all
the positions stated in this debate. The first bears on
the circumstances in which this war will come to an
end and on what we can do to halt it. The second bears
on the question of the future of our Organization, the
United Nations.

In the eyes of the world, this Council is fractured.
Indeed, the formula for achieving the disarmament of
Iraq divided us. The differences that emerged here have
led to an intensive debate about the authority of the
Security Council, the validity of multilateralism, the
United Nations capacity to enforce its resolutions and,
in general, the effectiveness of the collective security
mechanisms established in the United Nations Charter.

In these circumstances and at this time of
reflection, Mexico reaffirms its commitment to the
United Nations and its conviction that it is only within
the framework of the San Francisco Charter and by
means of multilateral decision-making mechanisms
that humankind will be able to find genuine and
effective formulas of collective security that will truly
prevent conflict, proscribe the use of force in
international relations, induce parties to choose
peaceful means of resolving their disputes, stop war
once it has begun, restore peace in fair conditions, and
promote full and complete disarmament and the
eradication of weapons of mass destruction.

The Security Council was established with the
central mandate of ensuring the maintenance of
international peace and security. Nothing today has
changed that. In carrying out that mandate, we in the
Security Council must strive through diplomatic
actions to secure an end to this conflict. The
disagreements that prevented the Council from
continuing inspections and the peaceful disarmament of
Iraq do not nullify the aspirations of the United Nations
or invalidate multilateralism. They do not divert us
from the values that gave life to the Organization.
What is happening in Iraq should be a sign that the
world cannot dispense with the United Nations.

Mexico regrets the war and deplores the suffering
of the Iraqi people. Destruction and the loss of human
life must be avoided. Together with other members of
the Council, my country sought formulas of
understanding that would have enabled the Council to
maintain by collective agreement the inspections
regime and political and diplomatic pressure, by means
of which we believed we could achieve the peaceful
disarmament of Iraq.

Faced with the impossibility of reaching such an
agreement, Mexico maintains its conviction that this
war should not have broken out. We uphold our
commitment to continue working within the Security
Council to find positions and actions that enable us to
restore peace in Iraq.

In that regard, the immediate challenge to the
Council is not to fall into paralysis or irrelevance. We
must overcome our differences and promptly reach a
consensus that will enable us, first and foremost, to
meet without delay the humanitarian responsibilities
already assumed by the Council, on which depend the
welfare and, today, the survival of a large part of the
Iraqi population.

That is the task and mandate of the oil for food
programme established pursuant to resolution 986
(1995): to use resources from the sale of the petroleum
of that country to alleviate the consequences of the
sanctions imposed on Iraq. The resources of that
programme belong to the Iraqis. Nothing could justify
a failure by the Security Council today to take the
decisions necessary to enable the people of Iraq to
benefit immediately from those resources. To the
extent that the Council is able to reactivate that
programme and to respond to this grave humanitarian
emergency by granting the Secretary-General the
powers necessary for its functioning, we will be able in
the near future to influence the establishment of
conditions that put an end to the armed conflict.

In that regard, Mexico welcomes the presentation
of the humanitarian "flash appeal", as the Secretary-
General has called it, which was developed by the
Secretary-General and which appeals to all Member
States to contribute generously to meet the urgent
humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people. Mexico will
make its contribution to that effort.
The United Nations must now also strive to
ensure that all the parties involved in this conflict
respect international humanitarian law, in particular the
Fourth Geneva Convention, in which are enshrined the
responsibilities and obligations of the belligerent
parties and the fundamental rights of the civilian
population, regardless of the cause of or grounds for
war. It is in our hands to ensure that the humanitarian
agencies of the United Nations system, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and non-
governmental organizations devoted to humanitarian
relief can fulfil their mission and act with the necessary
safeguards in any location where direct or indirect
victims of this war are found.

It is also incumbent upon the Security Council
and the United Nations as a whole to do their utmost to
ensure that all States respect the territorial integrity of
Iraq, as well as the fundamental and inalienable rights
of the Iraqi people over their resources, in particular
their oil. Whatever dimensions the armed conflict
assumes, here in the United Nations we must make a
great effort to ensure that peace in Iraq is not re-
established at the expense of the country's territorial
integrity. If this conflict is taking place because of
decisions taken outside the Security Council, the
Council is nonetheless the only body with the
legitimacy, authority and powers necessary for
undertaking a peace process.

This conflict has made evident the need to reflect
and to define the actions to take in three principle
areas: first, strengthening multilateralism, in particular
the role of the United Nations and the Security
Council; second, the search for consensus on the means
for effectively achieving the elimination of all weapons
of mass destruction; and third, updating the norms of
international law relating to armed conflict. All
Member States should participate in this process of
reflection, contributing ideas and proposals for the
reinvigoration and transformation of the United
Nations.

