Mr. Batu (Turkey): It gives me great pleasure to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of May. We are
confident that, under your able guidance, the Council will
successfully carry out its responsibilities. I should also like
to pay tribute to Ambassador Kovanda of the Czech
Republic for his capable and skilful work as President of
the Council in April.

In the historic Declaration of Principles, which raised
hopes for and great expectations of a new era in the Middle
East, the two parties agreed that negotiations on permanent
status, including Jerusalem, would commence later, the
implication being that the status quo would remain
unchanged in the meantime. Therefore, the latest action
taken by the Israeli Government with regard to
Jerusalem - namely, the decision to confiscate 53 hectares
of land situated in the area of East Jerusalem and its
announcement that this land would be allocated for the
continued building of Israeli settlements - contravenes
the spirit of the Declaration of Principles.

This recent action also violates the relevant Security
Council resolutions and the Fourth Geneva Convention, of
1949. Moreover, it is a negative move towards prejudging
the outcome of future negotiations at a time when Israel
is expected to engage in confidence-building measures in
support of the peace process.

Such acts obviously pre-empt the ongoing
negotiations and complicate the existing issues related to
settlers, settlements, the status of Jerusalem, and the
overall Middle East peace process. On the other hand, the
sensitive issue of Jerusalem, the Holy City, with its dual
political and religious dimensions, requires a careful and
rational approach as well as patience and wisdom and
action that is not based on sentiment. Any attempt to
change Jerusalem's geographical, demographic or legal
conditions would pose a serious threat to the entire peace
process.

We believe that a positive step to put an end to this
situation would guarantee the successful progression of
the process towards the achievement of a just and lasting
peace in the region.

We therefore call upon the Israeli Government to
rescind the declared confiscation orders and to refrain
from taking any such steps in the future. We also urge the
parties to reaffirm their willingness to see the peace
process currently under way continued, at this very
critical juncture. The great hopes generated by the historic
agreement should not be allowed to give way to despair.

