Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome Mr. Drame, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali, to the meeting and
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Annadif for his briefing.

As mentioned by colleagues, a few days ago
intercommunal conflict occurred in the Mopti region of
central Mali, causing many casualties. China is deeply
appalled by such developments and extends condolences
to the Malian Government and to the families of the
victims. We hope that the parties concerned will resolve
their differences through dialogue in order to restore
stabilty on the ground.

At present, the peace process in Mali is at a critical
juncture. The Government and the people of Mali have
made tireless efforts to promote the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
China appreciates their efforts in that regard. At the
same time, Mali continues to face severe challenges
as terrorist forces continue to expand their activities,
thereby affecting progress in the implementation of the
peace agreement.

The international community should continue to
provide support for peace and development in Mali.

First, it should actively promote the peace and
reconciliation process in Mali. All parties to the peace
agreement should prioritize the interests of the country
and its people, fulfil their commitments and work
together for national development and reconstruction.
China appreciates the efforts of the Malian Government
to promote dialogue and reconciliation and the progress
made in reintegrating former combatants. We call
on all parties to commit to resolving disputes by
peaceful means, through dialogue and negotiations.
The international community should respect the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Mali and help it improve its capacity for autonomous
development and governance. The work of the Security
Council's sanctions regime on Mali should aim to
support the political process and strictly follow its
mandate, as given by the Council.

Secondly, the international community should
help Mali strengthen its security capacity-building
by assisting its Government in improving its security
and counter-terrorism capacity so that it can gradually
assume responsibility for security. Peace and security in
Mali are closely linked to the overall security situation
in the surrounding areas. As such, it is necessary to
adopt integrated measures and conduct regional
cooperation in order to respond to terrorist activities
in and around Mali. China welcomes the formation
of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
to independently respond to security threats, such as
regional terrorism. We commend the United Nations
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) for their
work in support of the Joint Force.

Thirdly, the international community should
promote economic and social development in Mali. It
should continue to help Mali to build on the foundation
of its economy in order to achieve self-reliance and
sustainable development as soon as possible. That would
help to address problems in Mali at their source. China
calls on all parties concerned to continue to deliver
on their aid commitments and help the Government to
invest more resources in the development of northern
and central Mali. We look forward to the early
establishment of the northern economic development
zone so that local people can live and work in peace as
soon as possible.

Fourthly, the international community should
support MINUSMA in fulfilling its mandate.
MINUSMA and Special Representative Annadif have
played an important role in maintaining stability,
boosting security capacity-building and assisting the
peace process in Mali. The continued fulfilment by
MINUSMA of its mandate is extremely important to
the security and stability of Mali and the Sahel. China
supports a smooth MINUSMA mandate renewal and
will actively participate in the relevant deliberations.

China pays tribute to MINUSMA peacekeepers and
expresses condolences for those who laid down their
lives in the line of duty. The Secretariat and MINUSMA
have been actively improving the safety and security
of peacekeepers. It is our hope that MINUSMA will
continue to strengthen its work to ensure that supplies
and equipment are in place for mandate implementation
and security protection.

China is an important contributor of troops to
MINUSMA. More than 400 Chinese peacekeepers are
currently deployed in the Mission, performing medical
support, engineering and security-related tasks, among
others. Their ability to perform their duties has been
widely acclaimed. China will continue to work with
the international community to steadfastly support the
people of Mali in their pursuit of peace and development
and contribute to peace, stability and development
in Mali.

