The President (spoke in Chinese): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
April, I should like to take the opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to Mr. Ronaldo Mota
Sardenberg, Permanent Representative of Brazil to the
United Nations, for his service as President of the
Security Council for the month of March 2005. I am
sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Sardenberg for the great diplomatic skill with which he
conducted the Council's business last month.

Expression of condolence and a minute of silence
following the passing of His Holiness Pope John
Paul II

The President (spoke in Chinese): At the outset,
I should like to take this opportunity, on behalf of the
members of the Security Council, to express our
condolences at the passing of His Holiness Pope John
Paul II. As the Secretary-General best phrased it, the
Pope was a tireless advocate of peace, a true pioneer in
interfaith dialogue and a strong force for critical self-
evaluation by the Church itself.

I would respectfully ask Archbishop Celestino
Migliore, the Permanent Observer of the Holy See to
the United Nations, to convey the expressions of
condolence to the members of the Security Council to
the Holy See.

I wish to request members of the Security
Council to stand and observe a minute of silence in
memory of, and tribute to the life and work of Pope
John Paul II.

The members of the Council Observed a minute of
silence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Cote d'Ivoire

Fourth progress report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Operation in
C6te d'Ivoire (S/2005/186)


The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Cote d'Ivoire in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the consideration without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djangone-
Bi (Cote d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council
table.


The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members have before them document
S/ZOOS/ 186, which contains the fourth progress report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in C6te d'Ivoire.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2005/221, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution. Unless I
hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show aflmmls. The President (spake in Chinese): There were 15

In favour:

Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China, unanimously as resolution 1594 (2005).

votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted

Denmark. France, Greece, Japan. Philippines, The Security Council has thus concluded the
Romania, Russian Federation. United Kingdom present stage of its consideration of the item on its

of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United agenda.

Republic Of Tanzania. United States Of America The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 12.35 pm.

