Mr. Ould Deddach (Mauritania) (interpretation from French): Allow me first of all to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. Knowing your skills and qualities
and the interest that your country has in African issues, I
am sure that you will guide our work to a positive
outcome.

I should also like to take this opportunity to extend,
on behalf of the African Group, my congratulations and
encouragement to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
for his report, entitled "The causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa".

On 25 September 1997 the Security Council,
meeting at ministerial level, unanimously acknowledged
the need to engage in concerted international action to
achieve peace, security and development in Africa.

In its presidential statement (S/PRST/ 1997/46), the
Security Council indicated that it remained seriously
concerned by the number and intensity of armed conflicts
on the African continent. Believing that the challenges
facing Africa required a more comprehensive response,
the Council then requested the Secretary-General to
present to it a report

"containing concrete recommendations regarding
the sources of conflict in Africa, ways to prevent
and address these conflicts, and how to lay the
foundation for durable peace and economic growth".

At the same time, the Council affirmed its intention
to review promptly the recommendations of the Secretary-
General with a View to taking steps consistent with its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations.

All of the speakers at that ministerial-level meeting,
and in particular the current Chairman of the Organization

 

of African Unity, His Excellency President Robert Mugabe
of Zimbabwe, as well as the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity, His Excellency Mr. Salim
Ahmed Salim, put forward the concerns of Africa with
regard to security, peace and development.

The report that the Secretary-General was asked to
draw up has now appeared, and was presented to the
Council last week.

This substantive document, 22 pages and 107
paragraphs in length, is sound in every way. It covers all
relevant aspects of the security, peace and development of
our continent.

Indeed, the sources of these conflicts are varied and
manifold, but they all have a single common denominator:
underdevelopment and economic problems in general. For
example, of the planet's 48 least developed countries, 35
are in Africa.

The Secretary-General's report clearly emphasizes this
aspect of the situation. While the notable decline of
conflicts in Africa must be welcomed, the persistent
consequences of conflicts in several regions of the continent
must nevertheless be acknowledged, consequences that can
threaten peace and security and that significantly endanger
the efforts of the African States to achieve development and
ensure the well-being of their populations.

The Organization of African Unity (OAU) has done
significant work in the areas of conflict prevention,
management and settlement, in particular by creating an
organ entrusted with such action and by undertaking
numerous initiatives to restore and consolidate peace in
certain regions of Africa.

Africa is aware that it holds the primary responsibility
for solving the problems that face it; it must demonstrate to
the international community its will to face these
challenges, but it also needs the international community's
aid and support. The Group of African States would like to
take this opportunity to welcome the recent establishment
of a United Nations liaison office at OAU headquarters,
which will further ensure close cooperation between the two
organizations in the prevention and resolution of conflicts
in Africa and in other areas of mutual interest.

The annual meetings between the Secretaries-General
of the United Nations and OAU also promote better
communication and planning in order to achieve more
satisfactory results. Cooperation with all African
subregional organizations should also be encouraged.

In his report, the Secretary-General requests the
international community as a whole act to deal with the
situations in Africa. The Security Council, within the area
of competence conferred on it by the Charter, must
immediately set about implementing the report's
recommendations.

Other measures and actions recommended in
Mr. Kofi Annan's report fall within the purview of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and
the Bretton Woods institutions. All of these institutions
should immediately scrutinize the report in order to see to
what extent the actions that are within their competence
should be implemented.

Cooperation and collaboration between the African
countries and the United Nations are necessary to achieve
concrete results. Synergy between the various bodies of
the United Nations, on the one hand, and their partners
for development in Africa, on the other, is also required.

The establishment of a mechanism or a committee
mandated to implement the recommendations contained in
the Secretary-General's report would facilitate the work
of the Security Council.

The States of Africa are undertaking significant
reforms, and it must be acknowledged that these reforms
are beginning to yield positive results. However, those
States are aware that a great deal remains to be done. The
international community must pay greater attention to the
concerns of the continent, for at a time of globalization
and at the dawn of the twenty-first century, it is unjust
that some inhabitants of the planet do not even have the
bare minimum they need.

The best response the Security Council can give to
the concerns of our continent today is the adoption of a
resolution to give greater force to the actions to be
undertaken and to send a clear message to the entire
international community regarding the settlement of
conflicts in Africa, as a way to ensure its harmonious
development.

Africa is in favour of the Secretary-General' 5 request
for a biennial meeting of the Security Council at the
ministerial level to take stock of the efforts made and the
measures to be taken, and also supports the idea of a
summit meeting of the Security Council within five years.

 

My country, the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, like
all the African countries, welcomes any initiative
undertaken to help the continent extricate itself from
situations that compromise its future and that of future
generations of Africans.

My country's mission is to participate actively in an
organization that, respecting cultural diversity, advocates
cooperation and fruitful dialogue that serve the cause of
maintaining peace and stability for all.

Africa firmly believes that the report of the Secretary-
General will assist the international community in better
dealing with the problems it faces and that new initiatives
will be taken in order to help Africa overcome them.

In that context, for our Group, the only valid response
is that of undertaking specific measures to implement the
report's recommendations, since it is on that
implementation, as well as on the will of the continent's
inhabitants, that the security, stability and development of
Africa ultimately depend.

