Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Olof Skoog, Chair ofthe Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota,
its former Chair, for their briefings on peacebuilding in
post-conflict situations.

Recent changes and emerging challenges, along
with their impact in many areas of the world, have
required that the international community and the
United Nations acquire the necessary tools to deal
with them. Because challenges and threats continue
well after conflicts have ended, peacebuilding in the
post-conflict stage is an essential aspect of peace and
security operations at the national and international
levels. Signed peace agreements require the presence
of a solid mechanism to ensure that peace will last
and to deal with repercussions in the State concerned
and in the region, so as to ensure that the country does
not relapse into conflict and is in a position to recover
its capacity to manage its own affairs and assume its
responsibilities. None of that can be done without
the presence of a genuine partnership between the
international community and the national authorities
and communities within countries emerging from
conflict. Such cases require diplomacy more than
military intervention.

Since the current situation requires the review
and development of peacebuilding measures in post-
conflict countries, it is essential that peacebuilding
operations be adapted to the needs of individual States.
Furthermore, certain components must be put in place
so they can be responded to appropriately.

First, the training and the support of elements from
within the United Nations are needed, and capacities
required to meet unconventional challenges, such as
terrorism and cross-border crime, must be defined.

Secondly, the clear differences that exist among

States, whether in relation to the nature of conflicts
or national capacities to respond to threats, mean that
we must ensure national ownership in peacebuilding,
that capacity-building can happen and that the national
resources exist to ensure countries' medium- and short-
term development.

Thirdly, there is also the matter of building trust
between the United Nations and national authorities
and local communities, another important factor in
ensuring peacebuilding. It could take the form of
specific steps such as service-based projects to provide
resources to the country.

Fourthly, complex threats emerge during and after
conflicts and often cross national borders. They require
a multidimensional response in which governmental,
regional and subregional organizations should take
part in order to strengthen and ensure peacebuilding.
Despite the progress achieved in peacebuilding in a
certain number of countries such as Sierra Leone and
Burundi, such efforts still need to be aligned with needs
and with the efforts of the United Nations itself.

The United Nations should take a leadership role
in peacebuilding, particularly since that role is still
not sufficiently definted. For example, there is no
clear strategy for implementing peacebuilding. We
believe that the relevant context and political support
to national States are both essential, which means that
collective action based on clear plans is needed.

Moreover, the issue of mobilizing financial
resources remains a challenge for peacebuilding. The
United Nations, donors and international partners such
as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund
must provide the necessary financial and technical
support and expertise for peacebuilding, which means
that certain elements must be included. Stability must be
created by ensuring the rule of law, guaranteeing human
rights, bringing criminals to justice and ensuringing
accountability. That means building the pillars needed
to enable previous international sanctions to be lifted,
if the conditions exist.

Complementarity between the processes of security
and development is also needed. That requires the
reconstruction of institutions, with priority accorded
to economic and social issues. It is also necessary to
mobilize resources by involving the private sector, to
ensure lasting development. Certain illegal financial
flows must be ended.

Jordan accords great importance to the work
being undertaken by the Peacebuilding Commission,
including its advisory role for the Security Council,
and its positive participation that we have witnessed
in Liberia and Sierra Leone following the down-sizing
there of the role of peacekeeping. We reaffirm the
importance of providing support to all national, regional
and international players in order to further strengthen
the Peacebuilding Commission so it can meet the
challenges of peacebuilding in an effective way - not
after the withdrawal of peacekeeping operations, but
from the very beginning ofa conflict.

We support the committee that is reviewing
peacebuilding and hope the result will be a strategic
vision for designing response and implementation
measures for security and development plans in all
their aspects.
Jordan expects that the consideration by the United
Nations of its commitment in the peacebuilding stage
will include sending expert missions to work in post-
conflict countries, with clear mandates defined by the
Organization.

