Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I should
like first of all to welcome the presence among us of
the Secretary-General. I wish also to welcome Mr. Aziz
Pahad, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of South
Africa, and to thank him very warmly for his
outstanding presentation on the results of President
Mbeki's mediation, on behalf of the African Union, in
the context of the Ivorian crisis.
On behalf of Algeria, I should like to pay tribute
to South Africa and to President Mbeki for his personal
commitment and for his untiring efforts to break the
impasse in the peace process, and I wish to assure him
of our full support. Algeria would like also to thank
Mr. Alan Doss for his presentation.

Algeria is keen to see the Ivorian actors take the
opportunity of the meeting to be held in Pretoria on
3 and 4 April to announce a serious relaunching of the
political process. The situation in Cote d'Ivoire is
getting out of control, and therefore all parties involved
must discharge their responsibilities. The salvation of
the country should have priority over narrow interests
and personal ambitions.

It is important that the protagonists in the crisis
understand that the international community is starting
to lose patience, given the unjustified shilly-shallying
that is taking place and the failure to adhere to the
commitments undertaken. In his plan of action,
President Mbeki has gone to considerable pains to
address the objective concerns of all parties. He has,
quite rightly, made the re-establishment of confidence
between the parties a sine qua non for the relaunching
of the peace process. The African Union and President
Mbeki have also quite rightly asked and obtained from
the Security Council an additional chance for dialogue
and cooperation, as the Council has agreed to suspend
the implementation of the measures envisaged in its
resolution 1572 (2004).

We must, however, recognize that the parties do
not seem to have resolutely opted for peace and
reconciliation - far from it. The international
community expects them to make additional efforts and
to agree to mutual concessions.

Everything must be done to ensure that the
elections are held as scheduled. In that respect, it is
vital that the parties undertake initiatives to give the
country visibility and to provide the Ivorian people
with a reassuring outlook.

The worst-case scenario that I am willing to
envisage would be political deadlock at the time of the
October deadline. In order to avert such a situation, the
Forces nouvelles must be able to take their place once
again without delay within the Government of National
Reconciliation and begin the disarmament process. The
Ivorian authorities must, for their part, agree to find a
solution to the issue of article 35 and to ensure that the
legislative reforms will contribute in a meaningful way
to rooting out the causes of the crisis.
The development of the Ivorian crisis has had a
direct effect on the situation of UNOCI. The conditions
that were in place when its mandate and its
composition were originally determined have
significantly changed. At its start the mission was
designed to help Ivorians to implement the political
compromise agreed to at Linas-Marcoussis and
reaffirmed at Accra. UNOCI should therefore serve as
a guarantor for the proper implementation of the
agreements entered into, particularly with regard to the
most sensitive aspects, such as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, the reunification of
the country and the holding of credible, open and
transparent elections.

However, because of the way things are, and also
because of the will of the Security Council, UNOCI's
mandate and the rules of engagement have been subject
to change. It is now essentially concentrating on
dealing with the symptoms of the crisis, which, with
the continuing impasse in the peace process, are getting
worse day by day. UNOCI has become a stabilization
force. Thus it has been carrying out tasks for which it
is not necessarily prepared. The report of the
Secretary-General describes the various situations that
face UNOCI, particularly in the north of the country
and in the confidence zone. The Security Council
should carefully examine those problems the next time
it reviews the mission's mandate. During that
assessment, we must bear in mind that pressure on
UNOCI's resources will only increase. As the October
elections approach, the mission's responsibilities will
increase, quite independently of the development of the
political situation in cote d'Ivoire.

The international community certainly does not
want to see UNOCI remain passive and powerless in
the face of a possible deterioration in the situation.
This means that it is now more than ever essential to
strengthen its resources and, perhaps, to adapt its
mandate.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
reiterate its full support for the mediation efforts of
President Mbeki, and awaits with great interest the
assessment that he will make after the meeting in
Pretoria in April.

