Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We thank
Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi of Spain for his briefing
in his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). New Zealand is
a strong supporter of the mandate of the Committee.
We commend the Panel of Experts on its good work
and encourage both the Committee and the Panel to
continue their efforts.

Like others here today, we are pleased to note that
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) was
adopted on 18 October, 90 days after endorsement
of the Plan by the Council. Adoption was indeed an
important milestone in the process of ensuring that the
international community can have full confidence that
Iran's nuclear programme will be used for exclusively
peaceful purposes. We are pleased to note that JCPOA
participants, particularly Iran, are taking the necessary
first steps towards the full implementation of the nuclear
agreement. United Nations Member have also begun
the process of revising their domestic settings to reflect
the provisions of the agreement. This includes drafting
changes to allow for the removal of sanctions and for
snap-back arrangements, should these be required.

The process is by no means straightforward, and
we are acutely aware of the challenges faced by small
States in particular in implementing complex sanctions
regimes. Member States will continue to require
guidance to clarify and implement obligations under
resolution 2231 (2015). In order for the agreement to be
fully and effectively implemented, it is important that
all Member States and private sector entities be ready
to act in advance of implementation day. The Council
has an important role to play in assisting them to ensure
that they are indeed ready.

In the intervening period, we remind Member
States that all existing sanctions against Iran remain in
force. We note with concern the Panel's recent finding
of a violation of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007),
although we note that it did not reach a conclusion
as to whether this represented a wilful violation on
Iran's part. Additionally, the Panel has concluded
its investigation into Iran's test launch of a ballistic
missile on 10 October. New Zealand notes with concern
the Panel's conclusion that the launch of the Emad
missile was a violation of resolution 1929 (2010). Such
actions risk undermining confidence in and support
for the agreement and jeopardize its full and effective
implementation.

We urge all parties, in particular Iran, to approach
J CPOA implementation with the same positive intent and
good faith that enabled the agreement to be concluded.
We further note that even after implementation day,
Iran will remain subject to paragraph 3 of annex B of
resolution 2231 (2015), which calls upon Iran not to
undertake any ballistic missile launches.

