Mr. Pascoe: As the fighting in Libya continues
for the fifth month, there have been some marginal
gains on the battlefield by the opposition forces, but no
dramatic changes in the overall situation. The front
lines remain in flux as opposition forces attempt to
advance towards Tripoli, while Government forces
target strategic cities and areas under opposition
control. NATO operations continue, primarily against
sites in and around Tripoli.

The Secretary-General's Special Envoy,
Mr. Al-Khatib, briefed the Council two weeks ago on
the proposed parallel approach he has made to
Government officials in Tripoli and the Libyan Interim
Transitional National Council representatives in
Benghazi. At that time, both sides expressed their
readiness to study the proposal and discuss it further.
The proposal is designed to simultaneously establish a
credible ceasefire and create an institutional
mechanism for the management of the transition.

On 25 July, the Special Envoy travelled to
Benghazi to continue discussions. During his meeting
with the Transitional National Council, there was
discussion of his proposal for the transition as well as
other issues put forth by Council members. These
members insisted they could not engage in talks for the
establishment of a new transitional entity while the
existing regime in Tripoli was in place. They
emphasized that meeting the legitimate aspirations of
the Libyan people had to be the aim of the
negotiations, and this included the departure of
Colonel Al-Qadhafl. While no conclusions were
reached, the exchange was actually quite useful and
constructive overall.
2

On 26 July, the Special Envoy went to Tripoli for
talks with Libyan Prime Minister Al Baghdadi Ali
Al-Mahmoudi. The Prime Minister reiterated the
Libyan Government's position that it was not ready to
engage in a political process that implied the stepping
down of Colonel Al-Qadhafi. The Prime Minister
raised various aspects related the implementation of
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011), including
their impact on Libya, and demanded that NATO stop
its military actions prior to Libya's engagement in any
process to implement the Security Council's
resolutions. This posturing by both sides has been
fairly consistent since the beginning of these
discussions. Both sides are willing to talk, but they are
still emphasizing maximum demands at this point, and
patience is clearly required before detailed discussion
can begin.

As we have said many times, a ceasefire tied to
transitional arrangements that address the aspirations
of the Libyan people is the only sustainable political
solution to the crisis in Libya. The Secretary-General
and his Special Envoy make this point in all our
discussions with key interlocutors around the world.

From the outset, the United Nations has worked
closely with all concerned parties in Libya, with
regional organizations, including the African Union
(AU), the League of Arab States and the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, and with the wider
international community. I would like to note that
Mr. Al-Khatib today is in Mauritania, where he had a
good meeting with President Ould Abdel Aziz, the
Chairman of the AU Ad Hoc High-level Committee on
Libya. It remains critical that the international
community speak with one voice, through the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy, in order to bring
about a political solution.

On 15 July, the fourth meeting of the Contact
Group on Libya was held in Istanbul. The
Chairperson's final statement recognized the Interim
Transitional National Council as "the legitimate
governing authority in Libya" until the establishment
of an interim authority. The participants also expressed
their full support for Special Envoy Al-Khatib to lead
mediation efforts to resolve the Libyan crisis.

On 18 July, the African Union Ad Hoc High-level
Committee on Libya convened a technical interactive
meeting on Libya in Addis Ababa, to which the
Transitional National Council, the Libyan Government
11-43499
and the United Nations were invited. The Libyan
Government sent a delegation to the meeting, while the
Transitional National Council did not participate. The
AU is planning for a second interactive session with
the Transitional National Council, scheduled to take
place in Addis Ababa in early August.

The Secretary-General has remained closely
engaged in the search for a political solution. For
example, on 22 July he spoke with President Zuma of
South Africa on the way forward and on approaches
that would tighten United Nations and African Union
cooperation.

The number of people who have left Libya and
have not returned since the start of the conflict is now
estimated at over 630,000, including some 100,000
Libyans. Another 200,000 Libyans have been internally
displaced. The number of people stranded at border
points in Egypt, Tunisia and Niger has been reduced to
about 2,600, mostly third-country nationals, some of
whom are asylum seekers who cannot return to their
homes. Additionally, around 22,000 people, mostly
African migrants, have arrived by boat in Italy and
Malta from Libya. At least 1,400 people have died
during those journeys or are missing.

During my recent visit to Tunisia, I thanked the
Government for Tunisia's generosity in hosting
refugees. The Government raised the need for
assistance to be directed not only to the refugees in
camps, but also to the Tunisian families who are
generously hosting Libyan refugees in their homes.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and other United Nations entities are
working on how best to help support the displaced in
Tunisia, but additional support from the international
community will be needed.

The Government of Libya has repeatedly
complained about the shortage of medical supplies,
vaccines and equipment. In addition, major fuel
shortages are reported in Tripoli. Humanitarian aid and
fuel are arriving regularly in opposition-controlled
areas, although there are some shortages there too. The
lack of fuel, of course, affects the movement of people
and goods, electricity, water supply, employment,
hospitals, agriculture and fisheries. We remain
concerned about the risk of water services breaking
down due to uncertain fuel supplies and to a lack of
maintenance and spare parts.
11-43499

The approach of the holy month of Ramadan has
added greater urgency to the provision of supplies and
meeting of humanitarian needs. Both the Libyan
Government and the Transitional National Council
have requested the use of frozen assets to meet
humanitarian needs. The Secretary-General has
forwarded these communications to the President of
the Security Council.

The Special Adviser on post-conflict planning in
Libya, Mr. Ian Martin, has continued preparatory work
within the United Nations and with key partners on
ways we can be helpful when the conflict has been
resolved. The United Nations system-wide
pre-assessment process to develop possible scenarios
and areas where United Nations or other international
support may be appropriate, if it is requested, is
nearing completion. Cooperation within and outside
the United Nations system on this process has been
excellent. This effort will be invaluable if and when the
United Nations is called upon to react quickly in a
post-conflict Libya.

As we have told the Council, early contingency
planning is being undertaken by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations for military and police roles
that the United Nations may be asked to perform
following a ceasefire. The Secretariat will be ready to
discuss with the Libyan authorities and propose to the
Council the most immediate priorities for United
Nations assistance during a transition whenever
political developments make this appropriate.

The Chair of the Libya sanctions Committee
briefs the Council as necessary, pursuant to paragraph
24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011). I would therefore
simply note that the Panel of Experts appointed by the
Secretary-General in accordance with paragraph 24 of
resolution 1973 (2011) has begun its work in earnest.
The Panel is mandated to gather, examine and analyse
information from States, relevant United Nations
bodies, regional organizations and other interested
parties regarding the implementation of the measures
decided in resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011). In
doing so, it has travelled to countries in Europe, North
Africa and the Middle East. It has also visited
Benghazi, Libya, and intends to visit Tripoli in the near
future. The Panel will submit an interim report to the
Committee no later than 10 August 2011.

Since the adoption of resolution 1973 (2011), the
Secretary-General has received 43 communications
3
from more than 20 Member States and regional
organizations and arrangements, informing him of
actions with respect to the implementation of the
resolution. The majority of these communications
relate to paragraphs 4 and 8, and the rest relate to
humanitarian exemptions under paragraph 7.

In my previous briefings to the Council, I
provided updates on the letters addressed to the
Secretary-General by the NATO Secretary-General
conveying NATO's first and second monthly reports,
weekly reports and technical updates. Since my last
briefing, we have received the third and fourth monthly
reports, dated 27 June and 20 July respectively, in
addition to one technical update dated 11 July. All
reports have been circulated to Security Council
members.

The challenges posed by the crisis in Libya are
serious ones, but we believe that they can be managed
by staying closely involved, actively pursuing a
negotiated solution and planning carefully to play a
possible role, if asked, in the future.

