Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Since this is our first statement in the
Council this month, we should like to join other
delegations in wishing you success, Sir, in your
presidency of the Council.

We also thank the Ambassador Jones Parry of the
United Kingdom for his very skilful conduct of the
Council's work in September.

The course of events in the Middle East is of
growing concern and alarm. Following the large-scale
terrorist act in Haifa, the Israeli air force, for the first
time in many years, sent missile strikes against Syrian
territory near Damascus, targeting what Israel claimed
to be a training camp for the extremist organization
Islamic Jihad. It left open the possibility of other
attacks against terrorists wherever they may be.

It is very clear that such acts lead to increased
confrontation in the Middle East, are fraught with peril
for other countries and could trigger even more
dramatic consequences, both for the very tense
situation in the region and for international security as
a whole. Russia urges all parties to the conflict to show
maximum restraint and to act in a balanced and
responsible way so as to avert any further escalation in
the spiral of violence and to prevent regional
destabilization, the tragic results of which would be
difficult to foresee.

The ongoing escalation of violence in the Middle
East requires more energetic action on the part of the
international community in order to prevent an even
more dangerous aggravation of the situation. It is
important now to press the parties to the conflict to halt
the confrontation as soon as possible and to restore the
political process, the final goal of which is a
comprehensive settlement in the region. To that end,
what we need above all is to unblock the way forward
on the road map, to which there is no alternative in
finding a solution to the Israel-Palestine conflict. The
Palestinians and Israelis alike must resume their
dialogue and begin to carry out their obligations under
the road map.

