Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia): Allow me to begin by
extending my delegation's congratulations to you, Mr.
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of June. We are convinced that
with your diplomatic skill, our deliberations will result
in a positive outcome. I should also like to express our
appreciation to your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Singapore, Mr. Kishore Mahbubani,
for his excellent leadership in presiding over the work
ofthe Council last month.

Indonesia remains deeply concerned at the
current situation on the ground in the occupied
Palestinian territories. During the past few months, it
has become habitual for Israel to undertake at will
repeated incursions into, and to commit acts of
aggression against, the occupied territories. Israel's
storming of the Palestinian headquarters and its siege
of it are particularly reprehensible. The fact that Israel
has insisted on this abhorrent policy with impunity is a
sad reflection of the Council's inability to deal with
what is universally acknowledged as an intolerable
situation. Backed by military might, Israel has
continued its dangerous and destructive course, with
utter disregard for the prospects for peace. It is
therefore time to end Israel's military adventure and
initiate negotiations for a comprehensive settlement of
the conflict.

My delegation holds the view that the
implementation of resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403
(2002) is critical to the realization of peace in the
region. Of equal importance is the implementation of
resolution 1397 (2002), which sketched a road map for
the realization of two States, Israel and Palestine,
living side by side within secure and internationally
recognized boundaries. Only through the realization of
that objective can we bring to an end the turmoil that is
raging in the occupied territories.

Finally, my delegation deems it necessary to
reiterate the responsibility of the international
community, and specifically that of the Security
Council, to take the necessary steps to put an end to the
illegal Israeli occupation and to protect the lives of
innocent civilians. Therefore, my delegation strongly
believes in the imperative need to deploy an
international security force to protect civilians as a
matter of urgency and to restore normalcy to these war-
torn territories.

