Mr. Chavez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is pleased to see you, Mr. President, guiding
the work of the Security Council this month. We are
also pleased to participate in this open debate, for
which we are grateful. We would also like to associate
ourselves with the statement delivered by the
representative of Uruguay on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.

My delegation would also like to express its
gratitude for the Security Council's mission to Haiti
from 11 to 14 March. We would like in particular,
through you, to congratulate Ambassador Jorge Urbina,
Permanent Representative of Costa Rica, for his
serious and professional leadership on a subject of
particular importance and sensitivity for Latin America
and the Caribbean. We would also like to thank
Mr. Hedi Annabi for his ongoing efforts in Haiti and
for the important information he has given us.

It is clear that the security situation in Haiti has
improved. Areas that were once convulsed by violence,
such as Cite Soleil, today enjoy considerable calm with
regard to daily life. Co-existence and political dialogue
continue to prevail, despite some difficulties. We hope
for the success of the elections to be held this month to
elect a third of the Senate. We also welcome
improvements in extending State authority,
strengthening the rule of law and respect for human
rights.

However, it is no less true that there are specific
and quite worrisome problems on the socio-economic
front. We are concerned about the deterioration in
people's living standards as a result of the difficulties
that the country faced in 2008, in particular as a result
of the global food crisis and the damage caused by the
hurricanes that struck the island. In an already
extremely fragile environment, those difficulties have
been exacerbated by the effects of the global financial
and economic crisis. Far from losing hope, we should
face the challenges with renewed vigour. Haiti's
reconstruction and development are still unfinished
tasks.

Haiti now has a priceless opportunity in the high-
level donor conference that will take place on 14 April
in Washington, D.C.. This is essentially an opportunity
to secure financial and technological support, as well
as to further focus the Government's effort with regard
10

to planning and the necessary identification of key
objectives in the areas of food security, steps to create
jobs and providing reliable basic services. Addressing
urgent needs, which no doubt exist, does not obviate
the need to think about the long term and about
sustainable economic and social development. The goal
should be not just to secure resources, but also to
improve governance.

Speaking more broadly, it is a priority to support
the progress to which reference has been made in the
areas of security, political dialogue, the extension of
State authority and entrenching the rule of law and
respect for human rights. That should be done through
steps that make it possible to gradually and concretely
raise the standards of living of the average Haitian.

My delegation would like to highlight once again
the important role that is being played by the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti in bringing
stability in Haiti. We would also once again like to
commend the efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Haiti and of United Nations
development agencies that, along with other
international bodies, are doing commendable work in
that country. Coordination between the Government of
Haiti and all the groups providing advice, cooperation
or assistance should continue to be fine-tuned and
strengthened. Ensuring ownership of the process by the
Government and the people of Haiti is a major
challenge which must be faced with decision, energy
and healthy optimism. It is also a major responsibility:
ultimately, the Government and the people of Haiti
must set the guidelines and decide on their own future,
with the active support of the international community.

Once again, I stress the unwavering commitment
of the Government of Peru to the stabilization and
development of Haiti.

