The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Guinea.

1 should like first of all to extend my delegation's
sincere condolences to the Government of the Republic
of Korea and to the bereaved families for the tragic loss
of the five Korean soldiers from the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET).

I should like to express my delegation's support
for the report of the Secretary-General and to thank Mr.
Jean-Marie Guehenno for his excellent introduction of
the report.

The birth of the Democratic Republic of Timor-
Leste on 20 May 2002 offered us a glimmer of hope for
a better future for the people of Timor-Leste, who had
for so long been victims of the vicissitudes of history.
The many armed incidents and the public unrest in the
country since last November have unfortunately
tempered our optimism and undermined the hope that
had been engendered. The seriousness of those events
should urge the Council to consider the steps that can
be taken to avoid jeopardizing the valuable
achievements of three long years of arduous efforts on
the part of the international community.

The anxiety that has taken hold of the people at a
time when the country is going through a crucial stage
in its political and economic development is extremely
disturbing. In this connection, my delegation believes
that appropriate investigations should be urgently
conducted so as to determine the origins of the climate
of instability and to find the right solution. We believe
that the very first step should be rapidly to ensure the
necessary capacity for maintaining security so as to
preserve and strengthen the achievements of the past
three years.

Resolution 1410 (2002), which the Council
adopted unanimously on 17 May 2002, gave
UNMISET the specific mandate to ensure, on an
interim basis, the implementation of laws and public
security; to contribute to the development of the
national police force; and to provide assistance for the
maintenance of the internal and external security of
Timor-Leste. Given the growing threat to the stability
and security of the country, that mandate should be
supported vigorously now more than ever.

That is why we fully agree with the
recommendations of the Secretary-General, in
particular with regard to the simplified two-phase
deployment plan for the military component until May
2004 and the strengthening of the operational capacity
of the UNMISET police with a view to enabling it to
cope with civil disorder and improve the ability of the
Timor-Leste police to contain such disorder.

We agree, however, that we should not exclude
the possibility of such plans being revised in the event
either of a significant improvement or of a
deterioration in the overall security climate.
Furthermore, my delegation would like to emphasize
the need for the leaders and the people of Timor-Leste
fully to promote the implementation of the necessary
measures with a view to dealing with that challenge.
We also encourage the Indonesian and East Timorese
parties to continue negotiations to conclude a final
agreement on border demarcation so as to prevent
friction in the future and to strengthen relations of trust
between the two countries.

Finally, my delegation would like to reiterate the
appeal made to donors for increased support to Timor-
Leste in basic areas such as defence, the police, justice
and crime reduction. We are convinced that that will
help to consolidate the activities of UNMISET and
contribute to the establishment, in the near future, of
peace and stability, which will be the basis for the
sustainable development of the country.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Timor-Leste, to whom I give the
floor.

