Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): At the outset, let me
express my delegation's appreciation to Mr. Yun Byung-
se, Minister for Foreign Affairs ofthe Republic ofKorea,
for organizing and presiding over today's open debate,
and to Mr. Jan Eliasson, Deputy Secretary-General, for
his comprehensive briefing delivered today.

Armenia also strongly welcomes the Council's
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/7) under the
agenda item on the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs), adopted earlier today.
It again reaffirms that the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons and their means of
delivery constitutes a threat to international peace and
security.

While Armenia fully associates itself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union
(EU), I would like to make some brief comments and
remarks in my national capacity.

The Republic of Armenia considers resolution
1540 (2004) of 28 April 2004 to be one of the
fundamental international instruments in the sphere of
non-proliferation of WMDs and related elements, and
attaches paramount importance to its implementation.
Armenia was among the countries that fully supported
the extension of the mandate of the relevant United
Nations committee on the implementation of the
resolution until 2021. Since the adoption of the
resolution, Armenia has undertaken several measures
for its comprehensive implementation. In particular,
Armenia has completely reformed the national expert
control system on dual-use and military goods by
adopting a new law and relevant Government decrees.
In July 2013, by decision of the Prime Minister, an
inter-agency working group was formed to develop a
national action plan for the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). In September 2013, at Armenia's Ministry
for Foreign Affairs, the first workshop of the working
group and international experts took place in Yerevan.
Recently, a draft action plan was put on paper and
submitted for review to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Conflict Prevention
Centre, and the EU Chemical, Biological, Radiological
and Nuclear Centres of Excellence Initiative.

In conclusion, while reiterating our strong support
for the 1540 Committee, and in particular its leadership,
I would like to inform the members of the Council that
Armenia expects to finalize its national action plan on
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) no later
than July, and to start its implementation.

