Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation joins in the gratitude
expressed by several of our colleagues to the delegation
of the United Kingdom for requesting today's meeting.
We also thank you, Madam President, for putting this
item on the agenda. And we thank Mr. Mark Lowcock
for his briefing. We listened attentively to the details of
the horrific effects of the war.

My delegation is deeply concern about the
increasing level of violence in Yemen, and in particular
about the stepped up bombing and air strikes resulting
from the military campaigns in the area surrounding the
city of Al-Hudaydah. Regrettably, such armed clashes
have extended beyond the port and have affected the
main road connecting the cities of Al-Hudaydah and
Sana'a, making it practically impossible to use that
route to transport goods and humanitarian assistance.
In addition, as Mr. Lowcock explained, they have
affected the Red Sea Mills silos.

Since the start of the conflict, the number of
civilian Victims who have died or have been seriously
injured as a result of the clashes and attacks on civilian
areas and infrastructure has risen to more than 16,000.
That number could spike dangerously if the city of
Al-Hudaydah and its more than 600,000 residents are
trapped in the midst of a military campaign. Similarly,
effects could then be felt throughout the country as
ports that are vital to the survival of the Yemeni people
are compromised or rendered useless by the military
strife under way. We recall that more than 70 per cent
of the imports that arrive in Yemen enter through the
port of Al-Hudaydah. Therefore, an attack on the city
or port would not only seriously affect the 22 million
people who currently need humanitarian assistance in
the country; the number of people who require urgent
assistance would become unsustainable. It is also
important to bear in mind that increased violence would
also lead to the displacement of entire families fleeing
the conflict and heading to the city of Al-Hudaydah for
shelter. A clear example of that situation was recorded
by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. On 14 September, it reported that
approximately 3,500 people had been displaced as a
result of clashes in districts adjacent to Al-Hudaydah.
Clearly, a military campaign in that city could cause a
major disaster.

Those acts of war serve only to undermine and
go against the efforts being carried out by the United
Nations and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
to resume dialogue to bring the parties together in the
quest for a negotiated solution to the conflict. Therefore,
the Council must emphatically reiterate to the parties
that compliance with its resolutions if obligarory,
in particular resolution 2216 (2015). All actors and
parties involved must therefore put an immediate end
to the violence, abandon any precondition to establish
dialogue and commit to starting a negotiation process
for a political solution that meets the demands and
aspirations of the Yemeni people, while respecting the
country's sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. My delegation supports the process of
consultations and dialogue launched by the Special
Envoy, as an important initiative to foster a political
negotiation process that would allow for a peaceful
settlement to the situation in Yemen. We again call on
the actors and parties involved to join and contribute
constructively to the dialogue process.

It is also essential to remind the parties that attacks
or military campaigns that target civilians, public
spaces, housing or medical and educational facilities,
as well as missile launches and the deployment of
anti-personnel mines, are contrary to international law
and international humanitarian law. Such actions could
constitute war crimes and be investigated and punished
by the relevant international courts.

Finally, with a view to achieving a political solution
to the conflict in Yemen, my delegation reiterates its
full support for the efforts at mediation and dialogue
initiated and being carried out by the Special Envoy
vis-a-vis the parties.

