Ms. Dlamini Zuma (South Africa): We would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting. We would also like to thank the

representatives of the League of Arab States, Saudi
Arabia, Palestine and Israel for their respective
statements. We are pleased that we were able to
accommodate the request for this meeting this week.

After the Annapolis Conference, South Africa
thought that settlement activity in the occupied
Palestinian territories would cease. The settlements are
illegal, change the facts on the ground and are a key
obstacle to peace. The 1949 Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War prohibits the occupying Power from transferring
parts of its own civilian population to the territory it
occupies.

My delegation joins the rest of the global
community in calling for an end to Israeli settlement
activity in occupied Palestinian territory. We urge the
Council to demand that Israel immediately and
completely freeze all settlement activity, including
natural growth, and dismantle outposts erected since
March 2001, in order not to change facts on the ground
and prejudice final status negotiations.

The deadline set by the Annapolis process for a
peace agreement by the end of this year is drawing
close. Despite assurances that negotiations are
continuing, the situation on the ground has not
improved significantly since the start of this process. In
fact, in some areas such as settlement activity, it has
further deteriorated. Both parties to the negotiation
process, Israel and Palestine, have the obligation to
commit to the peace process, but any positive political
progress must result in visible progress on the ground.

We continue to encourage both Palestinians and
Israelis to persist with their negotiations to achieve the
goal of the establishment of an independent,
economically viable State of Palestine living side by
side with Israel, with both States enjoying secure and
internationally recognized borders. That vision of a
two-State solution has already been enshrined in
various United Nations resolutions. But clearly, the
increased settlement activity is threatening the
possibility of that viable Palestinian State.

We reiterate that the primary responsibility for
peace and security lies with the two sides, but that the
Security Council should also do its part and not
neglect, as it is currently doing, its Charter-mandated
responsibility to assist in the attainment of that goal.
