Ms. Lee (Singapore): We would like to join the
other delegations in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for his comprehensive briefing on the recent
developments in Kosovo and in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. I should like to make just two
main points today.

Singapore's positions on the major issues
confronting Kosovo are well known. We have
articulated them several times since we joined the
Security Council. Now that Kosovo-wide elections,
scheduled for 17 November, are coming closer, it is
even more important for all the parties involved to
invigorate their efforts to make sure that the necessary
conditions are in place. Of utmost importance is the
full participation and engagement of all the ethnic
communities in Kosovo in the elections and in
developing substantial autonomy. This includes
refugees and displaced persons, who should be
encouraged to return and to participate in the
registration, the elections and the self-government
structures. Several conditions are required. I would like
to highlight four conditions which we feel are needed.

First is a secure environment where all the ethnic
communities feel safe. Building on the establishment
of pillar I and the promulgation of regulations against
terrorism, organized crime and illegal weapons
possession, the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force
should take steps to further improve the security
situation in Kosovo. The Kosovo leadership also has a
part to play in forcefully rejecting violence, extremism
and terrorism. Violence against the ethnic minorities, in
particular, must cease.

Second is an environment favourable to
improving inter-ethnic relations and promoting
reconciliation. The Kosovo leadership has an important
duty in this regard, while Kosovo society must
overcome the deep hatred that exists among the ethnic
communities. Specifically, the Kosovo Albanian
leadership has to be more forthcoming on improving
the treatment of the minority communities, while the
latter must be more forthcoming in integrating into the
society at large.

A multi-ethnic Kosovo is clearly the only option,
and both the majority and minorities in Kosovo must
work towards this goal. The United Nations and the
international community can only assist to push the
process forward.

Third is a continuing emphasis on developing a
sustainable market economy. The positive spiral effect
of economic progress on Kosovo should not be
underestimated. Economic growth even has an
affirmative effect on the security environment in the
province. But just as for reconciliation, economic
development depends on the readiness of the Kosovo
leadership itself to build economic sustainability in the
province. In this respect, we urge the Kosovo
leadership to support the work of UNMIK in relation to
the strategies developed under the economic pillar.

Fourthly, it is even more important, in this crucial
period, for UNMIK to have regular, direct dialogue
with Belgrade. Dialogue between the Kosovo political
leaders and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
Government should also be encouraged. Clearly, the
effective implementation of resolution 1244 (1999)
requires continued communication with the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia Government.

The United Nations responsibility to Kosovo does
not end with the elections and the establishment of the
structures of provisional self-government. These are
indeed significant milestones, but Kosovo's return to
normalcy is likely to take more time.

Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) must be
strictly implemented until an agreement on the final
status of Kosovo is reached. The need for a continued
and substantive United Nations presence in post-
election Kosovo, supported by other international
agencies and interested parties, is obvious. The
duration and nature of that presence must take into
account the larger political context and environment.

The peaceful resolution of the Kosovo question is
integral to the security and stability of the entire
Balkan region. We are of the View that the eventual
termination of the United Nations presence, as in other
troubled parts of the world, must be gradual and
carefully structured to bolster, not undermine, the
painstaking progress achieved. It is imperative that the
United Nations, having begun such a major
undertaking, does not terminate or draw down one
mission prematurely on the simple-minded proposition
that another, elsewhere, can be supported.

The fact is that demand for resources to restore
international peace will always exceed supply.
However, if exit strategies for operations that the
United Nations has already committed to are not
carefully calibrated and executed, we run the real risk
of unravelling all of the achievements made. This
would render the substantial investments made by the
international community a total waste and seriously
undermine the credibility of the United Nations. Worse,
it might render necessary the expenditure of even more
resources to put the pieces back together again.

