Mrs. Audouard (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, and the Ambassadors
ofNew Zealand and Spain, for today's briefings and for
the leadership shown by all three countries in chairing
the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities.
Terrorism continues to be one of the world's greatest
threats to international peace and security, as the all-
too-frequent attacks that saturate the news remind us.

The Chair of the 1267 Committee emphasized that
the past year saw the Committee's activities refocused
on the threat posed by Da'esh and its affiliate groups.
In that regard, the adoption of resolution 2253 (2015)
was an important step forward in addressing the
current terrorist threat. The 1267 Committee carries
out at least two essential tasks that France considers
extremely important, one of them being analysing the
terrorist threat through the very detailed and valuable
reports of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004)
and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities. But I should also
commend the quality of the joint briefings with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
on such major subjects as foreign terrorist fighters and
combating terrorism financing.

The second is the implementation and rigorous
monitoring of the sanctions list. In that regard, we
encourage all States Members of the United Nations
to continue to submit requests for the inclusion of
names on the list. But in order to maintain the regime's
credibility, its procedures must also respect the
fundamental freedoms ofthe individuals on the list. The
establishment of the post of an Ombudsperson for the
regime represents an unprecedented effort on the part
of the Council to improve its procedural safeguards,
and I should commend Ms. Marchi-Uhel's outstanding
work on the job.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee also fills two
essential and complementary functions. The first is
doing as much as possible to raise States' awareness
of new trends in the ever-changing terrorist threat.
In that regard, the Counter Terrorism-Committee
Executive Directorate's recent work on the issues
of data on travellers and on foreign terrorist fighters
returning from conflict zones is particularly important.
The Committee's second function is monitoring States'
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and their
fight again terrorism and its financing generally, but
also their efforts regarding other resolutions, such as
1624 (2005), on combating incitement to commit acts of
terrorism, and 2178 (2014), on foreign terrorist fighters.
It is therefore crucial that States accept visits from
the Executive Directorate so as to enable it to assess
their systems for combating terrorism and make the
best possible recommendations. It is also essential to
ensure that the United Nations can implement technical
assistance programmes based on those assessments and
recommendations. We therefore consider it fundamental
to ensure that the Executive Directorate continues to
work closely with the other United Nations bodies
involved in combating terrorism in order to carry out
such projects.

Finally, I would like to comment briefly on
the important work of the 1540 Committee under
Spain's dynamic leadership. Unfortunately, the risk of
biological, chemical, radiological and nuclear weapons
falling into the hands of terrorists is real. The especially
worrying information reaching us from Iraq and Syria
means that we can no longer rule out that possibility.
To that we have to add the doubts that remain regarding
Syria's declaration of its chemical programme to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and the potential for the existence of residual capacity
in Syria, which only increases that risk and which we
take very seriously.

However, it would be unfair not to emphasize the
significant achievements of resolution 1540 (2004)
since its adoption. Today an overwhelming majority
of Member States have adopted measures translating
the resolution's provisions into national legislation.
In areas such as securing sensitive materials and
goods, strengthening border controls and even, when
necessary, establishing mechanisms for export controls,
the international community is working to ensure that
such sensitive materials and goods cannot fall into
terrorists' hands.

The ongoing comprehensive review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) will be an
opportunity to adapt and strengthen our tools against
this threat. By identifying implementation gaps,
strengthening assistance mechanisms and the dialogue
of the Committee with other international organizations,
we will be able to better prevent the risk of non-State
actors acquiring weapons of mass destruction.

The meetings in Madrid in a few days, and
especially the open meeting here in New York in June,
will be major landmarks that we must build on. Spain
can count on the support of France to make this year
a success.

