Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I am
pleased to congratulate you, Madame President, on
your leadership of the Council's proceedings for this
month. As a matter of fact, I am delighted to see a dear
friend and representative of a sisterly African State
presiding over the affairs of the Council.

Allow me to extend our thanks to the Secretary-
General, all members of the Security Council and all
States that stood by the side of Libya and the Libyan
people over the course of the past several months,
during which we were experiencing a painful plight.

On 20 October Libya declared its liberation from
the dictatorial regime of Colonel Al-Qadhafi following
his assassination, which was announced on 23 October.

Here, I would like to convey the gratitude of the
Libyan people to all those who contributed to their
support, whether by supplying weaponry, food or
medicine, or by caring for the injured, as well as to
those who participated in imposing the no-fly zone and
in protecting civilians. Had it not been for that
solidarity with the Libyan people, and the assistance
we received, we could not have done what we have
done, and the number of victims would have been
much higher than it is.

If I may, I should say that despite the admirable
action on the part of the international alliance in
imposing the no-fly zone and protecting civilians -
which the Libyan people strongly commend - we as a
people abhor any interference in our sovereignty and
consider that any foreign presence in our skies
diminishes that sovereignty, while understanding that it
was unavoidable and indispensable. The Libyan people
feel that every day that passes with foreign control
over our skies infringes on our sovereignty. This has
been particularly true since 23 October, when we made
our declaration of liberation.

I would therefore like to inform everyone that the
Libyan people are looking forward to terminating as
soon as possible the no-fly zone over Libya and the
mandate on the protection of civilians set out in
resolution 1973 (2011). According to our original
assessment, 31 October would be the logical date on
which to terminate the mandate.

However, there is no official resolution by the
National Transitional Council (NTC), and some
contradictory news militates against that. Also, some
believe that we need further evaluation of the country's
security situation and the extent of Libya's ability to
monitor its borders. Therefore we would like to ask
that the Security Council allow the NTC to take a
resolution on this subject to be officially conveyed to
the Council. That will take a few days. It may still take
place before the 31st of this month.

However, as the Council is aware, Libya is a huge
country, and we have not yet activated our air
capability. The people have been criticizing the NTC
for the delay in re-establishing the national armed
forces, since they are the only force that can maintain
our security and monitor our borders, besides
protecting our citizens. We therefore wish to request
that the Council not adopt a resolution hastily. We will
certainly inform the Council of the NTC's official
decision, which we hope we will have before the end
of the month.

With our declaration of liberation, we have
launched a new phase in Libya's history in which we
look forward to a democratic Libya that respects
human rights, preserves citizens' fundamental
freedoms, believes in pluralism, looks forward to the
future and will not be held back by the past, and looks
for equal and balanced relations with its neighbours
and all States of the world. This will be a difficult
stage, particularly in a State like ours, which has no
institutions. Besides the support we had from the
international community in our struggle to topple the
dictatorship, we will also need its backing in the future
in building a democratic State, development,
reconstruction and achieving prosperity for our people.

Much has been said about violations of human
rights, particularly concerning the way in which
Muammar Al-Qadhafi died or was killed. I would like
to declare that we will not tolerate any violations of
human rights. We all know the extent of the hatred that
controlled the minds of Libyans under the Al-Qadhafi
regime, the result of the horrific acts he perpetrated
against our people. However, if we discover that there
were any infringements of the rights of Al-Qadhafi or
any others, their perpetrators must be punished.

According to initial inquiries and information,
Al-Qadhafi was injured during clashes between his
loyalists and the rebels. When he was arrested, he was
bleeding from his abdomen and head; he died on
arrival at the hospital in Misrata. According to
preliminary reports, none of the revolutionaries fired
on him after arresting him. An independent
commission of inquiry has been set up, and its findings
will be made public after the investigation is
completed.

With regard to United Nations efforts, I would
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ian Martin, for his valuable and
comprehensive briefing. He has outlined clearly what
the Libyan people will need in the way of assistance
from the United Nations in the future.

Undoubtedly, it will be very difficult for the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
to begin its work at this time, as we are in the process
of forming the transitional Government. However, the
transitional Government will be set up soon -
sometime in the next two weeks. That will make it
possible and easier for the Mission to work in
11-56442
cooperation with all Libyan sectors and entities. In
addition, there will be a specific department in the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs charged with facilitating
the work of UNSMIL.

Of course, we require the assistance of the United
Nations and its experts at this critical stage. We will
return to the Council shortly to inform it of the official
decision of the NTC with regard to the mandate, in
accordance with resolution 1973 (2011) on the
protection of civilians and the no-fly zone.

