Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): At the outset, let me
join others in thanking you, Mr. President, and your
delegation for organizing today's open debate. The
concept note circulated by your delegation (S/2012/814, annex) is much appreciated. I would also like to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his
comprehensive presentation this morning.

We are deeply concerned at the continued incidents
of maritime piracy and armed robbery at sea, which
have detrimental effects on shipowners, seafarers,
international organizations, insurance companies and
Governments alike. Despite improvements in recent
years, piracy - with its economic, commercial,
humanitarian and security dimensions - continues to
pose a serious threat. We are particularly concerned
about the plight of seafarers taken hostage and held
in captivity by pirates in the Gulf of Aden and along
the Somali coast. Some of our nationals working for
shipping companies of different countries have fallen
victim. I cannot overemphasize the agony of the
captives and how anxious their family members are for
their release.

We are pleased to note that the number of piracy
incidents along the Somali Coast has significantly
decreased. This has been made possible by heightened
vigilance and cooperation on the participation of the
international community. However, a lot more remains
to be achieved in order to bring that figure down to
zero.

We must seek a comprehensive solution to the
problem for the sake of safe maritime trade, freedom of
navigation and the protection of maritime resources. It
is necessary to forge an international coalition with the
full participation of the countries of the region and the
involvement of the United Nations. We are encouraged
by the initiatives undertaken by the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. The United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, in particular in its
articles 100, 101 and 105, sets out the legal framework
applicable for countering piracy and armed robbery at
sea.

Yet we know that the complexities of international
maritime law make it difficult to prosecute pirates once
they are caught. We have to find ways to tackle this,
even if it requires the adoption of additional legal norms
consistent with the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea. Our goal should be to support efforts
to identify, arrest and prosecute pirates, trace and seize
ransom monies and destroy criminal networks. At the
same time, we need to pay attention to the predicament
ofthe hostages, including their well-being, both while in
captivity and after their release. We are happy to know
that a hostage support programme has been adopted by
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime with the
assistance of other international partners.

We recognize, like many others in this Chamber,
that the challenges of maritime piracy cannot be met
with military means alone. The problems on shore,
such as underdevelopment and poverty, must also
be addressed in order to fight piracy effectively and
comprehensively. We have to undertake a two-pronged
approach 4 building the capacity of the country or
countries of the region, on the one hand, and dealing
with its root causes, on the other. As we endeavour to
establish sustainable peace, effective governance, the
rule of law and a security apparatus, we have to think
about offering the people lawful attention to the subject
of piracy and banditry.

The political and security situation is improving as
the new Somali Government strengthens its foothold.
We need to capitalize on this positive development.
Donors must deliver on their financial assistance
commitments to support capacity-building for the
Somali authorities in combating piracy.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
importance of international cooperation to tackling the
menace of piracy. The long-term effort must be targeted
at addressing its root causes, such as underdevelopment
and the lack of opportunities for the Somali people. Only
through concerted and committed efforts, regional and
international, will we be able to achieve a sustainable
solution to this scourge, be it in the Gulf of Aden or
elsewhere.

