Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me at the outset to thank the joint
African Union-United Nations delegation that visited
South Sudan for their excellent briefing. We welcome
the visit made by this joint delegation, led by Small
Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security, and Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, who travelled to
South Sudan to help underpin the revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan, signed in Ethiopia in September, which
reflects the importance of women's participation in
the peace process in South Sudan. We also thank
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of UN-Women, for her comprehensive briefing to the
Security Council.

The Government of Equatorial Guinea is concerned
about reports of persistent sexual violations in South
Sudan, which is why we urge the parties to the conflict
to fulfil their commitments to punish sexual violence,
including by removing the perpetrators of such crimes
from the armed and security forces and protecting the
victims. We note the trial initiated by the Government
of South Sudan against 11 soldiers accused of rape, and
we urge it to continue to work in collaboration with
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan to ensure
accountability in responding to the needs of women and
girls affected by rape.

We remind the parties of their obligation to
create an environment in which women and girls
are not threatened and can go about their lives in an
environment where they are not so easily sexually
abused. The Council must make it a priority to find a
definitive solution to the situation.

We believe that the participation of women in the
political process in South Sudan is indispensable because
when women intervene in the resolution of a conflict,
they help to keep the family together and contribute
their work to the solution of educational, social and
economic development problems. Consequently, the
duty of women in South Sudan is to be present in the
endorsement, implementation and verification of the
final agreements to put an end to the conflict. It is said
that to properly educate a woman means to properly
educate a society.

Equatorial Guinea unequivocally deplores sexual
violence in armed conflict and in times of peace, as
well as the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war.
We believe that it is one of the worst attacks on human
dignity and we share the deep concern that everyone
in the Council feels about the growing trend of those
unacceptable acts in the world. We would like to
highlight the exceptional work of the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict,
the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict network, the appointment of a Victims' Rights
Advocate and the commitment to zero-tolerance of that
type of abuse.

Equatorial Guinea would like to call on the
parties involved in conflicts to commit themselves
to ensuring the protection of civilians, in accordance
with international humanitarian law - always taking
into account the primary responsibility of national
Governments in that regard, respecting the sovereignty
of countries and supporting their efforts in the
implementation of the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions.

We cannot isolate violence, including sexual
violence, from the root causes of conflict. Peace
cannot be achieved without investing in the sustainable
development of countries and in gender equality. That
is the most effective conflict prevention strategy. In that
regard, we would like to acknowledge the aspirations
of the African Union Agenda 2063 and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, including their
clear focus on people-driven sustainable development,
anchored in gender equality, women's empowerment
and equitable economic growth between countries and
within countries.

We would also like to acknowledge the collaborative
framework and the commitment of the African Union
and the United Nations to the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda and to the fight
against sexual violence in armed conflicts, the impunity
of the perpetrators of such atrocities and accountability
for the crimes.

Equatorial Guinea reaffirms the key role of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), resolution
1820 (2008) and other related resolutions in ensuring the
participation and empowerment of women in conflicts
and promoting actions to prevent sexual violence in
such situations.

In conclusion, in conflict situations and in
international responses to them, Equatorial Guinea would
like to recommend the coordinated implementation of
good practices in the training ofall contingents recruited
in predeployment preparations by the organizations in
charge of coordinating peacebuilding missions, through
the integration of a gender perspective and rigorous
training on sexual exploitation and abuse. We also
recommend ongoing support for the various elements
of the United Nations architecture for combating sexual
violence in armed conflict and for their collaboration
with United Nations agencies responsible for counter-
terrorism, organized crime, humanitarian response
and sustainable development, with a view to ensuring
the recovery and reintegration of victims, especially
children born of sexual violence and women who have
survived such indignities.

