Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We wish to thank our
colleagues from the United States for their serious
efforts to ensure a consensus on resolution 2440
(2018). We also appreciate their efforts in preparing
the resolution.

The developments that have unfolded in recent
months surrounding the issue of Western Sahara have
shown all of us that there is undeniable progress that
needs the Council's full support. We trust that the
efforts made by the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-
General on the Western Sahara to relaunch the broadly
advocated peace process will start seeing results with
the convening of preliminary round-table talks in
December in Geneva. It is also vital that the Council
continue to speak with one voice in support of the
Personal Envoy's efforts at this critical moment in the
peace process.

In that context, we would have liked to vote in favour
of the text proposed by the United States. Unforunately,
the points we raised during the negotiations on the
draft, which we believed were fundamental principles
for finding a political solution, were not taken into
consideration. It is Ethiopia's consistent position that a
just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution,
which must also have the ultimate objective of securing
the right to self-determination for the people of Western
Sahara in the framework of arrangements consistent
with the principles and purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations, is the only viable option for resolving
the issue of Western Sahara.

While we are looking forward to positive progress
at the Geneva talks in December, we reiterate our firm
conviction that any meaningful progress in the peace
process still hinges on respect for that fundamental
principle. Commitment to that principle and the full
cooperation of the two parties with the Personal Envoy
of the Secretary-General is absolutely essential. That
is why it is vital that the Council encourage the parties
to continue their constructive engagement, demonstrate
the necessary political will and fully commit themselves
to the political process. We look forward to a positive
outcome to the Geneva peace talks in December.

