Mr. Skraeie (Croatia): We, too, would like to
thank Mr. Ould Abdallah, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, for his significant
contribution and for the valuable insights he presented
here today. Croatia has aligned itself with the statement
to be delivered later in this debate by the Swedish
presidency of the European Union.

Croatia notes the recent progress that has been
achieved in Somalia but, at the same time, perceives
the scope and the complexity of the challenges still
lying ahead for that country. Undoubtedly, piracy
represents one of the burning issues, threatening not
only the key international shipping lanes and
commerce but also the effective provision of much-
needed humanitarian assistance.

Croatia fully supports the Djibouti Peace
Agreement as a necessary prerequisite for the
sustainable resolution of many pressing challenges in
Somalia. We are of the view that reinforcing Somali
sovereignty, as well as strengthening the capacity of
the Somali Government to provide law and order and
sustainable livelihoods for its people, will significantly
contribute to the eradication of piracy and armed
robbery off the Somali coast.

Let me repeat here the evident and often
reiterated conviction of this Council: there can be no
security along the Somali coast without genuine
security on its land. It is therefore apparent that only an
integrated approach has the possibility of yielding
results. In that context, Croatia commends the African
Union Mission in Somalia for the important role it is
playing in supporting the Transitional Federal
Government in its efforts to implement the
aforementioned strategy, as well as for its endeavours
to bring about a long-term political security recovery
and development changes.

Croatia welcomes the continuing strong
commitment of the international community to the
Somali Government in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolution and applicable international
law. In that context, we further welcome the Somali
Government's renewed request for assistance in
securing international and territorial waters off the
coast of Somalia, and the continuing implementation of
the provisions of resolution 1846 (2008).

Croatia believes that the Contact Group on Piracy
off the Coast of Somalia is proving to be an effective
coordination mechanism of the international
community. We welcome its decision to establish a
trust fund with the purpose of supporting adequate
measures against piracy and related activities aimed at
implementing the Group's objectives. Moreover, we
welcome additional coordinating efforts within the
naval forces operating in the region, including the
establishment of Shared Awareness and Deconfliction
(SHADE), as well as the continuing coordination
between the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia and the International Contact Group on
Somalia.

We are heartened to see such efforts bearing fruit,
the testimony of which is the considerable reduction in
the number of successful pirate attacks registered in
recent months. Croatia believes that the Governments
of the region should play a Vital role in establishing
conditions for effectively combating piracy. We
commend the Government of Kenya for its significant
efforts in that regard, and especially for its readiness to
detain and prosecute pirates apprehended by other
participants in the common efforts against piracy. It is
our hope that other countries that have expressed their
willingness will shortly be ready to follow suit.

Similarly, we call on regional States to fully
implement the Djibouti Code of Conduct as an
important step towards assuming increasing
responsibility in the fight against piracy and robbery at
sea. We particularly welcome further progress in the
field of regional capacity-building, and call upon all
States to continue logistic and financial support of such
regional efforts.

