Mr. Mekel (Israel): Allow me at the outset to pay
tribute to the Ambassador of Spain, Mr. Inocencio
Arias, for his stewardship as Chairman of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC). Under his leadership, the
CTC continues to play a vanguard role in the global
campaign against terrorism, in assisting and monitoring
State implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). Israel
takes this opportunity to reaffirm our support for the
work of the CTC and assure it of our full cooperation.

The war on terrorism has not been won. Although
both committees established by the Security Council to
fight that scourge have made significant contributions
since the Council last discussed this issue in July, there
is a risk of increasing complacency. On the day that a
terror attack succeeds, gruesome pictures are broadcast
across the globe, and we are overwhelmed with
genuine sympathy for the victims. But our resolve to
fight terrorism - not merely to condemn it - must
remain even when the images fade.

Recent attacks have demonstrated that extremist
elements are willing and able to strike at any target, in
any hemisphere, without concern or regard for human
life. In Baghdad in late August a terrorist bomb ripped
through United Nations headquarters, killing the top
United Nations envoy in Iraq, Sergio Vieira de Mello,
among many other victims. In Haifa this month, a
homicide bomber blew up the Maxim restaurant,
destroying over 40 years of Arab and Jewish
cooperation, killing 21 Israeli civilians, including three
whole families, and wounding over 60. Just yesterday,
three American citizens were killed in a terrorist attack
in the Gaza Strip as they were on their way in convoy
to interview Palestinian students for scholarship grants.
No part of the world - New York, Washington,
Mombassa, Karachi, Bali, New Delhi, Mumbai,
Casablanca, Jerusalem - is immune from the scourge
of this global threat.

We need an international partnership - a
coordinated global approach to combating international
terrorism. Israel welcomes the efforts of the Chairman
of the CTC to develop a new activist agenda for the
that body, and we look forward to the expansion of
existing bilateral and multilateral activities to
strengthen both the political will and the practical
capabilities of States to this end.

Global anti-terrorism conferences, such as those
organized by the CTC and the Organization of
American States (OAS) in New York and Washington
this month, serve as instruments to establish the legal
parameters for all regions and Governments to
collaborate to devise effective strategies and implement
policies to dismantle networks that provide financial
and logistical support to terrorists.

Regional organizations like the OAS serve a vital
role as catalysts and intermediaries, working in
conjunction with the CTC to meet the specific needs of
Member States. In the past few months, significant
contributions have been made by regional
organizations in the areas of capacity-building,
distribution of information, best practices, assessment
and programme implementation.

Still, our pace is too slow. The development of
practical counter-terrorism instruments and capabilities
is an important achievement, but they only matter if
they are implemented on the ground. Paper must not be
confused with progress.

A number of States, while demonstrating the
political will to fight terrorism, lack the proper
instruments to do so. International codes, best practices
and model legislation are the keys to success. However,
our pace is slowed primarily by those regimes that are
able but unwilling to join this campaign. It takes only
one non-compliant or complicit State to provide safe
harbour for a terrorist operative and to enable the
perpetration of future attacks against civilians. Those
who harbour terrorists or fund acts of terror are as
guilty of terrorism as those who pull the triggers,
detonate the bombs or crash the aeroplanes. Those who
abuse the language of resistance to justify the murder
of innocents create the environment where such murder
can take place.

For Israel, it is self-evident that the international
fight against terrorism must begin at home, at the
national level. It can succeed only if every individual
State makes a sincere commitment to prevent terrorists
from obtaining weapons and to dismantle the
infrastructure and networks that sustain them.

The threat of weapons of mass destruction falling
into the hands of terrorists is a dire illustration of the
nexus between terrorism and the illicit transfer and
proliferation of weapons. It is incumbent upon the
Committee and States to set standards for their import
and export, in order to ensure that no weapon of any
magnitude could be supplied to clients who may, in
turn, transfer them to terrorists.

The intensive cooperation and coordination of the
international counter-terrorism community is also
necessary in addressing the dire threat posed by man-
portable air defence systems (MANPADS). As the CTC
works to consolidate its agenda for the near future,
Israel reiterates its call for increasing efforts to combat
the threat of MANPADS, both strengthening
countermeasures and reducing the danger of
proliferation.

Security Council resolution 1450 (2002)
condemned in the strongest terms the missile attack in
Kenya on an Arkia Israeli Airlines flight. Subsequent
warnings of planned attacks involving shoulder-
launched surface-to-air missiles capable of destroying
civilian aircraft at low altitudes underscore the need for
States to take urgent action to curb the proliferation of
those weapons and access to them by terrorist groups.

Finally, we must recognize the crucial role that is
played by vicious incitement in the creation of suicidal
terrorists and in the fostering of an environment that
supports them. Unfortunately, in our region there are
too many examples of children who attend schools
adorned with posters of terrorists, study from books
filled with inflammatory rhetoric and watch children's
television programmes filled with songs which
demonize other cultures and praise terrorism and
violence.

We must ensure that information in educational,
religious and political institutions, as well as the media,
is used to promote progress and tolerance, knowledge
and understanding, and not be used as a tool to subvert
them. If education is left in irresponsible hands, we risk
giving birth to generations of children deprived of the
chance even to contemplate peace and who are incited
to consider the murder of innocent civilians as a
legitimate and even noble act. If incitement is not
eliminated, in accordance with established human
rights norms, it will be impossible to move away from
terror and violence to the path of dialogue and the
building of a better future.

The goals of terrorism are clear: to spread fear, to
weaken the rule of law, to undermine the exercise of
our most basic human rights, to demoralize law-abiding
citizens and ultimately, to destroy the essential
institutions of society. The targets and intended victims
of this vicious cycle are democracy and freedom itself.
The concerted efforts of the CTC, the Council and the
international community as a whole are needed to
ensure that the terrorists' goals are never achieved.

