Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French): The
adoption of a comprehensive resolution is an important
step in the continuing process to resolve the situation in
Iraq.

It is the culmination, as we are all too aware, of
many months of negotiation and intense diplomacy by all
of us. We must, however, pay particular tribute to your
personal efforts, Mr. President, and those of your team of

 

experts, who have worked hard to produce the resolution
we have just adopted.

When Canada became a member of the Council in
January, the Council was searching for a solution to a status
quo which was unsustainable. Weapons inspectors were
barred from arms depots, the humanitarian situation was
disturbing, and the plight of Kuwaiti prisoners of war risked
being forgotten. As a result, the Security Council's
credibility, authority and effectiveness was in doubt.

The three panels proposed by Canada in January
which worked so diligently through February and March
under the brilliant and imaginative leadership of
Ambassador Amorim of Brazil were designed to address
these problems and to lay the foundations for a new
Council policy on, and approach to, the question of Iraq, an
approach which would enable us to restore Council
discipline in Iraq while bringing effective succour to the
Iraqi people.

(spoke in English)

Today's resolution reflects most of the
recommendations made by Ambassador Amorim's three
panels; that is why it has attracted Canada's support.

The resolution offers the people of Iraq relief from the
humanitarian hardships they have endured while providing
the international community, particularly Iraq's neighbours,
with the assurance of continued and focused attention on
the disarmament problems which remain unresolved.

It is the people of Iraq who have paid the highest price
over the past nine years, and they stand to gain the most
from the swift implementation of the terms of this
resolution. We are pleased that the Council's efforts have
produced much in this text for the people of Iraq. There are
strengthened mechanisms to ensure that medical,
agricultural, pharmaceutical and educational supplies get to
the people, and get to them faster. There is a much needed
cash component, for the first time, for the humanitarian
effort in the centre and South of Iraq, which will allow
programmes there to directly address the training and
capacity-building needs of the Iraqi people. And the
resolution holds out the possibility of improving Iraq's
infrastructure and increasing Iraq's oil production
capability, through provisions for additional spare parts and
even foreign investment at some later stage. An important
immediate benefit will be the removal of the oil export
ceiling, which will make significant amounts of new money
available for humanitarian priorities.

The humanitarian provisions should provide
immediate relief to a variety of segments of Iraqi society,
and Canada is determined to work to ensure that the
commitments made in this resolution are implemented in
both letter and spirit.

In addition, Canada recently sent a mission to Iraq
to witness firsthand the humanitarian and other impacts of
Iraq's continued isolation. We are committed to
improving the humanitarian situation and are exploring
ways, based on the findings of that mission, to further
alleviate the conditions endured by the most vulnerable
segments of Iraqi society, especially the children.

We are determined as well to see the same diligence
brought to bear on the disarmament side of the Iraq
equation. There is much work that will need to be done
to put in place an ongoing monitoring and verification
system which can do the job competently, intelligently
and professionally. Canada will contribute to this effort
and ensure that the goals set on the disarmament front are
clear and precise and consistent with the regional security
objectives established by the international community.

These are all significant decisions by the Security
Council that reflect a willingness by the Council to come
to grips with the situation in Iraq.

We recognize that Iraq and some members of the
Council are not entirely satisfied with the Council's
updated approach. Canada believes, however, that this
resolution puts in train an important process which ought
to permit a new relationship to be established with Iraq
by laying out the principles and the commitments which
could underpin a different dynamic between the Council
and Iraq.

The passage of this resolution carries with it
obligations for the entire international community which
must be respected. On this principle, we are certain there
is Council unanimity.

Iraq must also respond positively if it is to realize
the dialogue with the Council that it has sought for so
long. The time has long since passed when the people of
Iraq could afford the luxury of their Government's desire
to play politics with the will of the international
community.

This resolution offers the Iraqi people both
immediate humanitarian relief and the hope of returning
to a normal life. We urge the Government of Iraq to seize

 

this opportunity to help its people and to move towards the
closure of this question soon.

