Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important briefing.

I too welcome Her Excellency Ms. Federica
Mogherini, High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, back to the
Council and thank her for her statement.

Malaysia reaffirms its full support for strengthening
cooperation with regional and subregional organizations
under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. As an established regional organization that
shares the values and principles of the United Nations,
we highly value the role played by the European Union
(EU) in promoting peace, stability and development in
its region and beyond.

We listened careful to Her Excellency Mogherini's
update on the role played by the EU in the Middle East
Quartet, including its participation in the international
conference in Paris last week. Malaysia welcomes the
constructive and objective role played by the EU as a
member of the Quartet. We would like to see a more
active role played by the EU in this regard, including as
an honest broker, in View of the absence of leadership
and political will in the Council on the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict.

As one of the most important and influential
regional organizations, we believe the EU we could
pave the way in the Israel-Palestinian conflict by using
the tools at its disposal to end decades impunity and
ensure adherence to international law, freedom and
respect for human rights, which are core values of the
EU. In view of the deteriorating situation on the ground
and the slow death of the two-State solution, we need to
move away from the previous practice of managing the
conflict it to addressing its root causes. We need to end
the repressive Israeli occupation.

Meanwhile, in facing other complex challenges in
the Middle East region, such as Syria and Libya, we
commend the strong support provided by the EU on the
United Nations-led political dialogue in both countries.
The massive humanitarian crisis arising from the
influx of migrants and refugees from Syria and Libya
prove too challenging for any one organization or
country to handle alone. We therefore applaud the
critical role played by the EU in supporting Syrian
refugees whether within the EU's territories or in the
host countries in the Middle East through its migration
policy and humanitarian aid.

The most recent pledge by the EU amounting to over
$3 billion at the London donors' conference in February
is yet another example of the EU's commitment to
address the migration crisis in the Mediterranean. On
this note, Malaysia looks up to the EU's vast experience
and expertise in dealing with my migratnts and refugees
to address the related problems of human trafficking
and people smuggling in the South-East Asian region.

Since the Council last convened to discuss
cooperation with the EU (see S/PV.7439), we have
witnessed shocking terrorist attacks in Europe by
Da'esh. Our heartfelt condolences go to the families and
loved ones of the terrorist attacks in Paris and Brussels.
No one is truly saved from terror attacks, regardless of
one's race, nationality, religion or beliefs. It is therefore
our responsibility to strengthen our joint resolve
in combating this menace. In this regard, Malaysia
welcomes the comprehensive strategy adopted by the
EU to counter the global threat of terrorism, violent
extremism and radicalization. The strategy seeks to
address not just the symptoms of terrorism, but also
its root causes. It also recognizes that military action
alone is not sufficient to defeat Da'esh, as it addresses
the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters, cuts off
terrorist financing, promotes political stability, and
engages in strategic countermessaging.

As part of a comprehensive strategy to counter
violent extremism and radicalization, we also need
to address the increasing sentiment of Islamophobia,
which has given rise to the marginalization and
alienation of and discrimination against Muslims in
Europe on the basis of their religion. Muslim minorities
in Europe should not be pressured to be less Muslim
in order to more European. They should not become
the twofold victims, first, of terror attacks, and then of
policy responses to these attacks. We acknowledge the
EU attempts to deal with the problem of Islamophobia
as part of its broader response to xenophobia in the
region. We believe that policies based on more dialogue,
social and economic inclusion, non-discrimination and
support for minority groups would complement the EU
counter-terrorism strategy and bring long-term benefits
to Europe's pluralistic societies.

In the Western Balkans region, we highly appreciate
the stabilizing role played by the EU, particularly in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo. We commend
the active participation of the High Representative in
facilitating the ongoing dialogue to normalize relations
between Pristina and Belgrade. We also fully support
the continuing role of the EU in further strengthening
democratic institutions, the rule of law and the process
of reconciliation, as well as in creating a functioning
market economy in the Western Balkans.

In Malaysia's view, if there is a single most
important lesson to be learned from post-Second
World War Europe for the Western Balkans, it is the
need to acknowledge and address the past. We strongly
believe that this would be the best way to move forward
towards peace, stability and prosperity in the Western
Balkans. It may be difficult to swallow, but unless and
until we acknowledge the atrocities committed in the
past, uphold accountability and learn from the mistakes
made, we will find ourselves unable to find closure,
foster reconciliation and make progress in the region.
Even worse, we may be condemned to repeat the past.

On Africa, we commend the role and contributions
of the EU, in close partnership with the United Nations
and the African Union, particularly in the Sahel region,
the Gulf of Guinea and the Horn of Africa. Over the
years, the EU has provided a stabilizing presence in
those regions, ranging from conflict prevention to
conflict management, post-conflict transition and
sustainable development.

Closer to home, Malaysia welcomes the recent
intensification of the EU engagement with Myanmar
in support of the country's democratic transition
and sustainable development. This includes EU-
Myanmar bilateral development cooperation under
the Multi-annual Indicative Programme 2014-2020,
and the EU support for the Myanmar Peace Centre
in providing technical support in implementing
the ceasefire and promoting political dialogue,
reconciliation and peacebuilding.

In conclusion, Malaysia welcomes the reaffirmation
by the High Representative that the EU will continue its
close cooperation with the Organization in upholding
the principles and purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations. As we have heard today, the EU has
a lot to offer through its specific expertise, wide
experience and pooled resources to complement and
support the role of the United Nations in facing various
global challenges. I take this opportunity to reiterate
Malaysia's commitment to playing a constructive
role in further engaging with regional organizations,
including the EU, in maintaining international peace
and security.

