Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, my delegation thanks Mr. Martin Griffiths, Mr. Mark Lowcock and Ambassador King for their invaluable briefings. Despite the delicate situation that Yemen has endured for years, efforts made by the international community - especially the United Nations - since the signing of the Stockholm Agreement have led to de-escalation and the emergence of positive indicators over the past few months, with a focus on ways to resume comprehensive political negotiations between the parties. However, we are deeply concerned by the recent exacerbation of violence and intensifying clashes, particularly in the areas of Al-Jawf, Ma'rib and Nihm, with negative impact on civilians. There could also be implications for the advancement of the political process and the overall situation, particularly with regard to the humanitarian aspect. Tunisia therefore calls on the conflicting parties to reach a ceasefire, de-escalate the situation, heed the voice of reason and make Yemeni interests a priority above all else. The military option cannot be a solution - rather, it would further complicate the crisis and deepen the suffering of the brotherly Yemeni people, especially given the potential for such escalation to spread to other fronts. In that context, we reaffirm the need to continue and complete the implementation of what was agreed upon in Stockholm, including the Al-Hudaydah Agreement, the agreement on the exchange of prisoners and the statement of understanding on Taiz. We also stress the importance of adhering to the Riyadh agreement and implementing its provisions. We also call for concertedefforts to create the necessary conditions for the resumption of negotiations for a political settlement and the establishment of a transitional period in accordance with the agreed terms of reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the inclusive National Dialogue Conference and the relevant Security Council resolutions, in order to put an end to the crisis, restore security and stability in Yemen and safeguard its sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. My country's delegation emphasizes once again our support for the efforts of Mr. Martin Griffiths and all his team to move forward the political process in Yemen. We welcome the agreement reached in Amman on a plan for prisoner exchanges under the auspices of the United Nations. It is a positive step in the right direction towards the full implementation of the Stockholm Agreement. In that regard, we encourage the relevant parties to go on with this constructive approach leading to confidence-building measures. Despite regional and international efforts to reduce humanitarian suffering in Yemen, an assessment of the situation in the country points to deteriorating humanitarian conditions, in particular as hostilities continue. Today's briefings included many indicators and clues about the grave situation and the difficult humanitarian challenges in Yemen. My country underscores once again the need to quickly reach a solution to the issue of the FSO SAFER oil tanker, given its possible environmental risks to the region. We reject any politicization of the issue. Tunisia calls for the stepping up of relief efforts and for continued humanitarian assistance, with unimpeded distribution and delivery to beneficiaries. We call on all parties to respect international humanitarian law and international human rights law. We also reiterate the need to ensure the safety and security of humanitarian workers.
