The President (interpretation from Chinese): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Croatia in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nobilo
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from Chinese): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in the course of its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the letter
dated 20 May 1996 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council, document
S/ 1996/363.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/1996/357, which contains the
text of a letter dated 20 May 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Croatia to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the letter
of the Secretary-General to its President of 20 May
1996 (S/ 1996/363) in which he informed the Council
of the assessment of the Transitional Administrator
that the military component of the United Nations
Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES) had been
deployed and was ready to undertake its mission of
demilitarization of the Region. That mission of
demilitarization began on 21 May 1996.

"The Security Council calls upon the parties to
comply strictly with their obligations under the Basic
Agreement of 12 November 1995 on the Region of
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium
(5/1995/951, annex) and to cooperate fully with
UNTAES. It stresses that they must refrain from any
unilateral action which could hinder the
implementation of the Basic Agreement including
the process of demilitarization.

"The Security Council reminds the parties that
the successful implementation of the Basic
Agreement requires the respect by them of the
highest level of internationally recognized human
rights and fundamental freedoms. It calls upon the
parties to continue to cooperate with UNTAES in
adopting confidence-building measures to promote
an environment of mutual trust.

"The Security Council calls upon the
Government of the Republic of Croatia to grant
amnesty to all persons who, either voluntarily or by
coercion, served in the civil administration, military
or police forces of the local Serb authorities in the
former United Nations Protected Areas with the
exception of those who committed war crimes as
defined in international law. It notes that the law on
amnesty recently passed in the Republic of Croatia
is a step in this direction. The Council calls upon the
Government of the Republic of Croatia to make this
amnesty comprehensive as soon as possible and
stresses the importance such a measure would have
for maintaining public confidence and stability
during the demilitarization and demobilization
process.
 

"The Security Council underlines the key
importance of attention to the need for economic
reconstruction and rehabilitation of the region of
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium and
encourages Member States to contribute to this end.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter and requests the Secretary-General to keep it
regularly informed of developments in the situation."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1996/26.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.25 pm.

