Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to extend our congratulations to
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. I wish also to congratulate
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Angola, for his wise and effective stewardship of the
Council's proceedings last month. Furthermore, I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2016/268). As the report is lengthy, I would ask for
your indulgence, Sir, to take the time necessary to
comment on its contents.

I had hoped that the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the
Secretariat would have assisted the Secretary General
by avoiding the inclusion of certain matters. We are
surprised to see certain paragraphs ofthe report that are
in clear contradiction of incontestable facts. We see, in
the assessment of the national dialogue currently under
way in the Sudan, an obvious contradiction between
certain paragraphs of the report and the statements
made by the Head of the African Union, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sudan and South
Sudan, and the Joint African Union-United Nations
Special Representative for Darfur - a situation that
causes us consternation.

The report states that,

"[w]ith the exception of the Popular Congress
Party all major opposition parties as well as
major Sudanese armed movements, continue to
boycott the process." (5/2016/268, para. 20)

That conclusion reached in the report, which is presented
in the name of the Secretary-General, runs counter
to the statement delivered by the Secretary-General
himself on 28 March, in which he invited those who had
rejected the dialogue to join it, as well as the road map
agreement proposed by the African Union High Level
Implementation Panel. Not only does that necessitate
denunciation, Sir, it also requires investigation. Our
faith and trust in the Secretary-General requires that
we call upon him to take this matter seriously.

The overwhelming majority of the Sudanese
parties - approximately 81 of them - including the
armed movements as well as the majority ofthe Sudanese
people, who do not belong to any political party, took
part in the national dialogue. The President of the
Republic is obliged to implement the recommendations
that the participants adopted unanimously - or nearly
so, by a 90 per cent majority - as binding resolutions.
Such an important matter cannot be subject to
individual political whims because such would lead
only to continued conflict. It would also give the armed
movements a license to continue to commit acts that
lead to the deterioration of the security situation, and
to target and kill civilians. In that connection, I would
like to stress that the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul
Wahid (SLA/AW), as per paragraph 36 of the report,
launched an attack with heavy weapons on 1 January
against UNAMID forces near the Kutum region. We
possess documented evidence that Abdul Wahid and his
movement threatened to kill citizens in Jebel Marra if
they refused to pay the ransom imposed on them under
duress. We have audiovisual documentation of that
incident, and can transmit that to you, Mr. President.

No dialogue anywhere in the world should serve
as an instrument for criminals. Regretfully, we note
that all noble endeavours being made to overcome
infighting in Darfur, including the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur, which belongs to the United Nations
and the entire international community, including the
national dialogue, are being sacrificed and questioned.
That should - rather must - come to an end.

Most of the contents of this report visibly and
indelibly clash with the conclusions of the two
technical meetings between the Government of the
Sudan and UNAMID, held in Khartoum on 13 January
and 23 February. That leads us to demand complete
transparency with regard to the preparation of this
report. The offices of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support ought
to advise us on the stages of preparation of the report,
as well as on the role of the Secretariat in New York.
That is the only way to eliminate those contradictions.

Sir, you have already seen how the practical
agreement on the exit strategy elaborated by the joint
tripartite panel composed of the Government of the
Sudan, the African Union and the United Nations has
been thwarted here in New York. In the light of such
evidence, you would excuse us, Sir, if we felt that there
is a hidden agenda behind the continued presence
of UNAMID that is contrary to the provisions of
resolution 1769 (2007), which authorized and mandated
its establishment.

Throughout Darfur, large numbers of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) have managed to return to
their villages and to cultivate and harvest their crops.
To date, 300 IDPs have returned to their places of
origin, and preparations are under way for the return of
100,000 IDPs to their villages in East and West Darfur.
I should like briefly to shed light on the displacement
of citizens as a result of armed Abdul Wahid movement
activity in the area of Jebel Marra, which is located next
to two other areas in West Darfur. The report states that
there was displacement from that region. Unfortunately,
while the report refers to an area - Darfur - that is
equal in size to the Republic of France, it makes no
mention whatsoever of the cases of repatriation to
which I have just referred.

With regard to Jebel Marra, by way of example, we
would like to recall that in a statement on 18 February,
the United States Department of State asserted that
initial attacks by the rebel Abdul Wahid movement had
prompted a response by the Sudanese armed forces.
Control by Abdul Wahid over the livelihoods of
Sudanese citizens in Jebel Marra has ended, and the
roads have been opened between Jebel Marra and
other main areas in Darfur as well as other parts of the
Sudan. For the first time in 13 years, primary-school
students sat for general examinations. Levies have
ceased to be paid. So I would like to know how this
could possibly clash with the objectives of the United
Nations. How does this run counter to international
law and its categorical provisions, and how does this
contravene the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur? Is
there any cogent justification for such a report to place
the Government of the Sudan, whose people exercise
their sovereignty through it, on a par with an armed
movement that uses terrorism and violence to achieve
its political goals, and invite both of them to seek a
peaceful settlement?

We categorically reject the contents of paragraph
16 of the report, on the Sudanese judiciary. The
Sudanese judiciary has taken a number of exceptional
measures with regard to the five states of Darfur.
It redeployed judges in the municipalities that had
suffered from insecurity. It also carried out a project
involving a prosecutor for each municipality, with the
intent of extending justice throughout Darfur. The
judiciary cooperated with UNAMID and provided it
with information and statistics as per the contents of
paragraph 63 of the report.

This could be a perfect opportunity for the Council
to ensure that UNAMID does not allow its personnel to
enjoy impunity in the criminal cases that we reported
to them by memorandums from the Permanent Mission
of the Sudan in New York, as well as in the briefings
we made to the UNAMID representative at our last two
meetings in Khartoum, in January and February. We
do not want to address this any further. However, if the

Department of Peacekeeping Operations asks us to do
so, we will definitely comply.

We wish to express our concern over the frequent
references contained in the report to the racial
dimension of the conflict in Darfur. This can only lead
to interference and to the fuelling and intensifying
of feelings of hatred. All the people of Darfur
without exception suffer from the horrendous climate
degradation afflicting Africa's western coasts up to the
Sudan. Along the same lines, the conflict is integrally
connected with the various means of livelihood. For
instance, according to the report, shepherds are fighting
with farmers.

Here we would like to thank the European Union
for its recently announced endeavours to cooperate
with the Government of the Sudan with a View to
achieving stability, particularly in Darfur. That is why
we believe that the negative references contained in the
report stand in the way of accomplishing that goal and
only deepen the conflict.

In conclusion, despite the inaccurate information
contained in many of the report's paragraphs, it
cannot avoid mentioning the positive developments
emanating from the conclusion and implementation
of the Doha peace agreement, and does so in the
following paragraphs.

First, in paragraph 2, it points to the decrease in
intercommunal conflicts; secondly, in paragraph 35, it
mentions the reduction in the number of criminal attacks
and the increasing coordination between security
agencies and UNAMID in pursuing the perpetrators of
attacks against UNAMID; thirdly, in paragraph 40, it
refers to the release of all containers in Port Sudan by
29 February.

Here we would like to make an important remark:
that progress in releasing the containers is contingent
upon the resumption of technical cooperation in
Khartoum and the regular holding of technical
meetings between the relevant Government organs and
UNAMID in Khartoum, which we requested last year
upon reviewing UNAMID's third report for 2015.

Fourthly, paragraph 41 notes that criminal attacks
against humanitarian organizations decreased to a great
extent during the reporting period; fifthly, paragraph 56
touches on efforts to protect human rights; and sixthly,
and lastly, the national human rights commission is
setting up branches in the states of Darfur.

