Mr. Cheshire (New Zealand): I join those who
have thanked the briefers for their contributions
and the delegation of Poland for organizing today's
important debate.

As we have heard, there has rarely been a more
dangerous time than right now to be a civilian in a
conflict zone. Two years ago, New Zealand was pleased
to work with four other non-permanent Council members
to secure the unanimous adoption of resolution 2286
(2016) in response to the horrific escalation in attacks
on medical facilities and personnel in Syria, Yemen
and beyond. It was an important reaffirmation of our
collective commitment to upholding international law
in the face of such atrocities. Yet health-care personnel
and infrastructure continue to be targeted in conflict
zones around the world. Despite the best efforts of
organizations such as the International Committee of
the Red Cross and Me'decins Sans Frontieres, large
numbers of civilians are unable to access health care.
Medical supplies are blocked, hospitals bombed and
doctors killed. Besieging civilians and denying them
critical health care cruelly exacerbates the suffering
of innocents. Such a lack of respect for international
humanitarian law is totally unacceptable, but we must
not become despondent or dispirited. There are three
areas in which we need greater shared determination to
reverse those trends.

First, we need to see the Council more determined
to discharge its responsibility to maintain international
peace and security. It must make use of all of the tools
available to prevent conflict, defend fundamental
international norms and hold those who violate them
accountable. It should also consider practical measures
such as publicly calling out offending parties and
instituting humanitarian safe zones in areas where
civilians are at risk during heightened hostilities. The
ongoing attacks on health-care workers and facilities
demonstrate the urgent need for the Security Council
to explore additional ways to use its authority to end
attacks and ensure that those responsible face justice.

Secondly, we need to see all Member States
determined to demand universal compliance with
international law from both State and non-State actors.
That is a prerequisite for the protection of civilians and
health-care workers in conflict zones. We cannot let the
erosion of international rules become the new normal.
Respect for accountability must stand. While we
supported the General Assembly's establishment of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for crimes committed in Syria, we regret that it was
necessitated by the Council's failure to take action. It
is incumbent on all of us to ensure that those rules are
strictly adhered to and that violations of international
law are met with appropriate consequences, including
from the Council, given its unique responsibilities.

Thirdly, we need continued determination from
Member States in support of the Secretary-General's
ambitious changes to how the United Nations works in
the areas of management, development and peace and
security. Taken together, those reforms promise a world
where we can significantly reduce the risk of conflict.
More directly, the changes to the peace and security
pillar should result in a Secretariat better positioned to
use and collect information to provide early warnings
concerning threats, such as those to civilians and health-
care facilities, and then to act on them. It should also
lead to a more integrated approach to peacebuilding and
sustaining peace across the United Nations architecture,
thereby enabling the United Nations to more effectively
protect civilian interests.

New Zealand is determined to do its part, and we
hope that that determination will be shared by others.

