Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to thank the Spanish presidency of the

Security Council for having convened this important
meeting and for the initiative to discuss the topic under
consideration. I should like also to thank all briefers for
their valuable interventions. In addition, I wish also to
offer thanks and appreciation to all those who expressed
their solidarity with Egypt in connection with the
terrorist acts that struck us yesterday morning, which
led to the deaths of 25 persons, most of them women
and children, as they prayed in one of Cairo's historical
churches. I should like to underline that such incidents
will only make us more adamant and determined to
combat terrorism and eradicate it completely.

International judicial cooperation in countering
terrorism is one of the most important pillars in the
effort to fight terrorism. It is vital in the context of
a comprehensive approach to combat this appalling
scourge. Without effective cooperation in this domain,
our efforts will always be incomplete and fall short of
reaching their objectives. It is as if we were working in
silos when it is in fact imperative for our efforts to be
complementary. We must fully cooperate and uphold
the common good and common interests, because
no country alone can defeat terrorism. So just as we
have forged alliances to defeat terrorism militarily
and operationally, we should also forge alliances and
cooperate judicially to defeat terrorism.

Resolution 2322 (2016), which the Council adopted
today, sends an important message to terrorists that
the international community is unified and adamant
in eradicating terrorism, and to the international
community on the need to go beyond narrow interests in
order to attempt, within a legal framework, to promote
international judicial cooperation in all its forms and
aspects, while stressing the need to end any form of
support for terrorism.

The resolution includes a number of important
aspects, including, for example, the need for the
exchange ofinformation among States so as to stop the
financing of terrorism and the supply of weapons to
terrorists, as well as the need to enact the legislation
necessary to criminalize the financing of terrorism,
promote police cooperation and benefit from the
capabilities of INTERPOL, and build the capacity of
States, with reference to the vital role played by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. There is
also need to promote and develop cooperation among
States, in line with criminal investigations relevant to
terrorist offenses.

The resolution also refers to the imperative of
holding officials accountable for terrorist acts, as well
as extraditing and prosecuting any person accused of
supporting, facilitating or participating in terrorist
acts. In that vein, the resolution reafirms the need to
not provide a safe haven to those who are financing,
planning or supporting terrorism. The resolution equally
reaffirms that it is necessary that terrorists not abuse
the asylum right. Political motives cannot be taken as a
pretext by States to reject requests for the extradition of
those accused of committing terrorist acts.

The Security Council's adoption of the resolution
on international judicial cooperation in countering
terrorism is important; however, what is more
significant when it comes to Security Council
resolutions on combating terrorism in general is the
political will of States to implement such resolutions.
And that requires concerted follow-up on the part of
the Security Council, as well as holding accountable
States that do not fully abide by their implementation
and those States that continue to support terrorists or
provide shelter to them.

In conclusion, I would once more like to thank the
Spanish presidency of the Security Council. I would
like to reaffirm that Egypt will constantly maintain its
commitment to be at the forefront of international efforts
to defeat terrorism, while respecting international law,
the rule of law and human rights.

