Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the organization of this meeting,
as well as the briefing by Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo.

Argentina, along with a large part of the international
community, repudiated the legitimacy of Nicolas
Maduro Moros's mandate initiated on 10 January as a
result of the electoral process of 20 May 2018 that did not
meet the requirements to be considered free, democratic
and transparent. On 10 January, Argentina announced
concrete measures against the Maduro regime,
including, inter alia, a ban on the entry of high officials
of the regime, suspension of the application of the visa
exemption agreement in diplomatic and official passports,
and alerts to banking and financial institutions about
the risks of working with the Venezuelan Government
or with companies that are owned or controlled by the
Venezuelan State.
As is well known, Juan Guaido, President of
the Venezuelan National Assembly, took office as
Interim President in accordance with the Venezuelan
Constitution, in the context of the massive
demonstrations by the Venezuelan people on 23 January,
whose clamour for democracy and freedom has been
clear and forceful. The Government of the Argentine
Republic recognized Juan Guaido as Interim President
of Venezuela, as did many other States.

On 24 January, at the behest of Argentina and other
countries, the Permanent Council of the Organization
of American States met in extraordinary session to
consider recent developments in Venezuela. As a
result of these deliberations, 16 countries signed a
declaration ratifying the constitutional authority of the
National Assembly and recognizing Juan Guaido as
Interim President of Venezuela. In recent days, several
international actors have again proposed dialogue
initiatives to overcome this crisis.

Argentina always bets on dialogue, but to be
conducive to positive results, dialogue requires the
good faith of the parties involved. Accordingly,
Argentina would like to recall that the Santo Domingo
dialogue process failed, owing to Maduro's lack of real
willingness to engage in dialogue. Therefore, Argentina
warns of the risk that dialogue initiatives promoted
in good faith by various international actors could be
manipulated by Maduro's regime, turning them into
delaying tactics.

Argentina believes that the United Nations and its
States Members should provide support to facilitate a
peaceful transition to free, democratic and transparent
elections as soon as possible. That is the only way to deal
with the serious political, economic and humanitarian
crisis that has plagued Venezuela for too long.

By October 2017, the Lima Group, of which
Argentina is a member, had already requested that
the Secretary-General and the United Nations system
contribute to addressing this crisis and the continuing
violations of human rights taking place in Venezuela.
Indeed, the crisis is regional and global in scope.
According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration, 3 million Venezuelan
migrants and refugees have been forced to leave
their country because of a political, economic and
humanitarian crisis that seriously impacts their human
rights. Of those, 2.4 million are now in Latin America
and the Caribbean.
Argentina once again strongly condemns the
repressive actions of the Maduro regime against the
Venezuelan people. The Argentine Republic will
continue to denounce the human rights violations
perpetrated by the regime, as it has been doing since
our President, Mauricio Macri, took office. In line
with this position, the Government of Argentina joined
other countries in requesting that the Office of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court initiate
an investigation into allegations of the commission of
crimes against humanity in that country, and promoted
the suspension of Venezuela's membership in the
Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR), pursuant to
the Ushuaia Protocol on the Democratic Commitment in
MERCOSUR, the Republic of Bolivia and the Republic
of Chile.

In conclusion, Argentina believes that the Security
Council should reaffirm its role as a guarantor of
international peace and security. The very relevance and
effectiveness of the United Nations are being assessed
by our peoples and by the international community in
the light of its capacity to act in the face ofthis complex
crisis that is unprecedented in the Americas. The
Council cannot remain indifferent in the face of this
tragedy, which, in our view, is a threat to international
peace and security because of its tragic consequences,
particularly for the Venezuelan people and the region.

