Ms. Bertini: May I start where the President left
off and say that this conversation that we are having
today, following up on many of the humanitarian issues
that the Council has discussed as they relate to peace
and security, is extremely important, as the President
has said. I know that those of us in the humanitarian
community have been so happy that the Council has
taken up these issues over the last few years, because
they are so integral to the success of the Council's
efforts on peace and security around the world.

On the Afghanistan questions, first there were a
couple of specific questions from Singapore about
resolution 1401 (2002). The establishment of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Afghanistan
(UNAMA) programme has been important for all of us
in the humanitarian community. We worked closely
with the Secretariat in its process of developing the
procedures. We are working in close connection with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Brahimi, and working perhaps a bit differently
from the way that the agencies have worked before, in
an even more coordinated effort than has been the case
in the past. In particular, Mr. Brahimi's deputy,
Mr. Nigel Fisher, has been very helpful in terms of
bringing all the humanitarian agencies together in a
coordinated structure as part ofthe overall framework.

Of course, we work with the local authorities
regarding their work, always committing ourselves to
being sure that we are ending hunger and using food
appropriately. If there is ever a possibility that food is
not used appropriately in a particular area, or that local
authorities are problematic, then we would revert to
Mr. Brahimi for his help in trying to fix the problems
that might exist.

Regarding some of the questions that Colombia
raised about Afghanistan, we are distributing food not
just in the major cities but all throughout the country.
We are doing so with a network of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), which also connects with
another question that I think Mauritius asked, about
coordination. The World Food Programme works with
more than 60 NGOs -most are local and some are
international - in food distribution. Those NGOs have
responsibilities throughout the country. So we do not
distribute only in the cities. In fact, this is a very strong
network that worked even during the last part of 2001.
It has become much stronger now that communications
and movement are a bit easier.

Regarding the military who are moving around in
civilian clothes, I would like to make a couple of
points. First, the military can offer tremendous
capacities, particularly in logistics and engineering.
Those kinds of activities have been extremely useful to
humanitarian organizations. One example is a field
military health centre set up by Jordan in Mazar-e-
Sharif, which is extremely helpful to the people there.
Other examples are mine clearing and bridge-building,
so that humanitarian activities can be better operated.
But we agree with those who say that military
personnel should be clearly identified as military
personnel.

I think one thing that is even more important than
that, though, is that everyone working in Afghanistan
supports the overall objectives of the Security Council
and supports the overall intent of helping to support the
central Government in Afghanistan.

When we look at lessons learned, we must
consider in particular our dealings with non-State
factions. We have to deal with non-State factions
constantly, in Afghanistan and everywhere else where
there are conflicts that have moved from an ideological
basis to a more ethnic or religious nature, or conflicts
over material and property. This has so much increased
the risk to staff security. It also means that we have to
work with all of these people. That does not mean that
we recognize their legal status, or any legal status, but
we have to work with the people who are responsible,
legitimately or not, for certain territories. Unless we
do, we cannot effectively deliver humanitarian
assistance. So that is something that is critically
important.

Again, if we find situations where somebody is
withholding food or access to food, that is when, if we
cannot figure it out on a humanitarian level, we revert
to a senior political person, a Special Representative of
the Secretary-General or someone else, and even the
Secretary-General if necessary, to try to fix the
problem.

Coordination works very well in Afghanistan, not
only with the NGOs but also, I should say, with all the
United Nations agencies in that country, and I think it
works well as a model.

On a few other questions that are not specifically
related to Afghanistan, I would say first of all, yes, the
World Food Programme is doing the best it can in
Gaza. This was raised by the Syrian Ambassador. We
are still distributing food to hospitals and to some of
the orphanages and to people who otherwise have
difficulty getting food. Transportation certainly is a
challenge for all of the humanitarian workers in that
region at this time.

There was a comment by Bulgaria about the
decrease in development and Bulgaria's regret over
this. We regret it too, very much. I did not concentrate
on that here, because it was not the focus of this
discussion. But I do hope that over the long term we
can reverse the downward trend, not only with food aid
but other kinds of aid, to support people who are
desperately hungry solely because they are poor, and
not because they live in a conflict zone or an area
where there has been an extremely difficult natural
disaster.

The purchase of local products was raised by
Guinea. The WFP purchases $200 to $300 million a
year of local agricultural production. We always
purchase the maximum amount we can with the funds
that we have available. As far as using local personnel,
WFP has just over 8,000 staff members. Less than 10
per cent are international. More than 90 per cent are
people hired in the countries where we work.

Finally, the United Kingdom had some comments
about some very interesting approaches to food aid. I
think that they were on point with practically all of
those. We have had a long discussion with the United
Kingdom about the use of food aid for development.
As I said, WFP thinks that it is particularly important.
But if we are moving to the point where we could talk
about using food on a case-by-case basis, then I think
that we may find times when food aid is useful in a
development-type capacity. Certainly, WFP is
committed to ensuring that the food that we use in all
capacities goes to the most vulnerable in a transparent
manner that can be monitored appropriately.

I again thank you, Sir, and Council members for
taking on these important issues in the context of your
overall work. I thank you for your kind comments
about my successor, Mr. Morris, who is a fine man and
who, I know, will lead WFP in an exemplary fashion. I
am sure that he looks forward to working with you.
Again, I appreciate the opportunity to be here in the
very last hours of my last day to highlight the fine
work done by the staff members of the World Food
Programme throughout the world. I thank you for this
opportunity. I thank you for your kind words and the
tribute to me and to WFP. But especially I thank you
for your political, moral and financial support to the
work of the World Food Programme and to its mission
to end hunger worldwide.

