Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to express my thanks for and to commend the
report presented by the Secretary-General (A/64/350),
as well as the very interesting and comprehensive
presentation of Mr. Steiner.

My country has strong ties of friendship with the
Pacific island States, which can be seen in our close

 

multilateral cooperation on issues including the law of
the sea and the conservation and preservation of the
marine environment, to which the Pacific small island
States have made an undeniable contribution. I would
like to warmly welcome the participation of the
President of Nauru, His Excellency Mr. Marcus
Stephen, and to thank him for his eloquent statement
this morning.

As a coastal Pacific State, Chile shares the
concern of the Pacific island States. It understands and
supports their interest in resorting to the relevant
bodies of the multilateral system to address current
difficulties, given the danger they face from sea-level
rise threatening their territory and the well-being of
their citizens.

The General Assembly addressed the issue of
climate change and its possible security implications
through its resolution 63/281 of 2009. The report of the
Secretary-General prepared pursuant to that resolution
acknowledged that climate change can be a "threat
multiplier", in particular in situations of extreme
poverty.

Thus, on the Antarctic peninsula, for example, the
Larsen ice shelf has been breaking up over the past two
decades, while large ice masses have broken off from
the western Antarctic. Such phenomena are undeniable
and serve to illustrate the threat to low-lying coastal
States, in particular small island States. To those are
added the issues of the possible displacement of
populations or increased political tension.

The debate on the possible security implications
of climate change certainly cannot undermine the
authority or mandates of relevant bodies, processes and
instruments in addressing such an important issue. It
should not deflect but strengthen the efforts of the
international community in the areas of mitigation,
adaptation and economic, social and environmental
development, and should promote greater impetus in
that regard. International cooperation, the exchange of
relevant information and increased support for
scientific research are essential to the pursuit of basic
solutions to this serious issue, which also includes
other extremely serious phenomena, such as increasing
desertification, among others, that affect various areas
of our planet.

Chile believes that we should reaffirm the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change as
the fundamental instrument for addressing climate

 

change. We recall its provisions, including recognizing
that the global nature of climate change requires the
broadest possible cooperation of all countries and their
participation in an effective international response, in
accordance with their common but different
responsibilities, respective capacities and social and
economic conditions.

In that regard, we believe it essential to move
towards establishing a broad and legally binding
agreement on climate change. At the same time, our
country believes that agreement in the negotiations on
the Kyoto Protocol must be reached as soon as possible
in order to avoid a gap between the first and the second
commitment periods under that instrument.

