Mr. Wittig (Germany): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Judy Cheng-Hopkins and
Ambassador Lucas for their detailed briefings.

This is a welcome opportunity to take stock of the
peacebuilding agenda and to follow up on its
implementation. We share the analysis that progress
has been achieved in various fields since last year's
progress report of the Secretary-General. However, our
undivided attention and continued support are required
for us to deliver on commitments and to further
enhance our impact on the ground. That includes the
need for continuous adaptation of peacebuilding to
changing and evolving circumstances in countries
emerging from conflict.

It is against that backdrop that I would like to
focus my remarks on three priority areas: first, the need
to further develop and clarify the scope and mode of
action of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC);
secondly, the implementation of the civilian capacities
review; and thirdly, the strengthening of women's
participation in peacebuilding.
First, with regard to the Peacebuilding
Commission, while the addition of countries to the
PBC's agenda over the past year proves the
membership's acknowledgement of and faith in the
PBC, focus needs to be given to developing strategies
that allow countries to graduate from the PBC's agenda
and, if needed, to a lighter form of engagement.
Ms. Cheng-Hopkins elaborated on that point as well.

As we witness the increasing inclusion of
peacebuilding into national poverty-reduction
strategies in countries like Burundi and Sierra Leone,
we also need a common understanding of the role the
PBC can realistically play to further promote
peacebuilding at that stage. The PBC should help
support the relevant actors to come to a common
vision. It should ensure that the stakeholders focus on
agreed and shared priorities. It should help countries
address obstacles to peacebuilding and obtain clear
commitments from the Government concerned and the
international community on the implementation of the
peacebuilding agenda. The Commission should raise
awareness; it must not be reduced to the role of a
fundraiser.

Moreover, enhancing partnerships with
international financial institutions and major regional
actors in order to help build coherence remains a
critical task. In that context, we welcome the increased
interaction and cooperation with the World Bank. In
our view, such collaboration should also be deepened
on the ground. The established interaction with the
group of fragile States is also a positive step. A mutual
understanding of how the PBC can best support the
implementation of the Monrovia road map of June
2011 needs to be achieved. Greater clarity on how the
PBC can contribute to the high-level forum on aid
effectiveness to be held in Busan in November, and on
its follow-up, is also needed.

My second point relates to the implementation of
the civilian capacities review. Making civilian capacity
available in an effective, appropriate and timely
manner to support peacebuilding in conflict affected
countries is the best way to secure national ownership
and to render peace and reconstruction sustainable. We
therefore welcome the Secretary-General's report on
civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict (see S/2011/85) and its just approach to making better use
of existing resources within the United Nations to that
end.

We advocate concrete steps towards
strengthening and using national, international and
United Nations capabilities in post-conflict situations
without delay. South Sudan should be a starting point.
Critical needs, notably the establishment of
Government institutions and justice, need to be

addressed swiftly. Attention should be paid to
identifying and effectively supporting national
capacities, including those of diasporas.

My third point concerns the strengthening of
women's participation in peacebuilding. Fostering
women's engagement in peacebuilding requires
integrating that effort into all activities and providing
dedicated funding for women's needs. One crucial
point in that context is the need for clarity,
comparability and consistency across the United
Nations in monitoring the impact of its agenda on
gender-related issues. We therefore agree with the
necessity mentioned in the recent report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2011/598*) to develop consistent means of tracking
and reporting of spending on gender equality and
women's empowerment within the next year. The
United Nations presence in conflict and post-conflict
situations should strive to achieve greater coherence.
Sector specific gender expertise is needed for the
effective implementation of the women and peace and
security objectives.

While several countries appear to be graduating
from fragility, there is scope to maximize the impact of
peacebuilding by further developing its strategic
approach and by bridging the policy-practice gap. We
stand ready to work to that end with countries
emerging from conflict, the United Nations and all
relevant stakeholders.

