Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): I thank the Deputy Prime Minister of Belgium for presiding over today's debate. I also thank the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany for being here with us today. I would like to thank the Assistant Secretary- General for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator and the UNICEF Executive Director for their briefings. The information they have provided us paints an alarming picture of the humanitarian situation, which is claiming the lives of women and children. This can no longer be tolerated. We must respond to the moving call made by the Executive Director of UNICEF to the Council. The Niger condemns the recent attacks on schools and hospitals, which have resulted in the deaths of several civilians, including students, teachers and doctors. We welcome the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/139) and his analysis of the situation related to the crossing points, which will help the Council to better assess their importance. The report of the Secretary-General confirms what we already knew about the humanitarian situation in Syria: that instead of improving, as we had so strongly hoped, it is, unfortunately, constantly deteriorating. According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, from February | to February 20, more than 100 civilians were killed. Since the most recent consultation on the humanitarian situation in Syria, the Syrian regime forces have registered gains in their fight against terrorism. The price of that confrontation continues to be paid by civilians, including many women and children, who are exposed to dangers of all kinds during this period of extreme cold. It cannot be said often enough: the fight against terrorism, legitimate as it may be, must be waged within a framework of respect for human rights. In this context of armed conflict, the delivery of humanitarian aid has been gravely imperilled. We commend the decision of the Syrian authorities to authorize certain agencies to deliver humanitarian aid. That process must continue, especially when it involves medical products and equipment. Resolution 2504 (2020), which allowed the continued use of humanitarian corridors, was beneficial; however, coordination between aid workers and the Syrian Government needs substantial improvement. Today more than ever, the situation in Idlib demands our attention. It must move us to an outpouring of solidarity and commitment to doing everything in our power to stop the ongoing military escalation, which will only worsen the already catastrophic humanitarian situation. I commend the Secretary-General on his efforts to obtain a ceasefire as soon as possible between the parties in open conflict in Idlib. If the hostilities do not cease, the meagre but hard-won gains registered will be wiped out. In conclusion, while we in this Chamber have taken the floor, three women have spoken from the heart in the face of the suffering of the weakest: the children of Idlib. Let us listen to them. Let us work to put an end to the tragedy in Syria, which has lasted for far too long.
