Mr. Marzooq (Iraq): I have the pleasure to deliver
my statement on behalf of the States members of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). I extend
my sincere congratulations to Peru and wish it every
success as President of the Security Council for
this month.

Before delivering our statement, I would like to
express the sincere condolences of the OIC member
States for the tragic demise of Ambassador Bernard
Tanoh-Boutchoue, Permanent Representative of
Cote d'Ivoire and Chair of the OIC Council of
Foreign Ministers.

Our debate today coincides with the worsening
situation and rising tensions in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. Less than four
weeks since the start of the Great March of Return by
the Palestinian people, at least 41 Palestinians have
been killed and more than 4,000 injured by the Israeli
occupying forces, who have used live ammunition
and other weaponry against unarmed, defenceless
civilians taking part in peaceful demonstrations in
demand oftheir rights and in protest against the cruelty
of the displacement, dispossession, occupation and
blockade that they have endured for decades. On the
eve of the seventeenth anniversary of the Nakba of the
Palestinian people, these protests have highlighted the
vast consequences and tragedy of this ongoing grave
injustice, as well as the urgency of the efforts to reach
a solution in the immediate interest of saving human
lives and the prospect for bringing about a future of
justice, peace and security.

We strongly condemn the brutal Israeli assault of
Palestinian protesters and urge this esteemed organ
to take responsibility and promote action to stop the
deliberate killing and wounding of Palestinian civilians,
particularly these days in the occupied and besieged
Gaza Strip; to ensure independent and transparent
investigations, as called for by the Secretary-General;
and to pressure Israel, the occupying Power, to comply
with its obligations under international humanitarian
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions.

Moreover, the OIC reiterates its call for lifting
the inhuman and illegal Israeli blockade; ensuring the
free movement of people, materials and goods; and
providing urgently needed humanitarian and economic
assistance to the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip,
in implementation of resolution 1860 (2009). Serious
efforts in that regard are necessary for averting the
further deterioration of this dire situation and averting
a human catastrophe.

The ongoing abuses and atrocities we are witnessing
in the Gaza Strip are taking place against the backdrop
of continued hostile, repressive and provocative Israeli
practices in the rest of occupied Palestine, including
with regard to the situation in occupied east Jerusalem
and at the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque. Deliberately
unlawful and racist legislation being imposed by
the Israeli occupation Government - in violation of
international law, conventions and United Nations
resolutions - is inflaming the situation and causing
even more Palestinian suffering. The OIC warns once
again that such illegal Israeli actions threaten to further
aggravate the cycle of violence, exacerbate tensions,
hatred and radicalism, and stoke religious dimensions
to the conflict.

Therefore, we reiterate our appeal to the Security
Council to take action to effectively address this
security situation. In that regard, we condemn Israel's
continuing settlement and colonization of occupied
Palestinian territory, including east Jerusalem, in
contempt of Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016), and the relevant provisions
of international law. This illegal settlement policy,
entrenching Israel's decades-long military occupation
of Palestinian land, remains a core challenge to the
will of the international community and the major
obstacle to peace. It is a litmus test for the collective
international resolve and particularly the Council,
which is entitled to take concrete actions to ensure
respect for and compliance with its resolutions and
prevent unilateral acts by Israel - the occupying
Power - that would seriously undermine the vision
of the two-State solution, to which we are committed
and have repeatedly advocated as a peaceful solution
to this conflict.

Millions of Palestinians have been waiting for
more than seven decades for the universal values of
justice, freedom and peace to prevail in their homeland,
Palestine, just as they have waited for their inalienable
rights and legitimate aspirations to statehood,
independence and recognition to be fulfilled, in
implementation of standing United Nations resolutions.
Today the OIC once again calls for their fulfilment
as a matter of obligation and responsibility by the
international community and as a matter of principle
and rights.

The status quo of political stalemate, along with
ongoing Israeli settlement policies are definitely neither
acceptable nor viable. In that regard, the OIC welcomes
and supports the peace plan presented to the Council
by President of the State of Palestine, Mahmoud Abbas,
on 20 February (see S/PV.8183). The OIC remains firm
in its conviction that the Security Council must act to
enhance prospects for peace, hope and justice in order
to maintain the viability of the two-State solution, based
on 1967 borders, through immediate engagement along
with international actors, by launching and sponsoring
a multilateral political process to resolve all final
status issues on the basis of the long-standing terms
of reference and parameters enshrined in the United
Nations resolutions, within a specific time frame.

The ongoing plight of millions of Palestinian
refugees reflects the cruel reality of a lack of justice.
While we praise the role and endeavours of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in that regard, the
continued need for its services bears witness to the dire
situation being endured by Palestinian refugees across
the region and embodies the political commitment to
their right to return. The OIC, on this occasion, calls
upon the international community to make sure that the
plight and growing needs of the Palestinian people are
receiving adequate attention, including the necessary
funding to UNRWA, and to assume their historical,
political, legal and humanitarian responsibilities
towards finding a just and durable solution to the
question of Palestinian refugees, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm the full support
of OIC countries for and solidarity with the Palestinian
people and their endeavour to regain their legitimate
and inalienable national rights, including the right of
return, self-determination and the independence of
their State on their national soil, with east Jerusalem
as its capital.
