Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to welcome you, Sir, and to congratulate
Lithuania on its election to the Council as a
non-permanent member, as well as to commend the
leadership of your country's Mission to the United
Nations under Ambassador Raimonda Murmokaite.

We welcome the initiative of Lithuania to hold the
present debate. In that context, I thank the Secretary-
General for his remarks and for the challenges to which
he drew our attention. We also welcome the remarks
of the High Representative of the European Union,
Baroness Catherine Ashton.

The present debate provides us an opportunity
to consider the various dimensions and functioning
of cooperation between regional and subregional
organizations and the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security. That is a matter
to which my country attaches great importance.
During our presidency of the Council in August
2013, we held an open debate on this topic chaired by
President Cristina Fernandez (see S/PV.7015).

The Security Council holds important and frequent
dialogues with the European Union. The European
Union was present at August's open debate, as well
as at the meeting on the topic held in October by the
Azerbaijani presidency, which focused on strengthening
the partnership synergy between the United Nations
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (see S/PV.7050). That marks a trend that we hope will
continue and extend to other regional and subregional
organizations, based on the understanding that such
organizations are equipped to contribute a more
comprehensive and effective understanding of specific
situations.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in matters
related to the maintenance of international peace and
security is an integral part of the collective security
envisioned in the Charter of the United Nations. The
role played by regional and subregional organizations
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts has grown
in importance and can be seen in a broad range of
situations since 1945. The contributions of regional and
subregional organizations complement the work of the
United Nations, bringing to bear, as they do, knowledge
of specific regional circumstances and an understanding
of the causes of conflicts - irreplaceable comparative
advantages that are invaluable in efforts to prevent
and resolve conflicts; establish and maintain peace;
uphold legal order; promote and protect human rights,
democracy and the rule of law; and fight impunity. The
United Nations, for its part, brings to bear its universal
membership and legitimacy, its broad experience and
its operational capacity in the area of international
peace and security.

Of particular note is the contribution made
by regional and subregional organizations to the
maintenance of international peace and security under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
through the deployment of peacekeeping operations
authorized by the Council. Regional and subregional
organizations can play an important role in prevention,
resolution and mediation processes, as well as in post-
conflict peacebuilding, recovery, reconstruction and
development. In that context, Argentina believes that it
is crucial for regional and subregional organizations to
work closely with the United Nations in the context of
the "Rights up front" initiative, which aims to protect
and promote human rights and develop early-warning
mechanisms as a strategy for preventing unstable
situations from devolving into serious conflicts or mass
atrocities.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
the European Union is notable for its scope in terms
of both geography and content. Argentina welcomes
the contribution of the European Union to upholding
international peace and security in its own region and
outside Europe, in particular, though not exclusively, in
Africa, where several States members of the European
Union have maintained a presence and have a historical
responsibility. In recent years, that contribution has
been strengthened through the Union's cooperation
with the United Nations in seeking solutions to conflicts
in the Middle East, Somalia, Mali, the Sahel and the
Balkans, inter alia. In particular, we should underscore
the European Union's role in international negotiations
and mediation, its commitment to the maintenance and
strengthening of peace and the humanitarian assistance
and logistical support it has provided in various
situations.

In the context of an asymmetric negotiation such
as that between Israel and Palestine, the international
community must support those who promote
peace on the basis of a fair and lasting solution. We
therefore believe that the European Union, through its
participation in the Quartet, has played an important
role by supporting the talks currently under way, at
all times reaffirming the principles and parameters of
the two-State solution - a position that shared by the
overwhelming majority of the international community.

In that regard, we view the European Commission
guidelines adopted last July establishing that it would
provide subsidies only to Israeli institutions within
the 1967 borders, and the recent offer of an economic,
political and security assistance package in the context
of an agreement between the parties, as specific
examples of the international community's contribution
and reaffirmation of the Union's commitment to the
two-State solution.

With regard to Syria, we recognize the financial
contribution of the European Union in seeking to
alleviate the terrible humanitarian crisis that the country
is facing, the assistance to neighbouring countries and
its support to the joint mission of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the United
Nations. We also commend the European Union's
continued call for a political solution to the crisis
on the basis of the June 2012 Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex).

However, we can only regret the step to lift the
embargo that prohibits its members from exporting
weapons to Syria, thereby opening the way for a greater
militarization of the conflict, despite having expressed,
on several occasions, its concern about the increase in
arms flows to the country. Also, with regard to using
sanctions, we wish to reiterate our strong belief that
the universal nature of the United Nations makes it the
most appropriate forum competent to undertake and
monitor such measures.

Argentina encourages regional and subregional
organizations, including the European Union, to
step up their efforts and strengthen their capacity
for conflict prevention, crisis management and post-
conflict stabilization. We attach great importance to
interaction and cooperation between the Peacebuilding
Commission and regional and subregional organizations.
We encourage the European Commission to continue
working in close consultation with regional and
subregional organizations and arrangements in order
to ensure more consistent and integrated strategies for
peacebuilding and recovery in post-conflict situations.

All United Nations organs and bodies must adopt
preventive strategies and take measures in their
respective areas of competence so as to assist Member
States and regional and subregional organizations
to eradicate poverty, strengthen cooperation and
development aid and promote respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms.

Finally, justice and the rule of law are key to the
promotion and maintenance of peace, stability and
development. In that regard, it is essential to put an end
to impunity with regard to gross violations of human
rights in societies in conflict and post-conflict situations
in order to address severe violations of international
law, human rights and international humanitarian law
and to prevent serious crimes from being committed
in future.

We are convinced that regional and subregional
organizations and arrangements can help to achieve
accountability by supporting the capacity-building of
national legal systems and by cooperating with regional
mechanisms and international tribunals, including the
International Criminal Court.

