Ms. Menendez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Many
thanks to Deputy President Zuma for being here with
us and for his briefing and also for the central role that
his country and that he himself have been playing and
continue to play with regard to the question on
Burundi.

The signing on 8 October of the Pretoria Protocol
on Political, Defence and Security Power-Sharing in
Burundi is a source of satisfaction. We know that this
has already led to concrete measures, such as the
restructuring of the Transitional Government. This
happened at the end of November when members of
the National Council for the Defence of Democracy-
Forces for Defence of Democracy (CNDD-FDD) of
Nkurunziza joined the Government.

Nonetheless, we believe that the process is still
fragile and that there are major challenges ahead. First
of all, a firm appeal must be made to the parties to take
measures that strengthen the positive steps that have
been taken thus far. This includes the complete
implementation of the comprehensive ceasefire
agreement between the Transitional Government and
the CNDD-FDD of Nkurunziza, as agreed on 16
November.

Secondly, another major challenge to the peace
process remains the question of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, in which the results
to date have been meagre. We believe that at the
present time, following the signing of the Pretoria
Protocol, the time has come to make true progress on
this issue. In addition, the forces of the African
Mission in Burundi have been fully deployed. Thirdly,
as we have said on many occasions, it needs to be
reiterated that there is an appeal to the Forces
nationales de liberation of Agathon Rwasa to enter
without delay into negotiations with the Transitional
Government and join the peace process.

Lastly, we emphasize the importance of ensuring
that progress at the political level lead to an
improvement in the living standards of the civilian
population. Unfortunately, right now the humanitarian
situation has not seen any improvement. A firm appeal
must be made once again to all the parties to the
conflict to facilitate free, unobstructed access by the
humanitarian organizations to the civilian population.

In a different context, as many other speakers
have already indicated, the support of the international
community to the peace process in Burundi is
fundamental. We emphasize the great importance that
the African Mission in Burundi has, being the first
African peacekeeping operation. We emphasize the
efforts that regional players are making - among them
the European Union - and we believe that we must
take into account the close relationship between the
peace process in Burundi and holding of the
international conference on the Great Lakes region.
The Security Council recently devoted a session to this
subject.

We believe that the consolidation of the peace
process in Burundi is essential, so that the questions to
be dealt with at the Conference can be dealt with in an
effective manner. I also want to express thanks to the
President of the Economic and Social Council for his
very useful comments on the contribution of the
Economic and Social Council to the peace process.

