Mr. Raytchev (Bulgaria): Allow me first of all,
Mr. President, to thank you for having convened this
important meeting of the Council on the situation in
Kosovo. I should like also to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Michael Steiner, for his
comprehensive briefing and to extend our gratitude to
him for the work he has done with respect to the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).

Bulgaria, as an associated country, fully supports
that statement that will be made later in the debate by
the representative of Italy on behalf of the European
Union (EU). I shall therefore limit myself to only a few
brief comments in my national capacity.

The report of the Secretary-General of 26 June
2003 accurately reflects the results of the efforts of the
international community and the constructive political
factors in Kosovo aimed at bringing life in the region
back to normal, four years after the adoption of
resolution 1244 (1999).

Bulgaria fully supports the process of transferring
responsibilities under chapter 5 of the Constitutional
Framework from UNMIK to the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government, and the role of the
Transfer Council. We are confident that the work of the
Council will proceed in a planned manner, which will
contribute to implementing the "standards before
status" policy on the basis of the benchmarks.

We consider, therefore, that the development and
implementation of a feasible, transparent and
acceptable plan for all parties is of key importance for
the success of the process.

We believe that the establishment of a functioning
administration and central and local institutions in
Kosovo is of key importance for the implementation of
responsibilities transferred under chapter 5. Therefore,
this process should be accelerated. Without an
administration that is multi-ethnic in its composition
and without functioning institutions, the transfer

process could be slowed down, with all ensuing
consequences.

Bulgaria is concerned over the ongoing inter-
ethnic violence and lack of tolerance, which impede the
reconciliation process among the different ethnic
communities and the return of refugees and displaced
persons to their native regions.

In this context, we consider that the international
community should show, in a categorical way, all local
inhabitants - irrespective of their status or position in
society - that such behaviour, or its instigation, is
absolutely unacceptable.

We support the efforts of the international
community to combat organized crime and trafficking
in human beings. We welcome the readiness voiced by
Belgrade and Pristina to take steps towards a
meaningful, direct dialogue, with the decisive
assistance of the international community. We believe
that this dialogue will speed up the process of finding
mutually acceptable solutions, which at the same time
will have a positive impact on the whole region.

Bulgaria considers that during the forthcoming
period, the efforts of the international community and
of local actors in Kosovo should be focused on
achieving tangible progress towards bringing life in the
region back to normal, based on the "standards before
status" policy and the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999).

In conclusion, I should like once again to express
our deep appreciation to Michael Steiner for his
contribution to United Nations endeavours in Kosovo
and to the progress achieved so far. We wish him well
and every success in all his future endeavours. Our
appreciation goes also to all the personnel of UNMIK
for their commitment and professionalism in carrying
out their duties.

