Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Sir, and the other members of the Security
Council for the opportunity to speak on the issue of
Iraq.

Switzerland stands firmly against all forms of
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, whether
this concerns the production of or efforts to produce
such weapons. These weapons first and foremost
present a threat to civilian populations. Switzerland
also shares the concern that such weapons could fall
into the hands of international terrorist networks. It
will continue working to promote comprehensive
disarmament that is verifiable and well-balanced at the
regional and global levels.

Switzerland should like to see the Iraqi
Government respect the obligations incumbent upon it
in accordance with the Security Council resolutions
regarding inspections. It notes that the policy of
armament pursued by that Government in recent years
gives rise to serious suspicions. It believes that the only
way to allay these suspicions is for the latter to accept
unconditionally the presence and the inspections of the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) on its territory.

Switzerland supports without reservation the
efforts of the Security Council, of the Secretary-
General and of the head of UNMOVIC. It has
communicated to the head of UNMOVIC that it would
be willing to play an active part in the UNMOVIC
mission should its assistance be required. It is of the
opinion that all so-called presidential sites must also be
listed and made accessible to the inspectors without
restriction. Finally, it considers that the inspections
must be thorough and lead to the effective elimination
of any illegal weapons that may be found.

Switzerland believes that all peaceful means
should be exhausted in order to achieve these aims.
The possible use of force should not be considered
without account being taken of all the potential short-
and long-term consequences at the political, security,
humanitarian and economic levels. Switzerland is
particularly apprehensive about the risks facing the
civilian population. It is equally concerned about the
impact that an armed conflict could have on regional
stability.

Switzerland believes in this context that the
primary objective to be pursued by the international
community is the elimination of any illegal weapons
that may be discovered in Iraq. It also welcomed the
willingness shown by President Bush on 12 September
2002 to seek a solution to the current crisis in the
framework of the Security Council. It also welcomed
both the Iraqi Government's announcement of its
decision to conform to the pressing demands of the
international community by accepting the return of
disarmament inspectors, as well as the constructive
results of the talks in Vienna.

Switzerland considers that all procedures
provided for in the Charter of the United Nations must
be respected and that recourse to the Security Council
is indispensable when the use of force is envisaged. In
particular, it points out the risk of a precipitous
interpretation of the notion of legitimate defence from
a preventive perspective that extends beyond the scope
provided for in the Charter. As such, it favours a two-
stage approach that would permit the Council to assure
itself, on the basis of the report of the inspectors, that
Iraq has fulfilled its obligations and, in the event that
this should not be the case, to take all necessary
measures with full knowledge of the facts.

Switzerland attaches great importance to respect
for Security Council resolutions. While recognizing the
specific nature of each conflict, it will continue to
strive to ensure the implementation of all Security
Council resolutions in the name of the credibility and
effectiveness of international law.

There is undeniably a need to act, and to act with
determination, in order to ensure the implementation of
United Nations resolutions, but action must be taken
jointly within the framework of the United Nations.
Only the United Nations can confer international
legitimacy on an action against Iraq.

