Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura
to the Security Council today. We heard a briefing from
Mr. De Mistura in this Chamber (see S/PV.8373) just 10
days ago. It is hard to recall any other instances ofpublic
briefings of the Council by United Nations mediators
on every contact with the parties to a given conflict or
the international stakeholders involved. Experience has
shown that this kind of work requires great patience,
caution and a very measured dose of publicity so as
not to harm the matter at hand. We are therefore not
convinced that those who insisted on convening today's
open meeting are genuine fans of a peaceful settlement
in Syria. It is not hard to postulate that what we are
seeing is rather the latest show of tragic breast-beating
and moralizing directed at Russia.

There is noticeable action being taken at the moment
with regard to Syria. On one hand, the United Nations
is working within the framework of resolution 2254
(2015). The Idlib agreements are being implemented and
our Turkish partners are working diligently on that. The
guarantors of the Astana process are making serious
efforts to halt the violence on the ground and create
conditions that can advance the intra-Syrian dialogue.
It is difficult, but concrete progress is clearly being
made. People in many parts of Syria are beginning to
return to normal life and feel that they are safer.

On the other hand, we have a group of self-styled
examiners sitting on high who have done no visible
service in the cause of a settlement but who for some
reason have arrogated to themselves the right to a
biased investigation of what Russia is doing. We want
to emphasize that there are no grounds for establishing
artificial deadlines for creating a constitutional
committee based on the outcomes of the Syrian National
Dialogue Congress in Sochi. It cannot be imposed
under conditions that run counter to the wishes of the
Syrians themselves. Mr. De Mistura's visit to Damascus
at the invitation of the Syrian Government was useful
as part of the pathway to achieving the goals outlined
in Sochi. We are confident that for the remainder of his
term he will spare no effort to advance the issue within
his mandate as mediator in full respect for Syria's
sovereignty, and we will help him do that.

The very fact of the Special Envoy's visit to
Damascus is crucial, but it is not the only development
on the Syrian settlement. The Astana troika recently
held consultations in Moscow, and representatives of
Turkey, Russia, Germany and France are meeting in
Istanbul tomorrow for a quadrilateral summit in which
the Special Envoy will also participate. Incidentally,
according to our information and assessment, his visit to
Damascus was very useful and constructive. We should
not underestimate its importance and the momentum
that his visit can give the settlement process.

However, we caution those who would like to reap
dubious dividends from an artificially whipped-up
crisis that it would do criminal damage to the political
process. That applies first and foremost to the Western
participants in the so-called small group. We believe
that the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy
understand the full depths of their responsibility in
this delicate matter. We assume that Mr. De Mistura's
briefing today is not his political farewell. He can still
get a great deal done before his mandate ends, and we
are sure that he will work tirelessly to get results. I will
say it again - we will help him in every possible way.

