Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank you for convening today's meeting,
Mr. President. We also want to thank the invited
speakers for their briefings. We particularly welcome
the presence here today of Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Burkina Faso.

Peru has been following the fragile humanitarian
and deteriorating security situations in the Sahel with
concern, in spite of the valuable efforts of the Joint
Force of the States of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel), which we witnessed during our recent
visit to Mali and Burkina Faso. In particular we firmly
condemn the continuing terrorist attacks and spread
of violent extremism. It is worrying that this crisis is
spreading to other States outside the region such as
Benin, Togo and Ghana, among others. We express
our condolences to the families of the victims of recent
attacks and to the countries affected, such as France,
which lost two courageous soldiers. In that context, we
stress the importance of redoubling our efforts in three
areas that we believe to be fundamental to addressing
this situation.

The first is security. The Joint Force plays a central
role in the fight against terrorism, armed groups and
transnational organized crime. We welcome the fact that
the Joint Force resumed its activities at the beginning of
this year and that the majority of its military and police
components are deployed. However, we are concerned
about the fact that there are still shortfalls in training,
equipment and capacity-building, as well as limitations
in the technical cooperation that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali is called on to provide. We reiterate the urgent
need to ensure that the Joint Force has predictable,
sustainable and flexible funding in order for it to fulfil
its objectives. We also underscore how important it
is that the G-5 Sahel countries remain committed to
the establishment of a human rights and international
humanitarian law compliance framework, with a view
to strengthening the confidence and support of the
international community.

The second area is sustainable development.
The Joint Force is part of a comprehensive and
multidimensional strategy aimed at addressing the
root causes of the conflict. That means building and
strengthening the capacities and institutions needed
to defend human rights, promote the rule of law,
counter the negative effects of climate change and
drive sustained economic growth, in line with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African
Union's Agenda 2063. We want to highlight the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the G-5
Sahel Priority Investment Programme in that regard, as
central elements in eliminating the structural obstacles
to development, peace and security in the region. In that
context, we emphasize the importance of promoting the
empowerment of women and the creation of more job
opportunities, particularly for young people, which has
a direct impact on stability and development.

The third area is regional and subregional
cooperation. We welcome the increased regional
cooperation between the members of the G-5 Sahel and
its neighbours with regard to information exchange and
the fight against insecurity and the terrorist threat. We
also emphasize cooperation with the various United
Nations offices, such as the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and the Peacebuilding
Fund. UNOWAS, in particular, offers a preventive and
regional perspective, thanks to its effective coordination
with the African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States and various regional organizations
and United Nations entities.

In conclusion, we welcome the efforts of the G-5
Sahel as a strong manifestation of the potential and
commitment of African countries to the promotion of
peace and security on their continent. Peru will continue
to support its efforts in all areas with the ultimate goal
of consolidating sustainable peace in that region.

