Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): In the interest of time,
Mr. President, I am going to skip the courtesies to you
and to your predecessor.

My delegation would like to thank the Executive
Chairman of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC),
Mr. Hans Blix, and the General Director of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr.
Mohamed ElBaradei, for presenting their second
periodic reports last Friday. My delegation considers
the reports of the inspectors to have been very
comprehensive, objective and highly professional. We
would like to reiterate our full confidence in Mr. Blix,
Mr. ElBaredei and their respective teams of inspectors.
We have no doubt that they will continue to do their
work with the same dedication and professionalism.

In their reports, both Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei
pointed out that they had noted greater cooperation on
the part of the Iraqi authorities insofar as process is
concerned. However, they still feel that there is a
deficit in terms of cooperation on substance. It is
extremely important for the Iraqi authorities to
understand that resolution 1441 (2002) puts an
obligation on Iraq to comply fully with all the
requirements of the resolution, leading to the complete
and total disarmament of Iraq in the field of weapons
of mass destruction.

We welcome the steps taken by the Iraqi
Government to allow U-2 surveillance flights, and the
conduct of private interviews with scientists, and the
reported adoption of national legislation prohibiting
proscribed activities. But we note that such measures
are being taken on an incremental basis and only under
the pressure of severe consequences. It is important for
Iraq to understand that it is the will of the international
community to see Iraq rid itself of weapons of mass
destruction and that it should engage in fuller, more
proactive and genuine cooperation with the inspectors,
whose job, we agree, should be the verification of Iraqi
disarmament rather than the search for weapons of
mass destruction.

We have noted that on several occasions Iraq has
claimed that it does not possess any weapons of mass
destruction. If such is indeed the case, it should provide
all the necessary evidence that can convince the
international community that it has indeed destroyed
whatever amounts of biological and chemical weapons
it is known to have possessed.

My delegation looks forward to the next report of
the inspectors, which we hope will show that Iraq has
displayed greater cooperation on substance and
provided the necessary evidence as requested by the
international community. Iraq must understand that it is
being given a chance to cooperate and to come clean.

My delegation considers that in the unfortunate
event that no tangible progress is seen in the next
report, the Security Council will have to assume its
responsibility and take whatever action is necessary
while maintaining and reinforcing its credibility and
centrality, as well as its unity. It is to be recalled that
resolution 1441 (2002) was adopted unanimously by
the Security Council, thereby reflecting the will of the
international community to see Iraq get rid of its
weapons of mass destruction.

This is the time for Iraq to choose full compliance
with resolution 1441 (2002) and pave the way for the
lifting of sanctions. The Iraqi Government must avoid
any step that would increase the suffering of its people.
At a time when a large number of countries are
suffering from abject poverty, malnutrition and lack of
development, addressing which requires significant
resources, the consequences of war and the ensuing
reconstruction will not only aggravate the situation of
the Iraqi population but also represent a major setback
in addressing global development programmes. We
therefore appeal to the Iraqi Government to comply
fully and unconditionally with the inspectors and to
disclose whatever it failed to disclose in its 12,000-
page declaration.

