Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): We join others in
congratulating you, Sir, on the start of your two-year
term as a member of the Security Council. We also
welcome your presidency and applaud your choice
of theme for today's open debate. This is indeed an
excellent opportunity to exchange views with the new
Secretary-General about the fundamental issue of
conflict prevention. We thank the Secretary-General
for his extensive analysis and his proposed surge in
diplomacy for peace. This subject matter is particularly
topical as we confront grave challenges to peace and
security at the global level.

First of all, as a consistent supporter and promoter of
the concept and practice ofconflict prevention, Armenia
particularly welcomes the focus on taking early action

to prevent conflict. We must note, however, that the
issue poses a persistent challenge, as the operational
activities of the United Nations and its relevant bodies
often address conflicts as they occur - and collective
preventive action has not seen much success.

In addressing the question of prevention, Armenia
has consistently stressed the importance of synergy,
coherence and coordination among United Nations
bodies in order to sustainably achieve the mutually
reinforcing, interrelated and indivisible primary
objectives of the Organization - known as the three
pillars of peace and security, development and human
rights. In underlining the objective of achieving
tangible results, we have consistently emphasized early
prevention, as inaction gives rise to conflicts, major
humanitarian crises and, not least, atrocity crimes.

We believe that, over the years, the United Nations
and its States Members have reached the reasonable
conclusion that conflicts are detectable at a considerably
earlier phase because they are, more often than not, a
reaction to persistent injustice, discrimination and the
denial of rights - which are generally the root causes
of conflict. We speak from experience. The human
rights aspect of conflict prevention should therefore
receive particular attention across the entire United
Nations system. In other words, all human rights are a
function of security.

Secondly, the regional context of conflict
prevention requires broader recognition and support. A
division of labour and coordination and non-duplication
of efforts and activities are the building blocks for
enhancing the capacity of regional organizations to
prevent and resolve conflicts. We serve as a example of
success in applying such efforts in our region. Armenia
welcomes the support of the international community,
the United Nations and the Secretary-General for the
work of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) Minsk Group co-chairmanship,
which is seeking the peaceful resolution of the Nagorno
Karabakh conflict.

In that connection, Armenia once again draws the
attention of the international community to Azerbaijan's
ongoing obstruction of tangible progress towards
reaching a peaceful settlement ofthe Nagorno Karabakh
conflict in conformity with the internationally agreed
format. Most recently, on 29 December, Azerbaijan
carried out a diversionary incursion attempt into
Armenia, which resulted in human losses. That heinous
act took place only months after its large-scale attack
on Nagorno Karabakh in the beginning of April 2016.
Through such acts, Azerbaijan continues to inflict
considerable damage on the peace process.

Furthermore, the habitual glorification of the
atrocities, beheadings and mutilations committed by the
armed forces of Azerbaijan, as witnessed most recently
during the April 2016 aggression, represent a grim
demonstration of the incapacity of the authorities of
Azerbaijan to adhere to the basic norms ofthe civilized
world. The perpetrators of such heinous crimes should be
brought tojustice. The irresponsibility and belligerence
of the authorities of Azerbaijan should receive forceful
condemnation by the international community.

In a statement on 29 December 2016, the Foreign
Ministry of Armenia stressed that, at a time when the
most serious damage caused to the settlement process as
a result of the Azerbaijan's aggression against Nagorno
Karabakh in April 2016 had not yet been overcome,
Baku embarked upon a new bit of adventurism, grossly
violating the agreements reached at the Vienna and St.
Petersburg summits and the commitment to settle the
issue through peaceful means. Azerbaijan has been
acting in blatant defiance of the most recent statement
of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs ofthe OSCE Minsk
Group co-Chair countries, issued in Hamburg on
8 December 2016, in which they strongly urged a strict
adherence to the 1994/1995 ceasefire agreements.

In their related statement of 9 December 2016,
the OSCE Minsk Group co-Chairs once again urged
strict observance of the agreements reached during
summits in Vienna and St. Petersburg, including the
obligations to finalize in the shortest possible time an
OSCE investigative mechanism. To date, Azerbaijan
has continued to reject the implementation of the
agreements on the expansion of the OSCE monitoring
team in the Nagorno Karabakh conflict area and the
establishment of an OSCE investigative mechanism
on the ceasefire violations. The most recent military
actions of Azerbaijan, on 29 December 2016, can only
stand as proof of its intention to deny the verification
of ceasefire violations, evade the responsibility that it
bears for those violations and sustain the escalation
of tensions.

Armenia remains fully committed to the peaceful
settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict within
the internationally agreed format of the OSCE Minsk
Group co-chairmanship and urges, as an immediate
priority, the full implementation of the agreements
reached at the Vienna and St. Petersburg summits in
May and June 2016, respectively.

In conclusion, the prevention of conflict or of
relapse into conflict also entails a change of mindset.
We strongly urge Azerbaijan to grasp the basic fact that
there is no alternative to the peaceful settlement of the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict and that there can be no
military solution to the conflict nor justification for the
human losses associated with it.
