Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to convey my gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate on such an
important topic of concern to the entire international
community. I would also like to express my appreciation
to Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs Jeffrey
Feltman for his briefing.

Every day, when we turn on our televisions or
radios, we see or hear how conflicts ravage a great
many countries, many of them to be found in Africa or
in the Middle East. The consequences ofthose wars and
conflicts are felt at many levels. In addition to the loss
of human life and the destruction of institutions and
economic and social infrastructure, we also have seen
the impact on the cohesion of societies in conflict and
the repercussions on the existence of States affected by
those crises.
The conflicts of today have devastating effects on
women and children in the form of killings, injuries,
imprisonment, detainment against their will by armed
groups and their exploitation for various purposes,
including as victims of sexual violence and human
trafficking. Conflicts tear families apart, destroy social
fabrics and deprive States of their resources for a very
long time.

What can the United Nations do in terms of the
prevention of conflicts, faced with their widespread
occurrence throughout the planet? What can rich
countries do to assist poor countries, which often serve
as the theatres for all types ofconflicts, to better manage
conflicts and restore lasting peace, so beneficial for
all? Some conflicts can be predicted, others cannot.
The international community will have to devote itself
to preventive diplomacy. In regions where States are
weak, racked by various ethnic quarrels and lacking
the necessary resources to meet the basic needs of their
people, there is, of course, a risk of conflict, especially
when not all the various elements of the population are
associated with or involved in managing the affairs of
State.

A few years ago, Cote d'Ivoire was considered to be
among the most stable of countries, yet war prevailed.
In the Central African Republic all the communities
were reportedly living happily side by side, but religious
differences emerged and surprised everybody. Mali, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan are
further examples, of which there are many throughout
the continent.

What is taking place in Syria and other States in
the Middle East is also not grounds for optimism.

A great many countries of the South have not been
spared by war because the conditions for lasting peace are
not there. Poverty, unemployment, underdevelopment,
socioeconomic fragility, injustice and marginalization
are factors that lead to conflict. Wars in today's world
do not produce winners and losers. All those who
fight are losers, because war causes devastation and
leaves a great many serious problems, in particular
material as well as psychological problems. Preventive
diplomacy is very promising insofar as it is a cost-
effective way to avoid conflict. To restore peace, some
demand justice - in other words, a peace based on
who is right - whereas others give pride of place to
reconciliation.

There is a need to merge both of those approaches,
that is, justice for serious violations and reconciliation
for all others. Reconciliation, which has been held up as
an example for all in South Africa, shows that a country
can play the role of a peacemaker. The international
community must make greater efforts to propagate a
culture of peace in the countries of the South by raising
the awareness of the people regarding the problems of
war and their collective and individual responsibility
for grave violations of human rights under international
humanitarian law, as well as for war crimes.

