Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I deliver
this statement on behalf of the Group of Arab States.

At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. We highly
appreciate the efforts of your predecessor in his
excellent conduct of the work of the Council last month.

I also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for
his valuable briefing. I also take this opportunity to
congratulate the State of Palestine on its election to the
chairmanship of the Group of 77 and China and to wish
it every success. We have confidence in the ability of
the Palestinian delegation to fully undertake that task.
Last month, we heard a briefing by Mr. Mladenov in
which he described alarming facts, the horror of which
he has reiterated today (see S/PV.8429). Those facts
reflect developments in occupied Palestine, including
the continued Israeli military occupation of Palestinian
territories; the confiscation of land; the demolition of
Palestinian homes in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem; and the expansion of settlements, which has
become a genuine threat to the two-State solution. Those
facts also reflect the dangerous escalation of violence
against Palestinian protesters and demonstrators, the
increased threat of war and the lack of any progress in
implementing resolution 2334 (2016), which calls for an
end to all settlement activities. However, that resolution
is deliberately and blatantly violated every day by the
Israelis, particularly in East Jerusalem,

Regrettably, today's briefing lacked any glimmer of
hope. All such reports lead only to further frustration
and disappointment among us as States Members of the
United Nations. What about the Palestinian citizens who
remain under the oppression of occupation on a daily
basis and enduring the repressive blockade in Gaza?

In the light of all those violations of international
legitimacy and Security Council resolutions, the
situation in Palestine today makes it incumbent upon
the Council to be more effective in order to preserve
its credibility, which is jeopardized by the Palestinian
question. The most important step that the Security
Council and the United Nations can take is to implement
General Assembly resolution ES-10/20, on the protection
ofPalestinian civilians, as mentioned in the report ofthe
Secretary-General contained in document ES-10/794.
We urge all States and civil society organizations to
ensure the protection of Palestinian civilians and
to establish a practical and effective mechanism to
implement the General Assembly resolution and the
Secretary-General's report.

We also call on the Secretary-General to step up
his efforts to facilitate the accession of the State of
Palestine to full membership of the United Nations
in order to preserve the two-State solution, which is
currently in genuine jeopardy. We call on the Security
Council to implement resolution 2334 (2016), which
reaffirms that the Israeli settlements constitute a
flagrant violation under international law and a major
obstacle to achieving peace.

We also call on the international community to
respect the legal status of the holy city of Jerusalem
and not to recognize any unilateral policy that would
alter the legal status of Jerusalem, since such unilateral
measures violate international law and relevant United
Nations resolutions. We urge the United Nations to also
work on finding a sustainable solution to the financial
deficit faced by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East through
predictable and sustainable mechanisms in order to
avoid exacerbating the status of Palestinian refugees.

We must offer the Palestinian people a glimmer
of hope. We have only described their plight, as
Mr. Mladenov stated in his briefing. However, we
must work to preserve the peace process in accordance
with relevant international resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the terms of reference recognized by the
United Nations.

Moreover, everything I have said also applies to
the occupied Syrian Golan. In that regard, we stress
the importance of the unity and territorial integrity
of the Syrian Arab territories and their freedom from
occupation of all kinds, which is to be condemned.
The occupying Power should not believe that what
is happening in Syria today will persuade the Arab
peoples to accept its occupation of the Syrian Golan,
no matter what illegal measures it takes to alter the
identity of the Syrian citizens in the Golan and detach
them from their motherland Syria, as it sought to do
by imposing municipal elections in the occupied Syrian
Golan, in gross violation of international law.

