The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
Czech Republic and Serbia, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity With the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, Without the right to vote, in
accordance With the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to a seat at the
Council table.

Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, was
escorted to a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Russian): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Palous
(Czech Republic) and Mr. Kruljevie (Serbia) took
the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber


The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Inzko to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to document S/2009/246, containing a
letter dated 13 May 2009 from the Secretary-General
transmitting the thirty-fifth report of the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by His Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko. This is
the first appearance of Mr. Inzko in the Security
Council as High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. On behalf of the Security Council, I
extend a warm welcome to him and wish him success
in his important assignment. I now give him the floor.


