President Jiang Zemin (spoke in Chinese): It is
my great pleasure to attend today's Security Council
summit meeting and to congratulate you Sir, President
Alpha Oumar Konare of the Republic of Mali, on your
assumption of the presidency of this important
meeting.

Fifty-five years ago the United Nations was
founded, an event which has influenced in a most
profound manner the direction in which post-war
international relations have developed. Over those 55
years, the United Nations has made contributions to
international peace and security, to increased
exchanges and cooperation among the countries of the
world and to world development and progress. We
should treasure and build upon this asset to the benefit
of mankind.

At the turn of the century, the international
situation is undergoing profound changes, and the
world is not all at peace. Various factors which threaten
world peace and security still exist. Regional conflicts,
triggered by ethnic, religious or territorial disputes,
have increased, instead of having decreased. The
common development of all countries is being hindered
by complicated problems and conflicts. People all over
the world are calling, more strongly than ever, for
peace, stability and development. How to enable the
United Nations to more effectively maintain
international peace and security and create a favourable
environment for the development of all countries has
become a pressing task.

What we are confronted with are unprecedented
challenges and complex problems. In order to dissolve
contradictions and conflicts effectively and achieve a
lasting peace and common security, the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter must be
strictly complied with. Disputes, if any, must be settled
through dialogue, negotiation and consultation. Wilful
use of force and interference in the internal affairs of
other countries in the name of humanitarianism not
only run counter to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter, but will also cause severe
negative consequences. Under the United Nations
Charter, the Security Council is entrusted with the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. It is at the core of the
international collective security mechanism. It is
against the will of the vast number of United Nations
Member States to act however one likes and bypass the
Security Council on major issues pertaining to
international peace and security. We must work
together to maintain, rather than weaken, the authority
of the Security Council, and to strengthen, rather than
weaken, its role.

Peacekeeping operations are one of the major
means by which the United Nations fulfils its
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Facts have proved that the success
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations depends
on the observance of the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter, particularly the principles of
respect for State sovereignty, non-interference in the
internal affairs of recipient countries, seeking prior
consent of the parties concerned, neutrality and the
non-use of force except for self-defence. The United
Nations should sum up its past experience and lessons.
It is true that the peacekeeping operations have
contributed to international peace and security, but they
are not a panacea. In order to enable United Nations
peacekeeping operations to work better, it is essential
to treat symptoms and remove the root causes that lead
to conflicts at the same time.

To meet the needs of the times, it is imperative
for the Security Council to reform itself where
necessary so as to strengthen its role, maintain its
authority and improve its efficiency. The expansion of
the Security Council should be based on the principle
of equitable geographical distribution and should first
of all address the under-representation of the
developing countries in the Council. Any reform of the
Security Council should adequately reflect the will of
the majority of the United Nations Member States.
Only then can the reform stand the test of history. To
this end, all Member States must have detailed and
patient discussions in order to reach consensus on this
issue.

It is undoubtedly very important to give priority
to the African question at this Summit. Looking around
the African continent, we have seen incessant turmoil
and raging wars plaguing many countries and regions,
which have not only displaced innocent people and
plunged them into poverty, but have also hindered the
social and economic development of Africa. Africa is
an important member of the world community. Without
African stability and development, there is no world
peace and prosperity to speak of. The current poor and
backward situation of Africa is due to the long-term
competition and plundering of old colonialism. Africa,
whose countries have realized their national
independence, should not be reduced to a neglected
corner. The United Nations and its Security Council
should pay greater attention to Africa and increase their
input into that continent. In dealing with problems
facing Africa, they should fully respect the sovereignty
of African countries, pay close attention to the opinions
of African countries and regional organizations, such
as the Organization of African Unity, take effective
measures to keep African countries away from poverty
and warfare and help African peoples onto the road to
tranquillity, development and rejuvenation.

China is a permanent member of the Security
Council and a developing country as well. We are
ready to work together with other United Nations
Member States to strengthen the role of the Security
Council in maintaining international peace and
security, support its continued efforts to resolve
regional conflicts and encourage the Council to
increase its support for Africa. So long as we are firm
in determination and persistent in action, the lofty ideal
of peace and development that people all over the
world have longed for will surely come true.

