Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): I
would like to welcome you to New York, Sir, on behalf
of my Government and to mention that we enjoy
excellent bilateral relations with your country. It is also
a pleasure for me to be here personally, since I spent
almost 15 years of my career working on questions
related to the South-East Asian region, serving in the
region, in Washington, DC, and elsewhere. I also want
to thank you for organizing this meeting. It is not every
day that we get a chance to greet the first new country
of the new millennium and I appreciate your joining us
on this happy occasion.

On behalf of the United States Government, Ijoin
other speakers today in congratulating the East
Timorese people on the occasion of their hard-won
independence. East Timor's evolution over the past two
and a half years, from devastation to democracy, has
been truly inspiring.

The success we celebrate today is the product of
contributions from many quarters and by many
individuals. I want to commend Australia in particular
for its leadership and the key role it played. This day
also marks a signal success for the United Nations -
something that the United States is delighted to
recognize at this meeting. We of course especially
applaud the tireless efforts of Special Representative
Vieira de Mello and the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET). Thanks to
UNTAET, East Timor is on a solid footing as it joins
the ranks of peace-loving nations today.

I also wish to commend all the military and
civilian police personnel from Australia, Portugal and
all the contributing countries that served as part of the
international force in East Timor, as well as UNTAET,
for their dedication and hard work in restoring stability
and ensuring security in East Timor since 1999.
Similarly, we recognize the legacy of good work done
by the United Nations Mission in East Timor in
conducting the popular consultation in 1999, which
brought us to this historic point today, and we salute
the memory of United Nations peacekeepers and
international personnel who have given their lives.

The United States remains committed to
supporting East Timor and established diplomatic
relations with East Timor this morning. Our
commitment to East Timor speaks for itself. Since
1999, we have contributed over $300 million towards
United Nations peacekeeping in East Timor and
committed nearly $180 million in bilateral assistance.
Per capita, East Timor is the largest recipient of United
States bilateral assistance in the world.

We look forward to working with Special
Representative Sharma as he leads the next phase of
United Nations involvement in East Timor. The
important thing now is to consolidate gains and avoid
instability. That is why the United States joined other
Council members in approving, on Friday, the
establishment of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET). We will continue
to urge the United Nations and the East Timorese to
work with the widest range of bilateral donors and
interested agencies as the new nation takes charge of
its affairs. We will also encourage the United Nations
to stay on the schedule that it has set for itself to fulfil
UNMISET's mission to devolve responsibility to the
Timorese people as soon as is feasible.

The Timorese can help this process by focusing
on a democratic, peaceful way forward, exercising
fiscal responsibility and discipline, setting realistic
priorities and developing sources of income. There is
much hard work ahead, but East Timor will have
friends to help it. My country is one of them. The
United States will continue to work with the United
Nations to promote prosperity, peace and stability in
newly independent East Timor. We welcome the people
of East Timor at last into the community of free and
democratic nations and to early membership in the
United Nations.

