Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Huang X1a, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, for his briefing. I would like to emphasize three points. First of all, progress on regional cooperation should be encouraged. France welcomes the positive developments in recent months. In particular, I welcome the continuation of the consultations between Rwanda and Uganda, facilitated by the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Angola; the collaborative approach on the demarcation of the borders between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia; the agreement between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda to strengthen their cooperation on security issues; as well as the holding, on 7 October, of the Great Lakes summit, at the initiative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is essential to continue the encouraging, committed momentum we have seen since the election of President Tshilombo Tshisekedi, which could be spurred on by the political transition in Burundi, in order to further reduce tensions and build confidence. The continuation of that regional momentum is critical to respond to the security challenges and achieve the common objective of stabilizing the Great Lakes region. Unfortunately, the situation in the region remains marked by the activities of armed groups, particularly in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that regard, I commend the tireless efforts of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Secondly, and more generally, the region must also address the root causes of instability. The development of anatural resource development plan and a transparent extractive sector would help combat the illegal exploitation of natural resources. France is playing its full part in collective regulatory efforts, with a view to the entry into force, on | January, of the regulation on minerals from conflict zones. France stands ready to participate in the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region workshop on this issue. Devising national and regional frameworks for disarming, demobilizing and reintegrating armed groups would facilitate their sustainable return to communities. Progress to that end in the Democratic Republic of the Congo by the Force de resistance patriotique de l'Ituri group must be rapidly consolidated to prevent a return to violence. Efforts must also focus on human rights violations and the fight against sexual and gender-based violence, which are obstacles to peace and stability in the region. International humanitarian law must be respected. That goes hand in hand with the strengthening of the rule of law, security sector and justice reform, as well as the fight against corruption and impunity. On its part, France has selected the Great Lakes region as one of the priority areas in its national action plan to implement the women and peace and security agenda. Nevertheless, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic particularly affects women, refugees and displaced persons and has contributed to worsening food insecurity, particularly in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Regional cooperation is critical in that regard as well. In that connection, I welcome the commitment undertaken last week by the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Angola and Uganda to establish a cross-border plan to combat COVID-19. France is doing its part to support the region by allocating €1.2 billion of our development aid to health issues in Africa. Thirdly, the United Nations has an important role in supporting the region. France reiterates its support for the work of the Special Envoy, who plays a critical role in supporting the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region and monitoring commitments. The COVID-19 pandemic has made it impossible for consultations to be as inclusive as in the past. We hope that dialogue can resume. I also welcome the Special Envoy's steps taken to prepare the second conference on investment and trade in the Great Lakes region. The United Nations strategy for peace consolidation, conflict prevention and resolution in the Great Lakes region will be a key tool for concretely strengthening political stability and peace in the region. It should also make it possible to respond to the challenges of economic integration and sustainable development in the region as a whole. Like other external partners that have actively contributed to its elaboration, we await the strategy with great interest and hope that it will lead to an operational action plan. France and the countries of the Great Lakes region share the same objective - stability and development in the region. To that end, we offer them and the United Nations our unflagging commitment and support.
