Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Like others, I
want to thank Ambassador Ne'stor Osorio for the 90-day
report on the activities of his very important
Committee. And while wishing him all success in
conducting the work of the Committee, I also want to
assure him and his team of my country's full support
for the fulfilment of his mandate.

I wish to convey my appreciation to the Panel of
Experts for the work they have done in a very short
time, and to thank them for the pragmatic and useful
recommendations offered in the interim report of
24 February, the first after their appointment by the
Secretary-General in November in accordance with
resolution 1929 (2010). The adoption of that resolution
was the most important event of last year regarding
Iran's compliance with its international obligations.

In order to restore international confidence and
allow it to sustain the nature of the Iranian nuclear
programme and its related activities, the quality of
cooperation with the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) has to be enhanced and moved up to a
satisfactory level by putting fully into practice the
safeguards agreement of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and its
Additional Protocol, thus granting access to all sites,
equipment, persons and documents, as requested by the
Agency.

Unfortunately, the report of the Director General
of the Agency to the Council of the Board of
Governors on 7 March reiterated the fact that certain
activities being undertaken by Iran and some of its
nuclear facilities are contrary to relevant resolutions of
the Board of Governors and the Security Council. The
report further indicates that Iran has not suspended its
enrichment-related activities, did not supply the
Agency with information regarding the construction of
new uranium enrichment facilities, and has not
suspended work on all heavy water-related projects.
Without full access to the Iranian nuclear facilities,

Director General Amano concludes that the IAEA is
unable to provide credible assurances about the
peaceful nature of these activities.

Allow me to say a word on the diplomatic track.
We regret that Iran does not seem willing to negotiate
meaningfully, as was indicated at the Istanbul meeting
in January. We call on Iran to engage fully in this
process. My country remains committed to a negotiated
solution, and we fully support High Representative
Ashton in this regard.

It is in the larger context to which I just referred
that the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) has a particularly important role
to play. While expressing deep concern about the
various incidents reported in the 90-day report,
indicating that violations and attempted violations of
the sanctions regime continue to occur, I agree with
Ambassador Osorio that the recent increase in the
reporting of such violations by Member States sets a
positive example and should be encouraged. To that
end, I very much support the intention of the Chair to
follow up on the implementation of the programme of
work of 23 July 2010, disseminating additional
optional guidance on implementation reports,
reviewing the Committee's consolidated list, and
updating its guidelines in accordance with the new
provisions of resolution 1929 (2010).

Being very much attached to transparency and
outreach initiatives as one of the best ways to stimulate
the overall implementation of the relevant resolutions,
I also very much welcome periodical open briefings for
interested Member States.

