Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank you,
Sir, for convening this important open debate on the
working methods of the Security Council and for
circulating the concept note that guides our discussions
today (S/2013/613, annex). Allow me to also take
this opportunity to congratulate Ambassador Maria
Cristina Perceval on Argentina's leadership in the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.
Brazil welcomes the adoption of presidential note
S/2013/515 and the commitments of Council members
therein to increasing the efficiency and the transparency
of the Council's work, as well as to improve dialogue
with non-Council members and other bodies. We also
welcome the adoption of presidential note S/2013/630,
which encourages a more interactive dialogue between
Council members and troop and police-contributing
countries. It is of utmost importance that the views of
the troop- and police-contributing countries be fully
taken into account by the Council. For this to happen,
consultations with them should be held as early as
possible in the negotiation of mandate renewals of
peacekeeping missions.

My country has long advocated for a Security
Council that is more transparent, efficient, inclusive,
accountable and accessible to the broader membership.
The Security Council acts on behalf of all United
Nations Members and has the political responsibility
to maintain a permanent and meaningful dialogue
with the whole membership. Therefore, we welcome
the fact that the holding of wrap-up sessions at the
end of each presidency is becoming a regular practice
among Council members. We expect that those sessions
can gradually become more open to the effective
participation of non-members. Monthly discussions of
the Council's work are a valuable tool for the broader
membership to have a better understanding of its
deliberations and of the issues on its agenda.

Since it is of utmost importance to enhance the
transparency of the Council's work, Brazil believes
that the Security Council should meet as often as
possible in public. We reiterate our understanding
that private meetings should be reserved for
exceptional circumstances. Furthermore, it is our
belief that the Security Council should consult
more regularly - formally or informally - with
non-members. It is disappointing that, although binding
on all Member States, Security Council decisions
seldom are discussed with the openness desired by the
majority of the membership.

In line with the spirit of the Charter of the United
Nations, it is important to allow all United Nations
Members to express their views and to influence
decisions whenever they may have a special interest in
substantive matters under consideration by the Council.
Encouraging the wider participation of the membership
in the Security Council's deliberations is the path to
enhancing the legitimacy, credibility and effectiveness
of its decisions. Greater transparency is also much
needed in the activities of the Council's subsidiary
organs. Substantive and interactive briefings with
Member States offer an opportunity to all interested
delegations to provide inputs to the work of those
bodies.

It is imperative to strengthen the relationship
between the Security Council and other United Nations
bodies. Closer cooperation is needed not only with the
General Assembly, but also with the Economic and
Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). Brazil believes that the PBC's advisory role
to the Security Council has not been explored to its
full capacity. Greater interaction between the two
bodies could be fostered. We once again encourage
the participation of the Chairs of PBC configurations
in the Council's debates and consultations. We also
welcome the expansion of consultation and cooperation
with relevant regional and subregional organizations,
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

As we have stated in the past, the interpretation and
implementation of Council decisions is an important
part ofthe discussions regarding working methods. The
establishment of objective parameters, especially when
the use of coercive measures is contemplated, would
clearly contribute to increasing the accountability and
effectiveness of Council decisions, and to avoiding the
loose interpretations of mandates. We also encourage
the Security Council to dedicate more of its time and
efforts to preventive diplomacy.

The Council's exercise of its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
should be informed by the principle that prevention
is always the best policy to reduce the risk of armed
conflict and the human costs associated with it.

Let me take this opportunity to welcome the
launching of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group. Brazil shares with the
group the understanding that reform of the working
methods of the Security Council is much needed and
commends the pragmatic and concrete approach that is
being pursued by ACT.

Since we are speaking of accountability, I must
reiterate that when matters of the utmost interest to
this Council are dealt with outside this body, the least
we can expect is regular reporting. Such reporting has
been seriously inadequate in situations such as the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, where a more forthcoming
approach and regular briefings by the Quartet are
clearly due.

We commend France for presenting a proposal
regarding the use of veto. We believe that this is a
clear demonstration of the necessity and urgency of
considering substantive decisions to update the organ.

The decision of Saudi Arabia not to take its seat
on the Council until the organ is reformed is also very
relevant to our discussions. It only reinforces the widely
held view that the more we protract the unavoidable
reform, the more often the Council will be confronted
with the serious limitations that jeopardize its capacity
to maintain international peace and security.

In conclusion, Brazil would like to underline that
the working methods of the Security Council cannot
be entirely improved without a comprehensive reform
of the body that brings the Council in line with today's
geopolitical realities and make it truly capable of
addressing the challenges of the twenty-first century.

In this context, we welcome the initiative taken
by the President of the General Assembly to establish
an advisory group to draft a text that would serve as
a basis for the intergovernmental negotiations in the
General Assembly. This initiative has the potential to
overcome the artificial delays imposed on negotiations
and materialize the existing widespread political
support for Council reform. As the General Assembly
nears its seventieth session in 2015, concrete outcomes
should finally be achieved on this important matter.
We remain convinced that such reform is the only way
to achieve a more representative, legitimate, efficient,
effective and accountable Security Council.

