Ms. Hoff: I speak to the Council today from the
country office of the World Health Organization
(WHO) in Damascus, from where I have led WHO'S
work in Syria for more than four years.

As the conflict and violence continue unabated,
I have seen the worst of humankind - but more
importantly, I have seen its best. I wish to begin
by paying tribute to WHO's staff in Syria for their
selflessness and determination and to the health-care
workers, health partners and national non- governmental
organizations working on the front line, who put their
own lives at risk every day when they reach out to
Syrians in need. Observing their dedication and the
sacrifices they make has been the greatest privilege of
my life.

It is also a privilege to speak to the Council today
to describe the health situation inside Syria and the
challenges it presents.

Before the conflict began, Syria had one of the
most advanced health-care systems in the Middle
East. As the country reached middle-income status,
non-communicable diseases were becoming the
predominant health concern. National vaccination
coverage rates were 95 per cent. Syria's thriving
pharmaceutical industry produced over 90 per cent of
the country's medicines and exported its products to
53 countries.

Now, almost six years later, the picture is starkly
different. According to the United Nations, well over
300,000 people have been killed and over 1.5 millionhave
been injured since the conflict began. Each month, the
number ofpeople injured in the conflict rises to 30,000.
Almost 5 million people have left the country, and just
over 6 million have been internally displaced. Within
Syria, 13.5 million people are in need of humanitarian
assistance. Almost 5 million people live in besieged or
hard-to-reach locations. These numbers are staggering.
Health-care services have been devastated. Over half
the country's public hospitals and primary health-care
centres are either closed or only partially functioning.
Almost two-thirds of all health professionals have left
the country. Domestic production of medicines has
dropped by two thirds and vaccination coveragerates
have dropped by half.

What does that mean for the Syrian people? It means
that they no longer have sustainable and reliable access
to medicines for chronic diseases that are manageable
with treatment but life-threatening without. It means
that unvaccinated children are at risk of life-threatening
childhood illnesses such as polio, which re-emerged
in Syria in late 2013 before being eradicated anew,
thanks to the concerted efforts of WHO and UNICEF.
It means that Syrians with traumatic injuries do not
receive timely treatment and die or suffer life-changing
disabilities. It means that pregnant women do not have
access to safe delivery. It means that huge numbers
will suffer lifelong mental health problems related to
prolonged, traumatic stress and displacement.

There have been repeated attacks on health-care
facilities in Syria. Between January and September,
there were 126 such attacks - almost two thirds of
all attacks reported in countries with emergencies. In
November alone, 11 hospitals were attacked in Aleppo,
Idlib, and Hama governorates, and some were attacked
more than once. The direct targeting of health-care
facilities is the most visible attack on the health-care
system in Syria today, but there are others as well,
including the militarization of health care facilities by
several parties to the conflict, the targeting of health-
care personnel, and the denial of medical and surgical
supplies in many areas. Many patients are simply too
afraid to travel to hospitals or clinics because they fear
attacks, detention or abuse.
Attacks on health-care facilities and workers have
an enormous impact on the communities they serve. For
example, before three hospitals in rural western Aleppo
were attacked last week, they provided more than
10,000 consultations and performed 1,500 surgeries
per month.

First of all, denying ordinary citizens access to
health care is an affront to our common humanity.
Everyone has the right to health; it is inscribed in
many international agreements, including the United
Nations Declaration.

Secondly, those attacks are an unacceptable
violation of international humanitarian law. Even in
war, there are rules against such attacks, inscribed in
the Geneva Conventions relating to the protection of
victims of international armed conflicts. Respect for
the neutrality of health facilities is one of our most
important humanitarian principles and laws.

Thirdly, those attacks also represent something
deeper. We all have a sense that there is something very
special - even sacred - about providing health care
to children, mothers, and the disabled. When health-
care facilities providing care to the most vulnerable
are targeted, something very precious is lost. We have
not only violated a right and a law, we have lost our
collective humanity.

WHO condemns in the strongest terms attacks
on health-care facilities by any party, regardless of
their affiliation. We condemn the inappropriate use of
health facilities for any military or political purpose.
As the global health agency, we take seriously our
responsibility to speak out against these abuses
whenever we can. We do so regularly. Nonetheless, our
repeated calls for protecting health-care facilities and
personnel always fall on deaf ears.

I would like to highlight other challenges that
WHO and its partners face on a daily basis, notably
our difficulties accessing hard-to-reach and besieged
locations to deliver life-saving medicines and supplies.
The Government routinely withholds its approval
for the delivery of medical supplies and equipment,
particularly surgical supplies, safe blood and blood
products, to those locations. Moreover, the operating
environment is now so dangerous that many health
partners, especially those managing cross-border
operations, have limited their activities.

Aleppo is the most visible face of Syria's suffering.
It illustrates our difficulty in accessing besieged and
hard-to-reach locations. Over a quarter of a million
people are trapped in eastern Aleppo. All eight of
its hospitals have either been put out of action or are
only barely functioning. Its few remaining doctors
are exhausted and overwhelmed. Eastern Aleppo
is running out of food, water, and medicine. WHO,
along with humanitarian partners, has painstakingly
prepared detailed plans to evacuate the critically ill and
injured and allow convoys to deliver supplies to eastern
Aleppo. The Organization is awaiting the removal of
all obstacles that would allow it to implement its plans.
Western Aleppo is also under attack by non-State
armed groups in eastern Aleppo. Hospitals in western
Aleppo have been overwhelmed with wounded patients,
following indiscriminate shelling. Scores of children
were killed or injured when a mortar landed on a school
in western Aleppo last Saturday.

Thus far in 2016, WHO has provided over 9 million
medical treatments throughout Syria, through both
cross-line deliveries from Damascus and cross-border
deliveries from Gaziantep and Amman. Over one third
of those supplies were delivered to hard-to-reach and
besieged areas. For the first time in several years,
WHO, along with its United Nations partners and
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, was able to reach all
besieged areas as part of United Nations inter-agency
convoys. However, WHO is not able to reach those
areas on a regular basis due to the lack of approval
of several parties to the conflict. The Government
withheld approval for the delivery of 75 tons of medical
supplies - mainly to support surgical, anaesthesiology,
laboratory and mental health services - to those areas.
As a result, around 150,000 people were deprived of
essential health care.

WHO has established a nationwide disease
surveillance system to detect and respond to outbreak
alerts. Fortunately, no major disease outbreaks have
occurred in Syria. The Organization has trained over
16,000 health-care workers to help fill the gap left by the
mass exodus ofhealth professionals. WHO and UNICEF
have supported the vaccination of millions of children
against polio, measles and other vaccine-preventable
diseases. We have done all this with the sustained
support of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and our
national non-governmental organization partners.
Lastly, WHO has used its position as the lead agency
of the health sector to consistently advocate for the
sanctity of health care and for sustained access to all
parts of Syria to ensure that people are able to access
the health care they need.

However, the situation is getting worse. WHO
appeals to all members of the Security Council to
use every last ounce of their influence to bring an
immediate end to the suffering in Syria. We ask the
Council to approve the establishment of a system
to ensure that all parties have the coordinates of all
humanitarian convoys and health facilities, and that all
attacks are registered. We ask it to help end the attacks
on health-care facilities and their personnel, regardless
of the attackers' affiliation. We ask the Council to
support sustained, unconditional access to all besieged
and hard-to-reach areas. We ask the Council to help
allow us to evacuate critically ill and wounded patients
and their families from all areas and to ensure their
safe passage.

I would like to reiterate that the WHO priority
remains the people of Syria. As a humanitarian agency,
we will continue our work to help to ensure that all
people in all parts ofthe country have access to essential
life-saving health care. We extend our deepest thanks
to the donors that have so generously and steadfastly
funded our operations in Syria during the past five
years. We stand ready to give a more formal, in-depth
briefing on those issues should the Council so desire.

Let me end by thanking you, Mr. President, and
the members of the Security Council for their time and
attention today.

