Mr. Sharma (Nepal): I should like at the outset
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July and on the outstanding manner in which you have
been conducting the business of the Council.

I appreciate the fact that you have convened this
timely public debate on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I also appreciate the
contribution of the former Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ngongi, to the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I
welcome the appointment of Mr. William Swing as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
and wish him success in his work.

Let me also express our appreciation to Mr. Javier
Solana for having briefed us on the initiative taken by
the European Union in the search for peace and
security in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Let
me also express my appreciation to Mr. Guehenno for
the briefing he gave this morning.

Rich in natural resources and ethnic diversity, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has long remained a
hotbed of conflict in Africa. Neighbouring countries
have found their interests intersecting with each other
and often interfere in the internal affairs of that
country. Rival groups have fought among themselves
and with the Government forces. The multi-ethnic
eastern region of Ituri has experienced the worst form
of violence of late.

The violence has taken a huge toll. Since 1999
alone, more than 60,000 people have lost their lives,
100,000 have fled their country as refugees and nearly
600,000 have been displaced. People's property, as
well as towns and villages have been destroyed.
Clearly the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
major case of an acute humanitarian and security crisis.

Nepal welcomes the establishment of a new
Transitional Administration in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and believes that the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) should help the new
administration to bring peace and security to Kinshasa
and elsewhere so that a democratic political process
can be set in motion.

We also welcome the role that the Multinational
Force, led by France, has played in containing violence
in the Bunia area. The fact that the Bangladeshi
contingent has begun to arrive in the Bunia area will go
a long way towards promoting peace and stability in
the Ituri region.

Nepal feels strong solidarity with the Congolese
people and pledges its full cooperation to help them
achieve peace and stability. Consistent with the pledge,
Nepal has already deployed 19 military observers and
headquarters staff and has made a further commitment
of an army corps of engineers that is awaiting
deployment by 1 September 2003 in Bunia.

We believe that the world community must
redouble its efforts to restore lasting peace and stability
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The role of
African countries in bolstering the process will be
absolutely critical. African nations will also play an
important role in building bridges among the parties in
conflict. That will be essential in this respect.

At the same time, the Security Council must
quickly take a fresh decision to increase MONUC's
troop strength considerably and to adjust its mandate.
Only a credible MONUC presence can create
confidence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which is critical to stop hostilities in the Ituri region
and elsewhere, to secure the Transitional Government
on a firm footing in Kinshasa, and to implement an
effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme. The Council should also
impose and enforce an arms embargo on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

To meet these challenges, the present Council-
authorized strength of 8,700 troops is woefully
insufficient. Nepal therefore calls on the Security
Council to comply with the recommendations of the
Secretary-General regarding the size of military
deployment in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We also underline the need to address the humanitarian
needs of the Congolese people as a matter of priority.

The people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo deserve peace and prosperity. While they ought
to work towards that goal with greater commitment on
their part, the world community must come to their aid

in a forthright manner. To promote peace and
prosperity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
as much a moral imperative as it is in the enlightened
self-interest of the global community. A peaceful and
prosperous Democratic Republic of the Congo will be a
boon to the well-being of Africa and of the entire
world.

Nepal is willing to help the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, through the United
Nations, to the best of its capacity by contributing
troops and other resources.

If asked by the United Nations, we are prepared
to contribute one infantry battalion, which a Union
assessment team that visited Kathmandu recently found
fully capable of operating in the existing situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

