Mr. Daeie (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): At the outset, I should like
to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and his
Special Representative Mr. Zahir Tanin for their report
(S/2019/102). The presence and activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) are of crucial importance. I therefore extend
to the Special Representative my special gratitude for
his hard work and dedication to fulfilling the mandate
of the Mission under resolution 1244 (1999) .

I also want to thank Equatorial Guinea for
including this meeting on the Security Council's
programme of work. Serbia believes that it is necessary
for the Security Council to be open and ready to
consider all questions relevant to international peace
and security, and consistently to pay special attention
to its prevention role and to respond to situations that,
in addition to being clear violations of the resolutions
of this organ, lead to increased tensions and threaten
stability and security.

We ask for these meetings not for the purpose of
one-upmanship, but to contribute to the stabilization of
the situation in Kosovo and Metohija and to peace in the
region. Serbia is a constructive, credible and predictable
partner. That is why we initiated the agreement on
the dynamic of the Security Council's meetings on
UNMIK, which remain necessary, and I am pleased to
express my gratitude to the members of the Security
Council that have agreed on this important question
in order to avoid needless debates in this organ with
respect to these meetings. The most important thing is
that the Security Council will continue to consider the
Secretary-General's reports on UNMIK on a continued
basis. I recall that the Security Council continues to
discuss Bosnia and Herzegovina twice a year, as well
as the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, and no one has asked that these topics be
removed from the Council's agenda.

I continue to believe that we should and can find
a common denominator of our interests and strive to
achieve it. We all want to resolve the question of Kosovo
and Metohija. We all want it to no longer be a topic on
the Security Council's agenda. We all want UNMIK to
complete its mission, and successfully so.

That moment is not yet near, however. I have often
pointed out that we are at a very delicate juncture and
called on all to proceed to create conditions for us to
sit and talk constructively, without preconditions or the
imposition of solutions. Let me recall that talks between
Belgrade and Pristina have entered their seventh year
and that progress has been made * sometimes more,
sometimes less - in this time. Yet, we have talked. As
Prime Minister during those years, I signed the Brussels
Agreement. Regrettably, the agreement has not been
fully implemented to date, while at this moment in
time there are no talks in Brussels, and everyone here
knows why.

I know that many Council members will call on
both sides to refrain from unilateral acts and commit
themselves to dialogue and the quest for a lasting
solution. I can only tell them that Serbia has refrained
from unilateral acts. We have not engaged in such acts,
despite the fact that the association/community of Serb-
majority municipalities, as the most important part
of the Brussels Agreement, has yet to be established
over the past five years, or to prevent such unilateral
decisions as the confiscation of the Trepca mines
property that Pristina undertook several days ago.

The dialogue has been forestalled for one
reason - the unilateral decision ofthe so-called Kosovo
to impose taxes on goods from Serbia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina at a rate of 100 per cent. This act, let me
recall, has been condemned by the entire international
community, Pristina's staunchest allies included, which
have called on Pristina to suspend the decision.

We have entered 2019 facing major challenges
and problems, the solutions for which are barely
apparent nowadays. I recall that, in addition to the
decision to establish the so-called Kosovo armed forces
shortly following the Security Council meeting in
November 2018 (see S/PV.8399), instead ofde-escalating
tensions and making maximal efforts to promote
dialogue, Pristina rushed to adopt misguided and
senseless decisions relative to the imposition of taxes
on Serbian goods. They were followed by numerous
pronouncements relative to "Greater Albania", which
were hardly a call to compromise, but rather intended
to gin up instability in the region. The one-sided
decision of Pristina to increase taxes on Serbian goods
by as much as 100 per cent, in contravention of the
Central European Free Trade Agreement, is primarily a
politically motivated decision that wreaked irreversible
damage and forestalled the continuation of the dialogue
on the normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina. For its part, Serbia continues to firmly believe
that talks are the only way for achieving a solution to
outstanding issues, and refrained - even following the
imposition of the taxes - from retaliatory measures or
any other act that would have aggravated the situation.
We demonstrated once again responsibility, common
sense and credibility.

The taxes are intended to make the situation of the
Serbian community in Kosovo and Metohija even more
difficult. Despite the condemnation and the intense
pressure of numerous international institutions, Pristina
soldiers on and continues to levy the taxes it imposed
more than two months ago. Owing to the fact that it
can take and implement unilateral and destabilizing
decisions and measures without consequences and that
it can breach agreements and raid a Serbian-majority
territory, Pristina is continuing in those practices
unabated. We are therefore faced today not only by the
absence of the community of Serbian municipalities,
but also by continued attempts to take over northern
Kosovo and Metohija, as evidenced by the raid carried
out by the special Regional Operations Support Unit
of that part of the province in November 2018, the
imposition of draconian taxes on Serbian goods, the
arrest of four Serbs in Kosovska Mitrovica in a brutal
action carried out by the special Regional Operations
Support Unit and the call for the unification of the
northern and southern parts of the town. Tantamount
to a drive to intimidate the Serbs living in the northern
part of the town, it also serves as a screen for the
intended takeover of northern Kosovska Mitrovica and
the expulsion of Serbs there in the same way that they
were expelled from its southern part.

Pristina continues to undo everything in which the

European Union and other international actors invested
considerable efforts through dialogue and regional ties.
Should we then expect that any given agreement will
be respected when the basic principles underpinning
modern-day Europe are being ignored? The decision
to ban the free flow of goods, capital and people as a
result of displeasure with a political decision is i let
me point out once again - inconceivable in the twenty-
first century. Pristina's contention that the act was
taken as a countermeasure to Serbia's policy, which it
characterizes as aggressive, is entirely false. Rather, it
was taken as a consequence of the withdrawal of the
recognition ofthe unilaterally declared independence of
Kosovo by 13 countries and its failed attempt to become
a member of INTERPOL. The explanation that has been
provided is that it is detrimental to the dialogue. Ever
since it unilaterally declared its independence in 2008,
so-called Kosovo has lobbied for recognition, aided and
abetted by certain States.

After all, some members ofthis body called on other
States in our previous meetings to recognize Kosovo's
unilateral declaration of independence. Serbia has taken
no unilateral measures as a result of those actions. On
the contrary, we entered the dialogue and engaged in
discussions notwithstanding the recognition that had
taken place. For those who are unaware, we began the
dialogue in 2012, and 19 countries have recognized
Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence since
then. No one said that those countries' recognition
impeded the dialogue. I would cite the example of
Madagascar. Nothing was said in November 2017
indicating that its recognition would be harmful to the
dialogue but, when Madagascar decided to withdraw its
recognition in December 2018, some Council members
viewed the withdrawal as extremely harmful. I truly
need help understanding such reasoning.

Pristina bears a grudge over the failure of its bid
to join INTERPOL and UNESCO, as well. However,
in 2015, prior to Pristina's request for admission to
UNESCO, Serbia, and myself personally, proposed
that the protection of cultural heritage be included in
the agenda of the dialogue and that an agreement be
reached on that issue. The proposal fell on deaf ears
without an understanding, just like the one concerning
INTERPOL. Pristina said that it was not obliged
to discuss that with us, that it had the support of the
majority of members of those organizations and that
it would try to become members. We tried to explain
that the INTERPOL candidature, which would entail
the inevitable lobbying for and against it by the
various sides - were an application for admission
to be submitted - would not create an atmosphere
conducive to dialogue. As it was irate following its
failed bid, Pristina raised the import tax to 100 per
cent. Let me recall that so-called Kosovo continues to
falsely bandy the statistic that it has been recognized
by 116 countries. Seventy-four States Members of the
United Nations voted in favour of Pristina's admission
to INTERPOL. It required and lacked an additional
36 votes. It now blames little Serbia for those results.
We take this opportunity to call for solving all issues
through dialogue, and we are ready to make every best
effort to find a lasting solution.

Some Security Council members maintain that the
situation in Kosovo is significantly different from that
of 1999 or 2009, and are calling for revising UNMIK's
mandate. Let me remind them that the Mission is
already significantly different than it was in 1999. At
the time, it numbered 4,718 civilian police officers
and 1,269 international and 3,566 local personnel. Its
budget then totalled $427 million. Today it has been
decreased by almost by 90 per cent, and the members
of its personnel number about 500 men and women. Its
budget is $40 million. The Mission's scope was reduced
too much and too soon. Many errors have been made
over the past 20 years, and, for that reason, I call on
members not to make the same mistake of making hasty
decisions. Assertions that the Mission is unnecessary
and has completed its mandate do not reflect reality.
Ramush Haradinaj's accusation that UNMIK and
the Secretary-General issue fake reports warrants
our collective condemnation, as does the decision
to discontinue cooperation with the international
Organization's Mission. Let me recall that Haradinaj
accused the European Union of killing the dialogue in a
meeting with the highest-ranking officials of the Union.

We welcome the fact that the Kosovo Specialist
Chambers and Office of the Specialist Prosecutor
began hearings concerning certain individuals from
Kosovo and Metohija. At the same time, we hope
that the initial indictments will soon be issued, While
especially bearing in mind the importance of that step
for revealing the perpetrators of the crimes committed
against Serbs and other non-Albanians. Those who
were served hearing summons included several high-
ranking officials, former members of the command
structure of the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army.
That is of paramount importance, as ample evidence
has been collected linking those individuals to crimes
committed in Kosovo and Metohija. Given the evidence,
it is now important to issue arrest warrants and try
alleged offenders in a judicial institution, which, to
date, has never been done. A large number of Serbs
and non-Albanians imprisoned by the so-called Kosovo
Liberation Army were killed, while others escaped
or were released. The Commission of the Republic of
Serbia on Missing Persons continues to collect evidence
in its archives with regard to more than 580 Serbs and
non-Albanians incarcerated in approximately 140
illegal prisons. The investigation must continue, as
information and evidence abound. The "yellow house"
and the crimes relating to illegally trafficking in human
organs committed therein must be investigated, as well.
We hope that Pristina will cooperate with the competent
institutions so that those crimes will be punished. Yet
war criminal Sylejman Selimi has been appointed as an
adviser to the Prime Minister of so-called Kosovo, a
fact that has been condemned, including by the United
States Ambassador in Pristina. There is not much room
for optimism, is there?

I would also like to remind the Council that
Mr. Selimi has been on a conditional release since
he was convicted of war crimes against Serbia. That
is the person who was appointed as an adviser to
the Prime Minister of so-called Kosovo. That is of
crucial importance for the stabilization of the situation
in Kosovo and Metohija and the efforts to achieve
historical reconciliation.

It is also important, however, to push back the
unscrupulous lies and montage of information brought
forth incessantly by the highest-ranking Kosovo
Albanian officials to cover up their own crimes, who
continue to posture as victims of the conflict. They
misuse and viciously manipulate the data with the
aim of incriminating Serbs alone for all the atrocities
committed in Kosovo and Metohija, as if only their
victims i their expellees, killed, missing and
tortured - mattered. What happened, however, was an
armed conflict between two warring parties: between
regular armed forces and police and the insurgent and
terrorist Kosovo Liberation Army.

Albanians do not mention that the victims included
2,197 Serbs, 159 Roma, 95 Bosniaks, 78 Ashkalis, 75
Montenegrins, 38 Egyptians and 46 members of other
communities, who had lived in peace and harmony in
the province. Speaking of the numbers, let it be known
that 2,725 Serbs and other non-Albanians were reported
as killed or missing.

Special fervour is displayed in hiding the truth that
most crimes were committed after the withdrawal of
the regular armed forces of Serbia from the province
in June 1999. One of the reasons is attempts to conceal
the settling of accounts by the Kosovo Liberation Army
with their disloyal fellow Albanians: 377 of them killed
at the hands of their co-nationals.

We should also mention that 1,250 Kosovo and
Metohija Albanians were killed by members of the
Kosovo Liberation Army in 1998 and at the beginning
of 1999, prior to the NATO aggression, to which
testimonies of members of many families have been
made and are in our possession. Pristina is less than
eager to unveil the number ofkilled or missing members
of the Kosovo Liberation Army, which, according to
international sources, reaches 2,132.

Pristina continues to contend that the missing
persons number is 1,647, but fails to point out that
the number includes 570 Serbs and non-Albanians.
It does not indicate that a large number of missing
Albanians was kidnapped and certainly killed by the
Kosovo Liberation Army. Following 10 June 1999, they
totalled 55. So far, none of Pristina's representatives
have said if a joint consolidated list of missing persons
has been established, or that the tracking of missing
persons continues in agreement and cooperation of the
competent bodies ofthe commissions under the auspices
of the International Committee of the Red Cross.

At the same time, Pristina refuses to make public
that the human remains of 900 Kosovo and Metohija
Albanians were exhumed at locations in central Serbia
from 2001 to 2017 and released to their families, and
that each and every request it submitted to check for
potential mass or individual graves has received a
response. On the other hand, no location in Kosovo and
Metohija that is suspected of containing mass graves
of killed Serbs, Roma or disloyal Albanians has been
checked to date, 20 years after the confrontation,
despite many requests made by our side.

According to the recent report of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe Mission in
Kosovo, the number of incidents directed at the Serbs
of Kosovo and Metohija last year increased by as much
as 30 per cent, compared to 2017. How are we to expect
then that any progress will be made in the return of the
internally displaced persons, let alone in the building
ofa multi-ethnic democratic society, if no basic human
rights, including the right to a safe and secure life for
all in Kosovo and Metohija, are not respected?

It is self-defeating to speak of those numbers today,
20 years after the establishment of the international
civil presence, that is, the adoption of resolution 1244
(1999), which entrusted the international civil presence
with a clear responsibility of

"assuring the safe and unimpeded return of all

refugees and displaced persons to their homes in

Kosovo." (resolution 1244 (1999), para. 11 (k))

Do the constant attacks on returnees and their property,
pressure and low-intensity violence, discrimination
and intolerance tell the Council anything as to whether
the goal that was proclaimed 20 years ago has really
been achieved? And are we ready for political goals
and strategic considerations to close our eyes to what
is happening and say that the situation is peaceful and
stable? We must not, and we do not want to, allow that to
happen. We must speak, today and tomorrow, about the
200,000 displaced persons from Kosovo and Metohija,
just as we would for any other such person in Europe or
elsewhere in the world, for each and every one of them
has the right to return home.

A conclusion in the dialogue was that the question
ofproperty would also be a topic ofdiscussion. Heedless
of that conclusion, Pristina took a one-sided decision
to confiscate the property of the Trepca mines. Let me
recall that, so far, Serbia has paid $750 million, with
$200 million remaining, on the loan taken out on behalf
of the Kosovo and Metohija borrowers, even though so-
called Kosovo is a member of the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund. With Serbia paying the
debt, why is Kosovo not a part of Serbia? If it is an
independent country, why does it not pay off its loans
itself? If the situation is as it says, then how can it
proclaim to own those companies?

Serbia is fully committed to dialogue and stands
ready to move forward with it, but it will happen only
once Pristina revokes its decision on taxes. I thank the
members of the international community that have
condemned the decision of Pristina and called on it
to revoke it. I plead with them, at the same time, to
persevere and continue to bring pressure to bear on
the representatives of Pristina so that the decision can
finally be revoked and we can continue with the talks,
despite some serious and significant consequences that
have already taken place. It is my hope that Pristina will
revoke the taxes; it would be reasonable and open the
door to the talks. If it does not do so, however, it will
be clear that it is not after agreements and compromise,
but rather it is after blackmail.

It is my earnest hope that this year will not be beset

by the challenges we faced in the past period, the like
of which we have not yet managed to overcome. Let me
reiterate once again that Serbia continues to maintain
that problems should be solved through dialogue and
with respect for the principles of international law. We
trust and believe that appropriate conditions will be
created in that regard. For our part, we shall continue
to conduct a policy of peace, but we expect that the
other side will fulfil its obligations and refrain from
unilateral acts and provocation. Twenty long years
after the conflict, it is high time we turned a page in the
history of Serbian-Albanian relations and proceeded to
lasting peace.

