Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his briefing. I also
thank the Permanent Representative of the State of
Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for
their statements.
France associates itself with the statement to be
made by the head of the delegation of the European
Union.

I would like to bring up the following points. The
Council is today considering a peace process that is
making no progress in a region that is experiencing a
remarkable groundswell of popular will. Tunisia and
Egypt are currently managing their post-revolutionary
periods and, together with the European Union, we
confirmed our full support to them during this
demanding phase of democratic transition.

In Bahrain, we must encourage the resumption of
dialogue so that the current difficulties can be
overcome in the interests of all Bahrainis.

Other situations, namely, in Yemen and Syria, are
also of concern to us. We call for the necessary respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms. We
support the mediation efforts carried out by the Gulf
Cooperation Council. We call on all Yemeni parties to
immediately begin a constructive dialogue under its
auspices, leading to a peaceful political transition.

In Syria, the authorities must renounce the use of
force against demonstrators and translate into facts,
without further delay, the announced reforms,
especially the lifting of the state of emergency, in order
to respond to the aspirations of the population. The end
of repression, the release of all political prisoners and
respect for the right to peacefully demonstrate and for
the freedom of the press must be implemented. Arrests
must be stopped and light must be shed on recent
events. An inclusive political dialogue should take
place for effective political reforms that will respond to
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people, thereby
contributing to the country's stability.

In Libya, we call on the international community,
especially the Tripoli regime, to respect Security
Council resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011).
Until there is respect for a genuine, verifiable and
lasting ceasefire that meets the requirements of the
international community, the coalition will continue its
actions aimed at protecting the civilian population and
ensuring respect for the no-fly zone and the arms
embargo. We welcome the role played by the
Secretary-General and the United Nations to ensure
that everywhere, dialogue and respect for fundamental
freedoms prevail over violence.
The aspirations of the Palestinian people to a
viable, sovereign State living in peace and security side
by side with Israel are no less legitimate than the
concerns expressed throughout the region. We must
respond to those aspirations and to those of the Israeli
people to regional security and integrity.

France believes that there can be no alternative to
a negotiated solution to put an end to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. That is why for several months
now we have been advocating that the Quartet endorse
the parameters we defined in this very Chamber on
18 February, so that direct negotiations can resume
between the parties on that basis with respect to all
final-status-related questions. The postponement once
again of the Quartet meeting, which we deplore, will
not help us to draw closer to that goal. Quartet envoys
will meet on 5 May; they must work to ensure that a
meeting of principals is held as soon as possible.

A long-lasting impasse in the peace process could
jeopardize the credibility of the two-State solution and
lead to a deterioration of the situation on the ground.
France remains determined to see that significant
progress is made before the September 2011 deadline
set by the Quartet.

The recognition of a State of Palestine is one of
the options that France is considering, together with its
European partners, with the goal of creating political
prospects conducive to a resumption of the peace
process. If we were to adopt this solution, it should
encourage the resumption of negotiations on the basis
of internationally known parameters. The reaffirmation
of our unwavering support for the State of Israel is
paired with a clear political message aimed at
dissuading both parties from pursuing unilateral
strategies or imposing faits accomplis on the ground
that would hinder our efforts to achieve peace.

In that connection, our stance on settlements is a
consistent one: settlements are illegal under
international law; they undermine confidence between
the parties; and they pose a threat to the two-State
solution. It is for that reason that, subsequently to the
open debate held in February (see S/PV.6470), we voted
in favour of the draft resolution submitted to the
Council. We call on Israel to abandon any further
construction activities, which are to be reviewed shortly.

We have taken note of the announcement that a
speech will be made by President Obama and a
diplomatic initiative undertaken by the Israeli Prime
Minister, to be presented to the United States Congress
on 24 May. We do not know the terms of those
initiatives, but we are, of course, prepared to support
any effort aimed at relaunching a dynamic involving
direct negotiations. Any proposal targeted at advancing
the peace process must be based on a set of credible
parameters that will make it possible to overcome the
crisis of confidence between the parties.

Eighteen years after the launch of the Oslo peace
process, we no longer have time to consider new, interim
solutions. Measures aimed at improving the situation on
the ground are welcome, but they cannot be an end in
and of themselves; they must be linked to prospects for a
definitive solution and cannot substitute for it.

If we do not respond to the aspirations for peace
expressed by the Israeli and Palestinian peoples, the
recent upsurge of violence in Gaza makes clear that
there is a risk of a flare-up. We condemn the Itamar
assassination and the firing of rockets, missiles and
shells at the civilian population in the south of Israel.
We call for respect for international humanitarian law
in the case of Gilad Shalit. The firing of an anti-tank
missile at an Israeli school bus marked a new stage in
the violence. We also condemn the humanitarian
consequences of the Israeli operations undertaken in
response to those attacks, which led to several civilian
deaths in the Gaza Strip. Security Council resolution
1860 (2009) offers a suitable framework for the
implementation of a durable truce, for which we call.

We continue to call for the implementation of
resolution 1860 (2009) in all its aspects, especially in
connection with the need to lift the blockade and the
provision of access for humanitarian goods to the
territory, which should take place through existing
channels established by the Israeli authorities.

In Gaza, too, we must respond to the aspirations
of the people through a fundamental change of policy
without compromising Israel's legitimate security
concerns. It is imperative that the measures aimed at
easing the blockade, which were put in place in June
2010, be implemented, including with respect to the
authorization of exports of commercial goods and the
liberalization of conditions for the movement of
individuals. The people of Gaza have also expressed
their desire for Palestinian unity, and we wish to affirm
our support for President Abbas in his efforts to
respond.
In this very volatile context, we cannot overlook
the regional aspect of the peace process. In Lebanon,
we hope that the parties will show restraint and
continue to cooperate, in the framework of the
Tripartite Commission, in order to avert any problems
along the Blue Line. A new Government has not yet
been formed, but the Lebanese authorities must respect
all of the country's international obligations, especially
those related to the Special Tribunal and resolution
1701 (2006).

In conclusion, I wish once again to stress the
international community's pressing obligation not to
allow this impasse, which has lasted more than seven
months, to continue. The conclusions of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians have
strengthened our conviction that the Palestinians are
more than ever prepared to establish their State and to
administer it in a credible and responsible manner. To
let the stalemate continue without responding to the
expectations raised by the prospects offered by
September 2011 - prospects that were underlined by
President Obama - would be to undermine the only
tangible asset towards the creation of a Palestinian
State - the Fayyad plan. To consolidate the gains
made, in June France will organize a donor conference
for the State of Palestine. However, that exercise will
be a meaningful one only if it is linked to the
indispensable resumption of the political process, the
conditions for which I recalled earlier.

