Mr. Cohen (United States of America): Let us
first congratulate Bolivia on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council. We wish you every success in
the month ahead, Mr. President. Let me also thank the
Chairs of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities; the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004); and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) for the
strong cooperation of their committees and Groups
of Experts.

We have come a long way at the United Nations
in helping to defeat the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria
(ISIS), Al-Qaeda and other terrorist organizations. But

ISIS is evolving, moving away from being an overt
organization to being a networked covert organization
cultivating growing numbers of affiliates around
the world. This year the 1267 Committee designated
ISIS facilitators in South-East Asia and an ISIS leader
in the Sahel, among others. Such affiliates can bring
the scourge of ISIS to new hotspots. It is important
that the 1267 Committee expeditiously designate ISIS
affiliates to prevent them from taking up the mantle of
a diminished ISIS core. We welcome the appointment
of Daniel Kipfer Fasciati as the new Ombudsperson
for the 1267 Committee and look forward to working
with him.

The threat of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) is increasingly relevant today.
This year has seen the devastating consequences of
chemical-weapons use by State and non-State actors
in Syria and the United Kingdom, and last year we
witnessed a horrific murder in Malaysia by VX. We
collectively cannot allow the international norm
against the use of such dangerous weapons to break
down, especially when non-State actors are becoming
increasingly violent and desirous of obtaining WMDs.

The three Committees and other relevant parts
of the United Nations system, including the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (OCT), must
work together more closely to better synchronize
their activities and cut down on duplication. Last year
we updated the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) to strengthen
coordination between the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the General Assembly counter-terrorism bodies
on counter-terrorism issues. In response, CTED and
the OCT released a joint report (S/2018/435, annex)
setting out practical steps to ensure the incorporation
of CTED's recommendations and analysis into the
work of the OCT. The report is a model to improve
cooperation and ensure that expert country assessments
define United Nations counter-terrorism technical
assistance. Given the diverse threats we face around the
world, ongoing collaboration and information-sharing
between the Committee's expert bodies remain integral
to minimizing overlap and ensuring accurate threat
assessments that lead to action.

The Secretariat and many Member States often
do not have the localized knowledge necessary for
adequately addressing the terrorist threat in all parts
of the world. That is why we continue to advocate
for a whole-of-society approach, meaning stronger
engagement with civil society and non-governmental
organizations. Working with both United Nations and
non-United Nations actors, including non-governmental
organizations and civil society actors, helps the United
Nations and Member States leverage the full array of
expertise and perspectives needed to better identify
and address fast-changing and diverse terrorist threats.
Our counter-terrorism Committees must ensure that
our counter-terrorism analysis and efforts are not
counterproductive to our international commitments
to human rights and to the rule of law. Enhancing
Committee engagement with human rights bodies is a
step in the right direction.

