Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico would like to thank Senegal for
convening this debate on one of the primary emerging
challenges to development and global stability, as
well as to sustainable peace. We acknowledge the
statements delivered by the Secretary-General and the
other briefers.

First, I shall make some brief comments on
behalf of the High-Level Panel on Water, which was
established by the United Nations and the World Bank
Group and is composed of 11 members and a special
adviser. The Panel is co-chaired by the Presidents of
Mauritius and Mexico.

The Panel on Water seeks a fundamental change in
the way in which the world deals with the issue of water
in order to prioritize it as humankind's most important
resource and to mobilize effective action to ensure its
availability and sustainable management for the benefit
ofour peoples, based on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and on Sustainable Development Goal 6
in particular. It is for that reason that we believe that
water should be at the centre of our discussions when
we talk about matters such as social and economic
development, peace and security, the protection of the
environment or adapting to climate change.

Last September, the Panel launched an action
plan, together with the Secretary-General and the
President of the World Bank Group, that recognizes
that access to safe drinking water is a human right.
The plan also acknowledges the need to shoulder
greater responsibilities in the face of local, national
and international challenges through a comprehensive
and coordinated approach. In that regard, our leaders
have called for the consolidation of the current
recommendations and research on water and peace in
order to present a new initiative in January 2017.

If the world continues consuming at its current rate,
by 2030 there will have been a 40 per cent reduction
in current water reserves. If we manage to achieve the
2030 Agenda Sustainable Development Goals, we will
create the necessary conditions for diminishing and
eliminating conflicts over water through a preventive
approach. Such an approach must also include
transboundary basins, which are home to 40 per cent of
the world's population but lack governance agreements
in 60 per cent of the cases.

In its national capacity, Mexico reaffirms the need
to protect that vital resource for the development of
countries and for their inhabitants, thereby promoting
sustainable peace. For Mexico, the foundations of
sustainable peace lie in development, the fight against
poverty and inequality, and access to justice and
institutions as the most effective means of preventing
conflicts and improving the quality of life.

The management and protection of water resources
is a particularly pertinent issue in those areas where
water has been a frequent source of conflict. It is
important to develop the abilities to cooperate and
mediate in resolving disputes related to water. The work
of the relevant United Nations agencies and bodies on
the ground, including the Peacebuilding Commission,
must take into account the specific nature of this issue.

The management of water, especially when the
resource needs to be shared between two or more
countries, does not necessarily have to result in conflict.
For over 120 years Mexico and the United States of
America have developed an exemplary framework
for bilateral cooperation through a binational body,
the International Boundary and Water Commission,
which monitors the implementation of the 13 treaties
on the matter, which both countries have signed.
Collaboration and mutual understanding have allowed
us to implement joint projects that have led to the
improved well-being of some 12 million inhabitants of
the border zone. That political will, expressed through
understanding and cooperation, is what must prevail
between neighbouring nations that share watercourses,
borders, security and a future.

The success of the cooperation on our northern
border has been replicated on our southern border,
where two independent international commissions are
in place. That has led to several decades of cooperation
with our neighbours Guatemala and Belize on the
governance of shared water basins and has also resulted
in the strengthening of bilateral relations.

