Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the Chinese
delegation, under its presidency of the Security Council
for this month, for prioritizing multilateralism as
an essential mechanism for preserving international
peace and security and promoting economic and social
progress. I would also like to commend the initiative
to convene this important debate on strengthening
peacekeeping operations in Africa. As a major troop-
and police-contributing country, Senegal commends
the concern shown by actors, including the Council,
in the spirit of triangular dialogue, with regard to
making peacekeeping operations more effective and
able to respond to the pressing current and future needs
and challenges.

I thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio
Guterres, and the African Union (AU) Commissioner
for Peace and Security, Mr. Smai'l Chergui, for their
excellent contributions. I would also like to commend
the statement made by the representative of Cote d'Ivoire
on behalf of the three African members of the Council
and reaffirm Senegal's support for the continuing efforts
to find definitive answers to the issue of predictable
financing for African Union peacekeeping operations
authorized by the United Nations.

The conclusion is clear: most of the activities
planned within the framework of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations,
particularly for peacekeeping operations, involve
Africa. This debate is therefore timely in that it offers
the opportunity to evaluate efforts to support Africa in
its resolute determination to take control of its destiny,
including with regard to peace and security, without
which the sustainable development that we all seek to
achieve through the Sustainable Development Goals
would be futile.

While we welcome the expressed will ofthe African
Union to fully assume its role as a key player in seeking
political solutions to disputes in Africa, including
through the AU Peace Fund, which was launched three
days ago at the eleventh extraordinary summit of the
organization, my delegation commends the tangible
progress made in the context of the strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union.

The Action for Peacekeeping initiative and the
subsequent Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which
has been endorsed by 151 Member States, including
Senegal, and four regional organizations, are a renewed
opportunity to make prevention and mediation a top
priority in Africa. In the spirit of the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(S/2015/446) and resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378
(2017), we call on the two organizations, including
the United Nations-AU Joint Task Force on Peace and
Security, to continue consultations on the issue of
predictable and sustainable support for African Union
peace operations in order to help make the African
Union initiative to silence weapons by 2020 a reality.

My delegation also welcomes the attention given
by the Peacebuilding Commission and the Economic
and Social Council to the situation in the Sahel, not
only in terms of the challenges ahead but also in terms
of the opportunities in the region, which deserves the
full support of the international community. I also
welcome the continued focus of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations on cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union, in particular
the strengthening of the African Union's peacekeeping
capacities. Moreover, given the increasing commitment
and involvement of French-speaking countries in
peacekeeping operations, as well as the deployment
of peacekeeping missions in those countries, mainly
in Africa, my delegation reaffirms the importance
of promoting multilingualism in the context of
those missions.

For its part, whether it be in a regional or
subregional context, Senegal will continue to work,
together with actors such as the United Nations, the
Economic Community of West African States and
the African Union, to make prevention and mediation
priorities in seeking and maintaining peace in Africa.
In the context of that preventive approach, which calls
for deep reflection on the crises in Africa, President
Macky Sall, among other initiatives, established the
Dakar International Forum on Peace and Security in
Africa, the fifth ofwhich was held on 5 and 6 November.

If the expected outcomes of the peacekeeping
operations deployed in Africa are to be achieved,
those missions must be based on a well-defined
political strategy, with focused, clear, realistic and
achievable mandates, while taking into account the
peacebuilding dimension.

Beyond regional and subregional organizations,
it is necessary to strive to make cooperation with
neighbouring States a reality on the ground, while
establishing a relationship of trust among missions,
States and host populations. More than anywhere else,
there is also the issue of adapting missions deployed in
Africa to the sociocultural realities and the environment
on the ground.

In Mali, for example, our troops operate in a sensitive
context, with targeted attacks against Blue Helmets,
United Nations personnel, the people and civilian
infrastructure. That means appropriate equipment and
training in order to operate effectively and safely. In the
same vein, we must consider, where necessary, the use
of modern technologies. The experience of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic has shown that the responsible use of those
tools has a positive impact.

Given that missions have become multidimensional,
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU
will need to place greater emphasis on training and
capacity-building. In that context, Senegal has set
up a dedicated training centre, in accordance with
United Nations standards, where contingents undergo
predeployment training that takes into account not only
feedback but also, and above all, awareness of the issue
of sexual abuse and exploitation.

Senegal remains ready to share its unique
experience in peacekeeping, including through South-
South and triangular cooperation. It is equally essential
for both organizations to make the zero-tolerance policy
of sexual abuse and exploitation a high priority. The
same is true for the increase in women's participation in
peacekeeping operations, in accordance with resolution
1325 (2000).

We join in offering our condolences to Tanzania
and Malawi, whose Blue Helmets have recently fallen
in theatres of operation. I reiterate the strongest
condemnation of any attack on United Nations personnel
and join in paying tribute to the men and women who,
sometimes at the risk of their lives, put themselves at
the service of the noble ideals of our Organization.

As a champion of pan-Africanism and having
enshrined in its Constitution its readiness to surrender
all or part of its sovereignty in order to achieve African
unity, Senegal reaffirms its ongoing commitment to
work for international peace and security, particularly
in Africa, including by pursuing its high-quality
contribution to the peacekeeping operations.

