Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I, too, welcome
High Representative Inzko to the Security Council and
thank him for his report (see S/2012/307). The United
Kingdom would like to express its gratitude to the
High Representative for the tireless and principled
efforts he has undertaken to ensure the implementation
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace and to
promote stability and reform in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We welcome the High Representative's
assessment of recent developments and join him in
welcoming Bosnia and Herzegovina's tentative steps
forward on both European Union (EU) and NATO
paths. In February, we finally saw the formation of a
new State-level Government, focused on the common
goals of EU accession and economic stability. We
quickly saw positive results, with the passage of laws
on State aid and the census. The Government of Bosnia
and Herzegovina has made it a priority to secure the
entry into force of the stabilization and association
agreement with the European Union. It also hopes to
lodge a formal application for EU membership this
year. Both are achievable if the remaining criteria are
met. We join the High Representative in encouraging
political leaders to demonstrate their commitment by
delivering reforms through hard work and compromise.

We also welcome progress towards the
completion of some of the five objectives and two
conditions necessary for the closure of the Office of the
High Representative. We urge the full implementation
of political agreements on the registration of defence
property and State property.

As the High Representative makes clear, it is
early days in the life of the new Government, and
progress remains fragile. Promises were made and not
delivered on in the past. There are still signs of
politicians putting their nationalist political agendas
above the needs of the country and its citizens. Of
particular concern are statements challenging the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, references to the dissolution of the State
and attempts to refer to entities as States. Such
statements are unacceptable and go against the interests
of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Those threats
are a stark reminder of the continued importance of the
High Representative's role in upholding the General
Framework Agreement for Peace.

We also note the rising tensions related to
municipal elections in October, in particular in
Srebrenica and Mostar, and call on leaders from all
parties and ethnic groups to refrain from divisive
rhetoric that increases tensions and instead serve the
interests of all people and promote reconciliation.

Twenty years since the start of the war in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, it is important to remember the
appalling human cost of that war and to commemorate
its victims. But we must also recognize that Bosnia and
Herzegovina today has much to be proud of and,
looking forward, it is clear that 2012 is a year of
opportunity for the country. In order to realize that, we
need to see urgent progress towards implementing the
judgement in the Sejdic-Finci vs. Bosnia and
Herzegovina case, so that Bosnia and Herzegovina's
EU stabilization and association agreement can enter
into force.

We fully support the European Union's strategy
for Bosnia and Herzegovina. EU Special
Representative and Head of Delegation Peter Sorensen
has done an excellent job. We commend his
collaborative relationship with High Representative
Inzko. There is no reason that the Office of the High
Representative and the EU cannot work together in a
complementary fashion, and every reason that they
should do so.

The European Union should provide the
incentives to lead Bosnia and Herzegovina forward
and, in response to genuine progress, increasingly take
the lead in the country, with the Office of the High
Representative gradually reducing its presence. That
Office will nevertheless retain a crucial role in
upholding the Dayton Agreement until the 5+2
conditionality is met. In the meantime, the executive
powers of the Office remain a crucial safeguard. We
must not lose patience or rush into significant changes
prematurely.

The United Kingdom strongly supports High
Representative Inzko's assessment that the executive
mandate of the European Union Force-Operation
Althea continues to provide critical reassurance to the
Bosnian people and that it plays a central role in
supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina's own efforts to
maintain a safe and secure environment. International
safeguards against instability remain essential
alongside a strong EU presence. We look forward to
the Security Council renewing European Union F orce-
Operation Althea executive mandate for an additional
year in the autumn.

