Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): On behalf of the Pakistan
delegation, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
China's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for June. Let me also express our appreciation
for the able manner in which Azerbaijan led the Council's
work last month. We would like to acknowledge the
presence of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, in the Council
today. We take note of his briefing as well as of his
fifteenth report submitted pursuant to resolution 1593
(2005).

Objectivity, not politicization, should guide these
reports and briefings. Let me state at the outset that
Pakistan, like about half of the current membership of
the Council, including three permanent members, is not
a State party to the Rome Statute establishing the ICC.
Nevertheless, we acknowledge the rights and obligations
of the States parties to the ICC.

The Sudan is an important country in the African
continent. Durable peace and stability in the Sudan is
not only a desire of the Sudanese people but also an
imperative for regional peace and security. Achieving
that objective requires serious and genuine support
and the understanding of the international community.
The situation in Darfur in the Sudan, in particular the
unfortunate suffering of the people, has been a matter of
concern for several years now. We must do more to help
resolve this complex problem in a holistic manner and
to bring an end to the pain and agony of the population.

Addressing the situation in Darfur is also integral
to the efforts for a comprehensive peace in the Sudan,
an objective that Pakistan supports. The international
community and the Council have recognized that
comprehensive peace entails progress on multiple tracks,
notably a political process aimed at promoting a peaceful
solution through dialogue, justice and reconciliation,
efforts to improve security, and addressing the human
rights and humanitarian aspects. It is in that regard that
we reiterate our support for the efforts of the United
Nations, as well as the African Union, particularly its
High-level Implementation Panel, towards achieving
peace, stability, justice and reconciliation in Darfur.

We believe the search for justice in Darfur should
be pursued in a way that does not impede or jeopardize
efforts aimed at promoting lasting peace in the region.
In that context, the positions of the African Union, the
League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation should also be duly considered.

Pakistan firmly believes in the obligation of all
States to guarantee and protect the right to life of all
their citizens. Having the primary responsibility, the
Government of the Sudan must take all measures to
investigate human rights violations in Darfur and bring
to justice their perpetrators.

We take note of the steps of the Government of
the Sudan towards the implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur and welcome the
establishment of the Darfur Regional Authority, as well
as the National Human Rights Commission.

It is also imperative for all signatory parties to Doha
Document for Peace to implement their commitments
under the Document for lasting peace and stability in
Darfur. On its part, the United Nations-African Union
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) has an important
role in the maintenance of peace and security in Darfur,
particularly with regard to facilitating the political
process in Darfur. Pakistan underscores the need for the
full implementation of the UNAMID mandate.

Let me conclude by reiterating that the overall
objective of the international community and the
Council is the attainment of durable peace and stability
in the Sudan. We should harmonize and consolidate our
efforts for the early achievement of that objective.

