Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I, too, would like to thank our friend Staffan de
Mistura, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Iraq, for his briefing to the Council. I
should also like to commend the courageous,
determined and effective efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in carrying out
the mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council. I
also wish to thank our colleague the Permanent
Representative of Iraq for his detailed briefing on
developments in the situation.

As he himself emphasized, there has been
significant progress in Iraq in recent months towards
the establishment of a secure, stable, democratic,
united and prosperous country where human rights are
respected. France congratulates the Government of Iraq
on its efforts in that regard. We reiterate our
willingness to continue and strengthen our contribution
to ensuring stability and prosperity in Iraq.

The holding of provincial elections on 31 January
2009 was an important step towards strengthening
democracy and reconciliation. As was the case, it is
important that the elections were well-organized and
conducted in an inclusive manner and in an overall
peaceful environment. This month, the Security
Council, the Secretary-General and the ministers for
foreign affairs of the European Union have welcomed
the holding of those elections.

The elections were, first and foremost, a triumph
for the people of Iraq, who have assumed full
ownership of the democratic process. France is very
pleased that the Iraqis are increasingly reassuming full
responsibility for their country's affairs. The Iraqi
Government should also be congratulated on having
organized these elections. Finally, we welcome the key
role played by UNAMI, in support of the Independent
High Electoral Commission, in preparing the elections.

As noted by European Union Ministers for
Foreign Affairs on 23 February, it is important to take
advantage of the outcome of the elections to make
further progress on improving the living conditions of
the Iraqi people and on the process of national
reconciliation. This means continuing the positive
commitment of the Iraqi Government, of the entire
international community and of neighbouring States.

I would like to focus briefly on four important
areas in this regard. First of all, the disputed internal
boundaries are an issue, particularly with regard to
Kirkuk. This issue will be a focus of attention, as the
Secretary-General emphasized in his report. UNAMI
must continue to provide its expertise to the Iraqi
Government in order to make progress on this
question, as well as on the matter of constitutional
review. Success in this difficult task will depend in
large part on - and will be a gauge of - the
willingness of all actors to work towards a
compromise.

Secondly, reconstruction and economic growth
are also great challenges for the coming year. The Iraqi

people expect concrete results. France has cancelled
€4 billion, or $5 billion, of Iraqi debt, and we are
prepared to contribute in all areas requested by the
Iraqi authorities.

Thirdly, UNAMI must also continue to support
the efforts of neighbouring countries to make progress
in the areas of energy, security, borders and refugees
and internally displaced persons. We also believe that
its assistance will be useful in supporting the regional
dialogue that should continue on issues such as
disappeared persons and property seized during the
Gulf war. Neighbouring States, of course, have a major
role to play in this respect, and we appreciate the
reference to these relationships that was made by the
Permanent Representative of Iraq.

Finally, efforts must also continue with regard to
respect for human rights, including with regard to the
situation of prisoners. As noted by the Secretary-
General, the creation of an Independent High
Commission for Human Rights is a positive first step.

The visit of the President of the French Republic
to Iraq on 10 February was a solemn indication of
France's resolute support for democracy, for the
restoration of sovereignty and for reconstruction efforts
in Iraq. This visit followed two visits by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Bernard Kouchner, in August
2007 and June 2008. These visits provided an
opportunity to clearly demonstrate the solidarity of
France. At the same time, we have cancelled debt and
have actively participated in the European Union
programme for training Iraqi civil servants under the
Union's Integrated Rule of Law Mission for Iraq.
Depending on the wishes of the Iraqi authorities, we
could deploy our efforts in all institutional and
economic areas.

More generally speaking, it is important that the
present positive cycle will enable Iraq to recover its
full sovereignty. In this respect, we would recall the
request made by the Security Council in resolution
1859 (2008) for the Secretary-General to prepare a
report after consultations with Iraq on the action
necessary to enable Iraq to recover international
standing equal to that which it held prior to the
adoption ofresolution 661 (1990) ofAugust 1990.

As was indicated by the French President in
Baghdad on 10 February, Iraq can count on the
friendship of France as we work with it towards its full
reintegration into the community of nations.

