Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing,
and we are so very grateful to the British for convening
today's meeting, which we were eagerly awaiting.
Unfortunately, however, we have not heard anything
new from it today.

When I listen to some of my colleagues, I feel that
we have already moved on from Alice's Adventures
in Wonderland and are in Through the Looking Glass
instead. Our Western partners are not interested in the
truth, and not just on this matter. They are not listening
and they will not hear. In Russian we say that you are
talking to them about Foma and they are talking to you
about Yerem - in other words, we are talking about
apples and oranges.

Today we heard the same lie that the United Kingdom
has already used to try to mislead the international
community. It is claimed that the United Kingdom has
not received from us the answers to the questions that
it requested. For the Council's information, I would
once again like to point out that the questions that we
have been asked actually consist of that same 24-hour
ultimatum that boils down to one question: "Why did
you do it?". Nevertheless, some of Britain's allies, with
a level ofpersistence that deserves a better subject, have
repeatedly urged us to answer the United Kingdom's
questions and cooperate with it. If they have questions
that we have not been asked, perhaps they can pass
them on to us, assuming that Britain is not going to give
us any additional questions. We would be very grateful.

Today we heard the same series of unsubstantiated
accusations, now allegedly backed up by the authority
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW). Let me say right away that there
is nothing in the OPCW report that supports the
mendacious British version of Russia's involvement in
the Salisbury incident. The main thing that is not there,
and that the British were dying to see, is any conclusion
that the substance used in Salisbury was produced in
Russia. On the contrary, the speedy analysis conducted
by the OPCW only confirms that such a substance
could have been produced in any laboratory that had
the right equipment. After all, in order to conduct
a comparative analysis one must have a standard for
the toxic compound, and such laboratories exist in the
United Kingdom at Porton Down, and in the United
States and a number of other countries. The formula
for the substance has been known since 1998, when it
was included in the database ofthe National Institute of
Standards and Technology by the United States Army
Edgewood Chemical Biological Center. Moreover, a
search in the Google Patents online resource for the
key word Novichok produces results for more than
140 patents issued in the United States alone that are
related to the use of and protection from exposure to
that toxic chemical.

Six weeks have already elapsed since the Salisbury
incident on 4 March, and yet the gaps in this story, held
together by the weakest of threads, have not only not
diminished, they have multiplied at startling speed. We
are not surprised by London's behaviour. At today's
meeting of the OPCW'S Executive Council, the British
representative, whose statement was as usual based
on lies and disinformation about Russia's motives,
methods and means, declared yet again that

(spoke in English)

"Russia has a proven record of carrying out
State-sponsored assassination." Proven by whom?

(spoke in Russian)

Naturally, that was followed by numerous references
were made to the Litvinenko affair, adducing arguments
based on British jurisprudence's new vocabulary, such
as

(spoke in English)

"President Putin 'probably approved it"'; "'the
Russian State may have been involved'"; "the
Russian State may have sponsored attacks"';
"there have been numerous suspected Russian

State-sponsored assassinations".
(spoke in Russian)

Everything that we have seen and heard today is
deja vu. We went through all of this in the Litvinenko
poisoning affair, with a complete lack of transparency
from the British, who to this day have concealed
any documentation that could have enabled us to put
together a full picture of what had happened to him
at the time. For those who do not know, I can inform
them that the United Kingdom has simply classified
that information.

London's modus operandi with respect to the
12 April report of the OPCW technical assistance team
was no exception to this. In the one and a half pages of
the document that were made public, the British forbade
the OPCW's experts not only from mentioning the type
of technical assistance that they had requested but even
from naming the toxic chemical identified by Porton
Down, preferring to conceal all that information in the
confidential section of the report, whose discussion in
an open Council meeting would violate the OPCW's
confidentiality rules. The reason that was done seems
obvious to us.

Well, if the British will not grant Council members
the right to discuss what they authorized to be included
in the substantive part of the report, we will discuss
what is not there. Above all, what is not there is any
mention of the Russian Federation, which corresponds
to the conclusions that we have already heard from
Porton Down. There is not the slightest mention of
the extremely crucial information on the factors in the
contamination of Sergei and Yulia Skripal and Nick
Bailey. Nor is there any information about the history
of their illness or treatment.

There is no explanation as to how a toxic chemical
that is extremely unstable in liquid form, according to
its alleged creator, Vil Mirzayanov, could have been
detected in a high concentration almost three weeks
after the incident. Nor is there a word about why this
substance, which is allegedly 10 times more deadly
than VX, could affect some victims seven hours after
contact while others succumbed instantly. And why
then - thank heavens - were the effects not fatal?
Perhaps Vil Mirzayanov and the Porton Down experts
are talking about different toxic chemicals.

Moreover, there is no sensible explanation in the
report of how a blood sample from one of the victims
taken 18 days after the incident could have contained
an undecomposed toxic chemical identified by Porton
Down, while this was not observed in the other victim,
who suffered a more toxic level of contamination. That
scenario is not only uncharacteristic for paralytic nerve
agents, it might also be an indirect indication that it
is highly likely that before the sample of the toxic
chemical identified by Porton Down was collected, the
victim was injected with the agent while in an induced
coma, which is why there was no biochemical reaction.

That raises an important question. On 5 April, when
I quoted Boris Johnson on the presence of samples of
A-234 at Porton Down, the Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom (see S/PV.8224) responded
to the effect that the United Kingdom is permitted to
conduct research for defence purposes. Perhaps the
experts at Porton Down have investigated and are in
possession of this and other toxic chemicals that are not
on the relevant Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC)
lists. I believe that as part of the preparations of the
report of the Scientific Advisory Board of the Director-
General of the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW for
the fourth CWC Review Conference, now would be
the time for the Porton Down experts to inform the
scientific community about their research on A-234 for
defence purposes and perhaps on other toxic chemicals
that pose a threat to the goals of the Convention. But
let us not labour under illusions. The line that Britain
has decided to take on the Salisbury incident has made
it clear that that will not happen. The United Kingdom
and its allies simply have no interest in a professional
discussion, while professional chemists and experts
cast ever more doubt the further they go into the official
British version.

Unfortunately, London's free interpretation of
the provisions of the CWC only raises questions. For
example, the British consistently refer to the fact
that their national investigation is being conducted
in accordance with paragraph 1 of article VII of the
Convention. These references would be justified if it
were not for one "but", which is this kind of investigation
pertains only to physical and legal individuals who are
under Britishjurisdiction. I do not believe it is necessary
to point out that Russia is not under Britishjurisdiction.
That goes without saying. In that regard, we request
a clarification from the British as to whether the
statements from Downing Street about Russia's alleged
involvement in the incident in Salisbury represent an
attempt to put political pressure on the investigative
work or the ultimate conclusions of a Scotland Yard
investigation. Or it normal under the British legal
system for the Government to identify the guilty party
and for its investigative bodies to subsequently tailor
their investigation to fit that conclusion?

I want to once again stress that any doubts about
the good-faith compliance by a State party with its
obligations under the Convention must be resolved,
as laid down in article IX. They must be resolved, and
we know of no other meaning for the English words
"shall" and "should". We would be grateful for possible
explanations from native English speakers about cases
when those words do not imply obligation. It would
be very helpful for our future practical work in the
Council.

Since our repeated proposals to London to begin
cooperating under article IX have been ignored, and
the requests of Russia's Prosecutor General, in line
with paragraph 2 of article VII, about providing legal
assistance on criminal cases, have gone unanswered, no
alternative remains to us but to initiate our own request
under paragraph 2 of article IX with a list of questions
for the United Kingdom on the incident in Salisbury on
4 March. A note to that effect was sent on 13 April by
Russia's Permanent Representative in The Hague to the
British via the OPCW Technical Secretariat.

In that connection, and with the aim of taking
measures to strengthen the CWC, we believe it is
essential that the Director-General of the Technical
Secretariat should prepare and introduce at the
next meeting of the OPCW Executive Council, in
accordance with paragraph 5 of article XV of the
Convention, a draft resolution amending the annex to
the Convention listing chemicals. That would not only
enable the substance A-234, identified by Porton Down,
to be officially classified as a chemical warfare agent,
it would put it and its precursors under the OPCW's
systematic control. That is what should have been done
long ago by the countries that, as it turns out, had all
of the necessary information, including samples of this
toxic chemical, rather than using the forums of the
OPCW and the Security Council to disseminate their
groundless allegations that the Russian Federation is in
breach of its obligations under the Chemical Weapons
Convention.

The information campaign, or rather war, that
the British authorities have unleashed on Russia
around the so-called Skripal case is no secret. The
norms of international law and of law in general, the
principles and rules of diplomacy, common sense and
simple basic politeness are being ignored. Against
a background of deafening silence on the part of the
competent British authorities on the merits of the case
and a multitude of politically tinged declarations and
pronouncements that have been aimed at Russia from
the very beginning, new versions of what happened
continue to appear, and significant discrepancies,
plants and open disinformation are surfacing that
London has no intention of refuting in any way. The
fake rumours are spreading. The calculation is that
down the road, thanks to this cacophony of unfounded
accusations and references to respected organizations
such as the OPCW - which allegedly fully confirmed
the British conclusions about Russia's involvement, and
which, I will say it again, is a total lie - Governments
and society will not be able to sort out the subtleties
of chemical analysis and the numerous inconsistencies
in the accusations that have been made. As a famous
quotation often attributed to Winston Churchill has
it, "There is no such thing as public opinion. There
is only published opinion." And the British and their
allies have no problem with their lying assertions being
disseminated by the media.

The British asked us two questions. We asked
them 47 questions. Here they are. We received partial
responses to two of them. There are no answers to the
questions that we asked during the previous Security
Council meeting on the issue on 5 April. We will have
more questions. We have promised them that we will
not let this go.

In order to acquaint the Council with the scientific
and factual side of this affair, we will circulate
separately the Russian representatives' statements at the
OPCW's fifty-ninth session of the OPCW, along with a
chronology of the events prepared by our Embassy in
London and a copy of my statement today.

While all the shouting is going on, the British
authorities have been busy working systematically to
eradicate any evidence or material proof. The household
pets have been destroyed and clearly no samples were
taken ofthem. The places that the Skripals visited - the
bar, the restaurant, the bench, the soil in the park and
so forth - are being cleared, while ordinary citizens
continue to live in Salisbury as if nothing had ever
happened. Yulia Skripal's whereabouts are unknown,
and the Consulate has been given no access to her as a
Russian citizen. Let me remind the Council that nobody
has seen Yulia or Sergei since 4 March. Meanwhile, a
crime - an attempted murder, with suggestions that it
might be terrorist in nature - was committed against
Russian citizens.

I would once again like to affirm our principled
position, which is that we will not accept the results ofany
national or international investigations without having
at our disposal the entire body of information - whether
that is data from the criminal investigation or full
technical laboratory reports - without the granting
of our right to consular access to Russian citizens and,
most importantly, without the direct participation of
Russian experts in all operations designed to clarify
what took place in Salisbury on 4 March. The only
thing that we believe is unarguable right now is that
London is continuing to conceal information that is
critical to establishing the truth, and will not permit
any transparency on the issue.

The British Embassy in Moscow once again
distinguished itself when a few days ago it put out the
following sensational piece of information, roughly
the same as that given by the British Permanent
Representatives to the OPCW and to the United Nations
in today's letter to the Secretary-General (S/2018/218).
First, Russia has been producing and stockpiling
Novichok for the past 10 years. Secondly, research into
the use of chemical warfare agents for assassination
purposes has been conducted in Russia. Thirdly,
beginning in 2013, Russian intelligence expanded its
interest in Sergei Skripal.

Brilliant. Bravo.

I will now return to the letter from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom to the United
Nations that she circulated today, including to the
permanent members of the Security Council. As usual,
it is packed with lying, unfounded and slanderous
allegations. As usual, it features vocabulary such as
"highly likely", "may have been" and "suspected". The
United Kingdom has previously had the audacity to make
categorical assertions about our chemical declarations
and to discuss the working methods of our intelligence
services. However, this time our British colleagues
went even further. They accused President Putin of
direct involvement in a military chemical programme,
without quotation marks, references or mentions of
"highly likely". I have always been astonished and
amused by the far-fetched suggestions of our British
colleagues - and not theirs alone - about how the
Russian system of Government works. In London they
clearly believe that the Russian President has a hobby.
Any free time away from his official duties is spent
on chemical-weapon programmes. I do not know if the
people in London or the Permanent Mission here realize
that they have gone beyond the bounds of acceptability
and propriety. I think they should thank our President
for being so restrained.

Why is all this necessary? The answer is banal in
its obviousness. This is an attempt to defame Russia
generally and to cast doubt on its legitimacy and role
in the international arena. I did not say that Salisbury
and Douma are connected lightly. First, because both
are provocations and secondly, because both are being
linked to Russia. This is an unscrupulous incitement
against Russia that is designed to deepen the divide
between Russia and the European Union, something that
is clearly particularly timely for the United Kingdom on
the eve of Brexit. That is all.

In conclusion, it seems that the moment has come to
wield the classics - in this case, our Shakespeare, who
in Henry VI, Part 111, said, "Suspicion always haunts
the guilty mind". Now that is how the British should try
to prettily package their so-called suspicions, because
otherwise they are somehow not very convincing. We
even feel bad for them.

We will eagerly await the continuation of this
gripping serial. If Britain drags in some new information
or sensation in the spirit I have cited today, we reserve
the right to request such a meeting ourselves. The United
Kingdom should not think that it can hide behind its
poisonous web of lies and conjecture. It has not ended
with the report of the OPCW technical assistance visit.
We will continue to demand that it give us the facts.

There is undoubtedly chemistry in this affair - the
chemistry that links it to the Russian word for "swindle".
Yes, they have pulled off quite a swindle. But we agree
with them on one point. There will be no impunity
and those responsible for this provocation must be
held accountable.

