Allow me to congratulate the Niger on assuming the presidency of the Security Council during the month of September and for giving me the opportunity to brief the Council today. It is becoming a regrettable cliche to appear before the Council and warn that Libya is at a critical juncture, but I am compelled to pronounce those same words yet again today. Libya is indeed at a decisive turning point. The Council's support, not only in words but more importantly in action, will help determine whether the country descends to new depths of fragmentation and chaos, or progresses towards a more prosperous future. On the ground, an uneasy standoff continues around Sirte, imperilling the lives of the city's 130,000 vulnerable inhabitants, as well as the country's vital oil infrastructure, which comprises its economic lifeline. While the front lines have remained relatively quiet since June, both the Libyan Arab Armed Forces (LAAF) and forces under the control of the Government of National Accord (GNA) continue, regrettably, to benefit from the assistance of foreign sponsors in stockpiling advanced weaponry and equipment. Since the Secretary-General last briefed the Council on 8 July (see S/2020/686), some 70 resupply flights landed in eastern airports, in support of the LAAF, while 30 resupply flights were dispatched to airports in western Libya, in support of the GNA. Similarly, around nine cargo vessels docked in western ports, in support of the GNA, while a reported three cargo vessels arrived in support of the LAAF. Foreign sponsors are fortifying their assets at key Libyan air bases in the east and west. The activity described above constitutes an alarming breach of Libya's sovereignty and a blatant violation of the United Nations arms embargo, not to mention the commitments undertaken by the Berlin Conference participants. The Mission continues to receive reports of a large-scale presence of foreign mercenaries and operatives, who are further complicating local dynamics and reducing the chances of a future settlement. While the rate of accidents from booby traps - including improvised explosive devices, landmines and explosive remnants of war - has decreased, explosive hazard contamination remains a significant risk to many communities, particularly in southern Tripoli. As of 24 August, a total of 61 people had been killed and 113 people injured, of whom 107 were civilians. The United Nations continues to support the authorities in developing and implement strategies to ensure the safe, dignified and voluntary returns of people to their homes. Reports of imminent offensives and reliance on social media networks to spread those rumours exacerbate the risk of miscalculation. As a sign of increased volatility, localized tensions among armed groups, most recently in the cities of Al-Asabaa, Sirte and neighbouring localities, are on the rise, with allegations of unlawful arrests and detention, abuse of power and targeting of civilians being widely shared with the Mission. Those developments make the requirement for a genuine disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme even more urgent. On the night of 26 August, General Haftar's forces launched Grad rockets towards areas in which GNA forces were operating near Sirte. Last night, there were similar reports of rockets launched by forces affiliated with General Haftar. The rockets did not cause any damage or injuries, but they are a breach of the ceasefire that General Haftar's signed on to in June, according to his spokesperson. With the stakes so high, such reckless action risks igniting large-scale confrontation, with the devastating consequences that would entail for the country and the region at large. It is imperative that the Council use its influence to impress on all sides that now is the time for restraint. The instability is further compounded by degraded socioeconomic conditions that are fuelling popular unrest and threatening the fragile calm required to advance our security and political discussions. The partial lifting of the oil blockade, announced by the LAAF on 18 August, had a minimal impact on the severe energy crisis faced by the country as it only applied to the removal of condensates from eastern stores. While that allowed the National Oil Corporation to continue providing natural gas for eastern power plants, the blockade otherwise remains unreasonably in place, including a forced shutdown of all domestic refineries. As the international price of fuel increases, so do domestic fuel shortages, which negatively impacts multiple sectors of the economy, including electricity. In the nation's capital, residents too often go without electricity for up to 20 hours a day. We must make the full lifting of the oil blockade, in place since January, a top priority. The immiseration of the Libyan people is further compounded by the debilitating effect of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which appears to be spiralling out of control. The number of confirmed cases has more than doubled in the last two weeks, with 15,156 cases and 250 recorded deaths as of 1 September. Exponential increases are a worrying trend, with community transmission now reported in some of Libya's main cities, including Tripoli and Sebha. We are, however, looking at the problem through a keyhole, as persistent shortages in testing capabilities, adequate health-care facilities and contact tracing mean that the true scale of the pandemic in Libya is likely to be much higher. The handling of the pandemic is limited by the fragmentation of health-sector institutions, the extreme shortage of medical supplies and workers, as well as a funding shortage. After more than nine years of conflict, the health-care system is nearing full collapse and is unable to respond to the additional burden of COVID-19 patients in addition to maintaining normal health services, including child immunization programmes. The United Nations and our partners are at the forefront of supporting the national authorities through the provision of health supplies and personal protection equipment. We are also working closely with the authorities to build the capacities of health workers, to destigmatize the virus and to increase awareness so as to ensure that people take the proper precautions to protect themselves. It is essential that Libyan authorities cooperate transparently in our joint fight to control this terrible plague. The challenge of humanitarian access, compounded by COVID-19 restriction measures, remains persistent across the country. These challenges notwithstanding, humanitarian organizations have reached more than 243,000 people with assistance since the beginning of the year, including getting support to 66,000 internally displaced people, 119,000 vulnerable conflict-affected Libyans and recent returnees, and 58,000 migrants and refugees. The socioeconomic impact of COVID-19, along with the protracted crisis and deteriorating public services, continued to stretch the coping capacities of those in the most vulnerable circumstances, particularly the more than | million people estimated to be in need of humanitarian assistance in 2020. I remain concerned that migrants, refugees and asylum seekers continue to attempt to cross the Mediterranean, at great risk to their lives. am deeply saddened by the recent deaths of 45 migrants and refugees attempting to cross to Europe in a singular incident on 18 August when their boat sank off Libya's coast. More than 7,000 migrants and refugees have attempted the crossing this year, more than 300 of whom have died. Reports of delays in rescue and disembarkation highlight the need for a review of European countries' approach to this situation and for a more humane and predictable disembarkation mechanism in line with the responsibilities placed on Member States by international human rights law and search and rescue obligations. Libya cannot be considered a safe port for disembarkation. Many migrants and refugees who have been intercepted at sea have been returned to Libya and placed into detention. As of 21 August, almost 2,400 migrants and refugees are in official detention centres in Libya, where they are routinely subjected to grave human rights violations. Many more are in unofficial sites where the United Nations does not have access. I continue to urge the authorities to take greater steps against smugglers and traffickers and to find alternatives to detention in Libya. The United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) welcomes the nomination by the High Commissioner for Human Rights of the three members of the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya. We look forward to cooperating with them and assisting them in fulfilling their mission to document violations of international human rights law and humanitarian law since 2016, address impunity for such violations and act as a deterrent. Sustainable peace in Libya will be achieved only through justice and accountability. All the elements I mentioned are producing fertile ground for social unrest across the country and confirm once more that the status quo is simply unsustainable. In recent days, Libyans have come out in force throughout the country, most notably in Tripoli, to express their anger over the lack of basic services, widespread water and power cuts and rampant corruption. I have personally communicated to Libyan authorities the concerns the United Nations has about reports of excessive force used against peaceful demonstrators, and I reiterated our calls for the rights to peaceful assembly and freedom of expression to be respected. Those who have been arbitrarily detained by armed groups must be released. The surge in the use of hate speech and incitement to violence - occasionally stirred up through foreign-based media outlets and electronic armies - appears designed to further divide Libyans, increase polarization and tear at the country's social fabric, at the expense of a Libyan-Libyan solution. On 29 August, the situation morphed into an open political crisis when the Presidency Council suspended Minister of Interior Bashagha and expedited a governmental reshuffling, exposing underlying tensions that had resurfaced within the western camp, as the threat posed by General Haftar's offensive subsided. Now is the time to join hands, as efforts are undertaken to reach a settlement that would aim to preserve the country's sovereignty and integrity and to address long-standing economic shortcomings and the need to implement lasting DDR and security sector reforms. The disturbing trends I have just described should compel us all to press for immediate de-escalation and a return to the political process before the fragile window of opportunity created by the informal halt in hostilities dissipates to the detriment of Libyans, first and foremost, but also to the detriment of international peace and security. However, glimmers of hope have appeared from within the country, and UNSMIL, with the support of the Berlin-established International Follow-up Committee on Libya, is working on nurturing and using them as an anchor for its own efforts. Rejuvenation of political activity in the west and the east has enabled the emergence of a constituency advocating for change, for a Libyan-Libyan solution, for the restoration of the country's sovereignty and for efforts to disentangle the Libyan people from broader regional and international struggles. On 21 August, President of the Presidency Council Serraj and Speaker of the House of Representatives Saleh issued separate yet simultaneous statements calling for an immediate ceasefire, the lifting of the oil blockade and a return to the political process under United Nations auspices. These statements were met with overwhelming expressions of support from Libyans of all political affiliations and from international partners as well. I remain optimistic that, with many points of convergence between both declarations, we may have a chance to move forward with intra-Libyan political and security discussions while continuing to engage with other key political and military forces across the country. Since my previous briefing (see S/2020/421), I have conducted a number of missions to shore up support for the United Nations efforts in Libya, including visits to the United Kingdom, Algeria, Morocco and Egypt. Earlier today, I met with Tunisian President Saied to specifically thank the Tunisian Government for its unstinting support for the United Nations operations in Libya. From all of my regional and international interlocutors, I secured commitments on assisting UNSMIL in its tasks of bringing the Libyan parties together and of working to maintain calm on the ground. Libya's neighbours are directly threatened by the continuing instability and influx of weapons and mercenaries. I also met directly with Prime Minister Serraj, House of Representative Speaker Saleh and High State Council President Al-Mishri, as well as with a number of their representatives and other key figures. I would like to thank the Swiss Government for its superb facilitation of our meetings with Libyans in these difficult times. At all levels, the Mission is engaging with Libyan stakeholders to counsel calm and build the bridges that will ease the political process. In Ghat, on 18 August, the relatively high turnout recorded in municipal elections despite COVID-19-related constraints demonstrated Libyans' determination to exercise their rights to elect their representatives. It is therefore not surprising that spoilers would seek to sabotage further such exercises, as happened in Traghen on 25 August, when an armed group affiliated with the LAAF forced the suspension of the vote. These green shoots of democracy must be protected. I salute the tireless efforts of the Central Committee for Municipal Council Elections as it continues preparations for elections in a new group of municipalities, starting with Misrata tomorrow. On the military front, UNSMIL continued discussions with delegations of both sides under the auspices of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission and moved past areas of convergence identified previously to adjust to new dynamics on the ground. As of today, and since 8 July, we have convened three virtual rounds of discussions with the GNA delegation and two with the LAAF delegation in an attempt to urge for immediate de-escalation. I encouraged both sides to consider the incremental establishment of a demilitarized area starting with Sirte, supported by a comprehensive set of confidence-building measures. This proposal would also comprise a small international-Libyan joint ceasefire monitoring mechanism. While divergences of views and distrust between the two sides remain high, I call on the Security Council to encourage the parties to refrain from insisting on unrealistic and maximalist positions and participate in good faith for the sake of their country. Addressing the economic drivers of the conflict is at the core of any hope for a sustainable settlement. To create the necessary confidence required for a frank and open discussion over the transparent allocation of resources, UNSMIL had long pushed for an international audit of both branches of the Central Bank of Libya, as requested by Prime Minister Serraj in a letter to the Secretary-General in July 2018. I am pleased to report that, thanks to UNSMIL's support, the international financial review audit was launched on | August and is moving forward quickly. This process will advance efforts to unify the two branches of the Central Bank of Libya, enhance accountability and create the transparency needed to inform discussions on the equitable management of revenue. Iremind Council members that, 16 months ago, we were on the cusp ofa broadly gauged Libyan national conference that would have established the framework to replace the current divided political structures with one that would have more clearly reflected the legitimate aspirations of all Libyans. That effort was upended by those who falsely believed they could achieve their aims through the use of force. After 14 months of needless death and destruction, they did not succeed. The use of oil as a weapon of war has only exacerbated the misery of the Libyan people and propelled the country towards economic and social collapse. It is therefore clear that the only path out is through dialogue and compromise leading to a comprehensive political settlement and culminating in national elections.
