Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and the
important briefings by Mr. Staffan de Mistura and
Mr. John Ging. We also appreciate their tireless efforts
and those of their teams.

Peru observes with deep regret and concern the
continuation of the conflict in Syria. We note with
alarm the prospect of a new escalation of violence in
the town of Idlib and the devastating humanitarian
consequences that it would bring. The levels of violence
and suffering registered in Aleppo and eastern Ghouta,
among other locations of the protracted conflict,
prompt us to underline the responsibility of the Council
to protect some 3 million people in Idlib, including
more than 1 million children. In a few days, we could
be talking about tens of thousands of new fatalities and
some 700,000 newly displaced persons, according to
United Nations estimates. That does not include the
wounded and the destruction of civilian infrastructure.

We must also anticipate the serious repercussions
that a new display of barbarism would have on the
peace process that, with the support of the Council, is
being promoted by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General. That could lead to the further destabilization
of the Middle East and to new tensions among the
permanent members ofthe Council, which have a special
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

In that context, we emphasize the applicability of
the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes,
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. We
also recall that resolution 2401 (2018), which must
be enforced and implemented, calls for a ceasefire
on all Syrian territory. The Council, and especially
the countries with influence on the ground, must act
to ensure that the parties to the conflict abandon the
military track and the contempt they have shown for
international law and international humanitarian law
by acting with impunity.

Peru emphatically condemns terrorism and believes
that terrorist groups that remain in Idlib and other parts
of Syrian territory must be held accountable before
the courts for the crimes they have committed. But
we emphasize that in no case does that justify further
massacres of civilians. In that regard, we highlight the
spirit ofunity and commitment expressed on Wednesday
by the 10 elected members of the Council in conveying
a message of concern that emphasizes the urgent need
to prioritize the protection of civilians in Idlib.

We hope that the Astana guarantors, meeting today
in Tehran, will be able to agree on a formula to prevent
the tragedy looming over the civilian population ofIdlib,
and on that basis support the political process based on
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex).

Dag Hammarskjold, alluding to the horrors of
the Second World War, famously stated that the
Organization was "not created in order to bring us to
heaven, but in order to save us from hell" (SG/382, p. 7). A few months ago, however, Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres described eastern Ghouta as "hell
on earth" (S/PV8185, p. 2). We believe that it is time
for the Council to act with unity and commitment to
prevent Idlib from becoming a new scene of horror
and suffering.

