Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation voted today to adopt
resolution 2046 (2012) in view of the need to deal
speedily with the dangerous state of relations between
the Sudan and South Sudan. We proceeded from the
opinion that the text aims to support the road map,
adopted on 24 April by the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union, for regulating the crisis between
the two States.

It is well known that Russia is firmly in favour of
solving African problems by relying on the positions
and assessments of the countries of the continent
themselves and their regional organizations. Our
concerns, however, were only partially reflected in the
text of the resolution. We have been compelled to
conclude that the disagreements between the Sudan and
South Sudan came close to a major military conflict
after the recent occupation by South Sudanese troops
of the Heglig oil-producing region. According to the
information available, the oil infrastructure of that
region, which is vitally important to the economy of
12-32731

the Sudan, was either destroyed or rendered inoperable
by that occupation. In that context, the language in the
resolution welcoming the South Sudanese army's
withdrawal from Heglig seems inappropriate. We
believe that an assessment should be made of the
damage done during the occupation and a fair level of
compensation specified.

It is also intolerable that thousands of armed units
from the so-called Sudanese Revolutionary Front are
pursuing their destabilizing activities in the Sudanese
states of Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile with the
aim of violently overthrowing the Government in
Khartoum. There is reason to believe that this new
insurgent alliance has major external support. In this
connection, we are convinced that any possible future
measures to be taken by the Security Council under
paragraph 6 of today's resolution cannot be applied to
those aspects that touch on the issue of regulating the
situation in the aforementioned Sudanese states.

Concerning possible future steps to be taken by
the Council regarding the crisis in relations between
the Sudan and South Sudan, we wish to emphasize that
the arsenal of political and diplomatic tools for
normalizing the situation is far from exhausted. We
consider the sanctions route to be an extreme step for
influencing both parties, and the effectiveness and
specificity of any such sanctions should be carefully
evaluated.

In light of this, Russia intends to carefully and
objectively weigh the implications of Article 41 of the
Charter of the United Nations in evaluating the
implementation by the Sudan and South Sudan of the
road map settlement. We believe that the African Union
and its High-Level Implementation Panel, led by the
former President of South Africa, Mr. Thabo Mbeki,
should continue their active efforts to mediate and
remain the chief mechanism for normalizing relations
between the two countries. We urge the Sudan and
South Sudan to renew the negotiation process and
solve all the disputed issues by peaceful means.

