Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): The adoption of
resolutions 1988 (2011) and 1989 (2011) represents
another important step in the Council's firm stance to
counter terrorism. We consider that the separation of
the two regimes will facilitate the advance of a
comprehensive political process in Afghanistan in
support of national reconciliation among all citizens
who have rejected terrorism and who hope for a
peaceful political resolution of the continuing conflict,
which will enable them to build a stable and
democratic State.

We also believe that the decisions taken today
will advance both regimes and allow for a more
efficient management of the existing mechanisms
while improving the legal framework that supports
action taken by the international community in this
context.

We particularly highlight the improvements made
in the review by the Committee of the situation of
listed individuals, the further efforts stressing the
preventive nature of the restrictive measures imposed,
and a strengthening of the role of the Ombudsperson in
the whole system of guarantees that are granted to
individuals requesting de-listing.

We welcome the important and serious work
undertaken by the Ombudsperson, Ms. Kimberly Prost,
which was essential for the Council to be able to move
forward in adopting these resolutions. They represent a
decisive improvement in a mechanism that was
conceived to address the need for fairer and clearer
procedures when applying sanctions to individuals. The
more streamlined decision-making process aiming at
overcoming recurrent deadlocks resulting from the
consensus role, the recognition of the need to
strengthen the capacity of the Ombudsperson, the
access to relevant information and the process of

consideration of its recommendations are all important
improvements in the regime. The Ombudsperson is
now in a better position to play a crucial role in
assisting individuals in the process of reviewing their
cases.

While welcoming these positive developments,
we should have expected the Council to go further with
respect to some specific issues, in particular regarding
the time limits or the so-called sunset clause.
Moreover, in our view, the Ombudsperson should also
be called on to play an active role in the context of the
resolution on Afghanistan when referring to individuals
and entities seeking de-listing, and we hope that the
Council will have the opportunity to revisit this
important issue in the near future.

Portugal will naturally work actively in the
Committees for the full implementation of these
resolutions, with the aim of ensuring their swift
implementation, not losing sight of their important
objectives for peace, stability and security in
Afghanistan and the fight against terrorism, but also
keeping in mind the need to ensure fairer and clearer
procedures that increase credibility and facilitate
enforcement and the overall efficacy of the sanctions
regimes.

