Mr. Baali: For almost two years, I have served in
my personal capacity as Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and as my tenure draws to a close, I would
like to take the opportunity to share some of my
experiences by giving Council members some brief
background regarding the arms embargo and then a
short account of the work of the Committee during the
past year.

On 28 July 2003, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1493 (2003), by which it imposed an arms
embargo on all foreign and Congolese armed groups
and militias operating in the territory of North and
South Kivu and in Ituri, and on groups not party to the
Global and All Inclusive Agreement on the Transition
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
resolution also provided for the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) to monitor the situation with
regard to arms supply and the position and movements
of armed groups.

Resolution 1596 (2005) extended the arms
embargo to any recipient on the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, with certain
exemptions, including the army and police of that
country, under conditions set out in the resolution. That
resolution also imposed travel restrictions and an assets
freeze on persons and entities acting in violation of the
arms embargo. The most recent resolution, 1616
(2005), renewed the arms embargo, travel restrictions
and assets freeze until 31 July 2006.

The Committee has been active since its
establishment, holding two formal meetings and 15
informal consultations during 2005. The Committee
also issued three notes verbales, calling the attention of
Member States to their obligations under the
resolutions.

On 21 June and 12 October 2005, the Committee
sent notes verbales to all States, conveying the
preliminary list provided by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and a revised list
of receiving sites for supplies of arms and related
materiel or technical training and assistance intended
solely for support of or use by units of the army and
police of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

There have been seven instances of States, in
accordance with paragraph 2 (c) of resolution 1596
(2005), notifying the Committee with regard to
exemptions to the arms embargo, namely, the export of
non-lethal military equipment to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Cognizant of the important role played by
regional States in implementing the arms embargo, the
Committee, in 2005, held two rounds of discussions
with States in the region besides the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, namely, Burundi, Rwanda,
Uganda and South Africa, in order to have in-depth
discussions on relevant issues.

On 1 November 2005 , the Committee issued a list
of persons and entities subject to the travel restrictions
and assets freeze specified in resolution 1596 (2005).
That list is now available on the Committee's website.

Since the first Group of Experts was established,
under resolution 1533 (2004), three subsequent groups
of experts have fulfilled their mandates and submitted
their reports to the Council through the Committee. In
each case, the Committee held extensive discussions on
the reports, including their observations and
recommendations. Those reports have also been
discussed in the Council. The mid-term report of the
current Group of Experts was discussed by the
Committee recently. Its final report is expected shortly.

Those reports all contain details of the Groups'
monitoring and investigations regarding the arms
embargo, as well as their observations and
recommendations for improving its effectiveness. The
reports also contain details of the challenges
experienced by the Group in the fulfilment of its
various mandates.

In its midterm report, the Group reiterated
information contained in its earlier reports that foreign
and Congolese armed groups continue to destabilize
the peace process in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and that the Group is attempting
to track the source of the illegal arms surrendered in
North Kivu. The Group expressed concern that non-
customs airports are still being used at the country's
entry and exit points for lack of a well-functioning
civil aviation system.

In the area of customs, the porosity and length of
the borders of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
with its neighbours, the lack of adequate monitoring of
its land and lake borders and the numerous possibilities
for smuggling continue to be aggravating factors in the
failure to implement the arms embargo in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

During the past two years, during which I have
chaired the Committee on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, I have become acutely aware of the
importance to the Security Council of the sanctions
tool in the maintenance of peace and security. I have
also become aware of the challenges faced by
committees and the limitations on the effectiveness of
sanctions relative to the level of political will brought
to bear on an issue, both by States imposing measures
as members of the Security Council and by those
implementing the measures, as all States are obliged to
do.

The capacity of States to implement sanctions
varies widely. The level of cooperation with the
Committee and its monitoring arm, the Group of
Experts, also varies widely from one State to another.
The Group of Experts faces serious challenges in
carrying out its mandate, including lack of access to
certain sites and to information, as well as generally
inadequate levels of cooperation. Wherever and
whenever the Committee was able to assist in that
regard, it did so.

Finally, I would like to acknowledge the excellent
cooperation I received from the members of the
Committee and the unfailing commitment they
demonstrated in carrying out their mandate. I would
like to commend the Group of Experts for the excellent
work they have done under difficult conditions. I
would also like to thank the Secretariat for the advice
and support that it provided during my tenure. I would
like to assure my successor that this is a challenging
but rewarding job at the same time. I would also like to
assure my successor that I will do whatever is needed
to ensure a smooth transition.

As I am also the Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
918 (1994), concerning Rwanda, I wish to say a few
words on the status of that Committee.

As the Council is aware, the restrictions imposed
by paragraph 13 of resolution 918 (1994), on the sale
or supply of arms and related materiel to the
Government of Rwanda, were terminated on 1
September 1996, in accordance with paragraph 8 of
resolution 1011 (1995). However, all States are
required to continue to implement those measures with
a view to preventing the sale and supply of arms and
related materiel to non-governmental forces for use in
Rwanda. Furthermore, in accordance with paragraph 11
of resolution 1011 (1995), States are also required to
notify the Committee of all exports to Rwanda from
their territories of arms or related materiel.

During the period 2004 and 2005, the Committee
received no information on violations of the sanctions
measures. That does not necessarily mean that there
had been no violations. In that regard, I would like to
note that, in the absence of a specific monitoring
mechanism to ensure the effective implementation of
the arms embargo, the Committee will continue to rely
on the cooperation of States and organizations in a
position to provide information on Violations of the
arms embargo.

