The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Armenia, Australia, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti,
Hungary, India, Iraq, Ireland, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Maldives, Mexico, the Federated States
of Micronesia, Morocco, Nauru, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Papua
New Guinea, Portugal, Qatar, the Philippines, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Somalia, Slovakia, Spain, Sri Lanka, the
Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkey, Tuvalu, the United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs; Mr. Achim Steiner,
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme; Mr. Pavel Kabat, Chief Scientist of the
World Meteorological Organization; and Ms. Lindsay
Getschel, Research Assistant at the Environmental
Security Program of the Stimson Center.

Mr. Steiner is joining today's meeting via video
tele-conference from Davos, Switzerland.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules ofprocedure, I also invite Mr. Antonio
Parenti, Minister Counsellor of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations; Her Excellency
Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations; and Mr. Robert

Mardini, Permanent Observer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2019/l, which contains a letter
dated 2 January 2019 from the Permanent Representative
of the Dominican Republic to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.

I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo,

