The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Japan.

I, too, would like to extend a warm welcome to
the presence of Prime Minister Bellerive of Haiti and
to convey the strong solidarity of my Government and
people to him.

I would also like to express my appreciation to
Mr. Mulet, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his informative briefing. We applaud his
courage and determination and that of his colleagues in
Haiti to stand and face the challenge of stabilizing and
reconstructing Haiti after the earthquake's devastation.

The focus of the international support in Haiti is
now moving from the emergency stage to recovery and
reconstruction, but enormous challenges must be met
before full-scale reconstruction is launched. Such tasks
as removing debris, improving drainage, preparing
alternative sites for at-risk settlements and ensuring
access routes are prerequisites for reconstruction
activities and should be completed in an expeditious
manner.

There are high expectations of MINUSTAH in
terms of securing a safe and stable environment for
Haiti's reconstruction efforts. We encourage
MINUSTAH to utilize its maximal capacity, within its
current mandate.

In response to the call to strengthen the
engineering capacity of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Japan
dispatched a Self-Defense Forces engineer squadron of
350 people. They have been engaged in such tasks as
building facilities in internally displaced persons
camps, repairing the road to the border with the
Dominican Republic, and removing debris from the
street. We are very pleased that the activities of the
Japanese engineering squadron are contributing to the
acceleration of the reconstruction process.

It is clear that we cannot reconstruct Haiti in the
absence of a safe security situation. We commend
MINUSTAH for its efforts in maintaining calm in the
country. We are grateful to troop- and police-
contributing countries and financial contributors.

At the same time, we are concerned about
instances of sexual and gender-based violence in and
around internally displaced persons camps. The
presence in society of escaped inmates is also a source
of concern. We hope that MINUSTAH will make every
possible effort to improve the security environment and
support the capacity-building efforts of the Haitian
National Police.

We appreciate the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/200). In view of the importance of maintaining
security, we support the recommendation of increasing
by 680 the number of police personnel. The Secretary-
General's report emphasizes the need to scale up the
activities of MINUSTAH, including support to the
electoral process. We all support this effort.

Effective cooperation between the Government of
Haiti, the United Nations country team and the

international community is essential to implementing
the broader areas of the mandate of MINUSTAH. We
welcome the success of the donor's conference held
one month ago, and we congratulate in particular the
Government of Haiti and the host Government and
organizations.

The sustained and long-term engagement of the
international community is essential to realizing Haiti's
reconstruction. Japan will continue to support Haiti's
own efforts for self-sustaining development. Our
support will place particular priority on the areas of
education, human resource development, health,
medical care and employment in rural areas.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Uruguay.

