Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Boris Tadie, President of the Republic of Serbia,
and Mr. Skender Hyseni, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Kosovo, for their presence and their
statements. I welcome the actions of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Lamberto
Zannier, who has effectively and pragmatically
implemented the reconfiguration of the international
presence decided by the Secretary-General with the
support of the Security Council.
In his most recent report (S/2010/5), the
Secretary-General notes the progress made in recent
months in Kosovo, and in particular the decrease in
acts of violence. Nearly two years since the Republic
of Kosovo declared independence, the situation there
today is encouraging. Tensions have been defused and
all parties understand that the inhabitants of Kosovo,
regardless of what communities they belong to, want
above all to live in peace and their children to have a
future that is prosperous as possible. That is their main
and perfectly natural concern.

I welcome the engagement of the European
Union, whose Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) is doing
outstanding work to consolidate Kosovo's institutions
and to ensure the full implementation of their
commitments to the rule of law. As the European
Mission is consolidated, it would seem desirable to
pursue the drawdown of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo in response to the
presence and actions of EULEX.

EULEX is working to the benefit of the entire
population and all communities of Kosovo. In that
respect, we welcome the Mission's technical
cooperation with the authorities of Kosovo's
neighbours, including police cooperation with Serbia.
We count on the Republic of Serbia to pursue its
cooperation with EULEX and, in particular, to allow
justice to prevail in northern Kosovo.

France invites Serb and Kosovo authorities to live
up to the great expectations of their citizens by
devoting their energies and abilities to the real
problems of economic development, infrastructure,
dialogue and peace. We are convinced that Serbia will
maintain its responsible attitude and adopt a
constructive position vis-a-vis Kosovo. In that regard,
France welcomes a new factor that has arisen since our
last meeting on this issue. Serbia submitted its
candidacy for membership of the European Union on
22 December, confirming a strategic orientation that
we welcome and that it will have to translate into
deeds.

For its part, Kosovo must focus on its central
priorities and continue to move ahead in its
commitment to the rule of law, good governance and
human rights. Decentralization is an essential priority
of Kosovo and a key to its success in creating a
multi-ethnic society. To that end, we believe that the
local elections of last November, organized by the
Kosovar authorities, illustrate the encouraging progress
that has been achieved. No one can object to such a
democratic exercise.

Differences will long persist between Serbia and
Kosovo. The essential thing is for both countries to
share the same concern to maintain regional stability,
which will require restraint so as not to fuel passions at
a time when the people aspire to peace. The contrast
between the impassioned rhetoric of some and the calm
of the voters is testimony to that. The European Union
will maintain its commitment to ensuring a stable and
prosperous future for the entire West Balkans and to
offering a common future to the Serbs, the Kosovars
and the entire region.

