The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Chambas for his insightful briefing on the
semi-annual report of the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and the recent
developments in West Africa and the Sahel. I would like
to sum up by saying that we appreciate the important
role that Mr. Chambas and UNOWAS are playing in
conflict prevention throughout the vast region, and
that cooperation with regional and subregional actors
is extremely Vital if we are to have an effective impact.
Such collaborative efforts have yielded the latest
positive political and economic developments that we
have witnessed in West Africa.

In that vein, we call on UNOWAS to continue
its work on strengthening post-electoral stability
and paying close attention to the upcoming elections
across the region. The work of UNOWAS will now
become even more challenging with the closure of
both the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
and the United Nations Mission in Liberia, especially
in the light of the increasing threat of terrorism and
Violent extremism in West Africa and the Sahel, with
linkages to transnational organized crime. We are
deeply concerned by the food insecurity and forced
displacement among civilians caused by Violence
related to terrorist activities.

Kazakhstan fully supports regional initiatives
to address these threats through the Group of Five
for the Sahel Joint Force and the Multinational Joint
Task Force, and commends international partners for
mobilizing financial support for these initiatives, as
well as for the provision of humanitarian aid for the
affected population. We believe that the military
approach and humanitarian assistance should also be
implemented with development efforts in an integrated,
complex and well-coordinated manner, reinforced with
long-term sustainable funding. We, therefore, stress
the importance of recalibrating the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and developing an
integrated approach for the Lake Chad basin region.

To that end, we recommend a coordinated modus
operandi on the part of all United Nations agencies
and programmes concerned in order to increase the
effectiveness of assistance provided by the United
Nations on the ground, ensuring greater transparency in
its adminstration, including anti-corruption measures
and a more effective use of shrinking development and
humanitarian aid towards a harmonized United Nations

approach in Africa and its subregions.

Kazakhstan will continue to work together with the
other Council members and key actors to find a solution
in order to achieve lasting peace in West Africa and the
Sahel region.

I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.

I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

The meeting rose at11.10 a.m.
