Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I should also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Haekkerup, for the briefing he has given us.

We are also grateful to the Secretary-General for
his report. The assessments and conclusions in the
report and the briefing we have just heard provide us
with a good opportunity to look at the overall situation
in and around Kosovo and to determine what further
steps should be taken to implement Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) in its entirety.

We wish to pay tribute to the work done by Mr.
Haekkerup and by the United Nations Mission that he
heads in seeking to establish normalcy in the area. We
also understand that Mr. Haekkerup inherited a rather
difficult legacy from his predecessor. However, the
first steps he has taken give us grounds for hoping that
he will be able to correct the situation relating to the
implementation of resolution 1244 ( 1999), particularly
insofar as concerns constructive cooperation with the
Security Council and the establishment of close
interaction between the international presences there
and the Yugoslav authorities.

We note the steps already taken to open an office
of the United Nations Interim Administrative Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) in Belgrade, and we believe that
UNMIK and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will
continue to operate in this way thus strengthening their
mutual cooperation. Incidentally, in this connection, we
wish to draw attention to one sentence in the report of
the Secretary-General, a sentence that we regard as
incorrect factually and politically. According to that
sentence, in paragraph 64 of document S/200l/218,
"initial signs of the commitment of the new
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999)" are only now
emerging.

That assessment does not reflect the actual
situation, and I do not believe that I need to provide
proof in this Chamber that it is not only now that we
are seeing signs of commitment by the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to resolution 1244 (1999). In
fact, we are all familiar with the many steps taken by
the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
to implement the resolution, and those steps were taken
under the previous UNMIK leadership. In other words,
those steps were taken by the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia Government when Mr. Kouchner was the
Special Representative. But there was no reciprocal
response to those actions from UNMIK.

There are still a number of important problems
awaiting solution, and this is certainly not because
there was no desire on the part of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia to cooperate in implementing resolution
1244 (1999). I have in mind in particular the question
of the agreements that must be signed by the
international presences with the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on the status of
UNMIK and the Kosovo Force (KFOR). The absence
of such agreements to date is contrary to all of the
existing rules of the United Nations. Nor has an
adequate solution been found to carry out the tasks set
forth in resolution 1244 (1999) in order to ensure the
necessary conditions for the safe return of Serbs and
members of other non-Albanian populations to Kosovo
and for their continuing to live there.

We would encourage the UNMIK leadership to
take a very balanced approach, in cooperation with
Belgrade, in order to resolve the whole range of
problems involved in preparing for and holding, the
Kosovo-wide elections. It is necessary to ensure
conditions for a truly democratic expression of the will
of all the ethnic communities in the region so that they
can participate fairly in the new provisional organs of
self-government in Kosovo.

Rushing through the elections before the process
of the return of refugees has become irreversible and
before the proper security is ensured for all inhabitants
of the area would simply strengthen the mono-ethnic
nature of Kosovo and heighten the nationalist mood in
the area, particularly in the districts populated
primarily by Albanians, and this would happen not
only in Kosovo but elsewhere as well.

We have often said that before the election
campaign begins there must be absolute clarity in
respect of the concept of what is meant by substantial
autonomy for Kosovo within the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999). As we
understand it, that is what UNMIK is trying to
accomplish by preparing the legal framework for the
future provisional organs of self-government in
Kosovo.
Agreement on that legal framework must involve
not only the various groups in Kosovo, but also the
direct participation of Belgrade. We believe that simply
informing the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
authorities about the process is obviously not enough.

I would also like to note that in the Secretary-
General's report there is a statement to the effect that
the Kosovo Serb representative withdrew from the
Working Group on the legal framework, supposedly on
instructions from Belgrade, but as far as we know that
statement does not reflect the actual situation, which is
much more complex than that. I will not go into detail,
but I would like to note that, in any event, there must
be participation by Kosovo Serbs in the Working
Group in order to make sure that their voice is heard.

The final text of the legal framework must be
approved by the Security Council, which should also
take a decision on the timing of the holding of the
elections. In this connection, I would like to recall our
proposal that a Security Council mission should visit
Kosovo. It could also visit Belgrade and, if security
conditions so allow and the Yugoslav authorities agree,
the Presevo region as well. In our view such a mission
would be very useful if it were to take place before the
decision was taken on the legal framework and before
the elections. We would be grateful to Mr. Haekkerup
if he could perhaps give us his views about this,
including a possible time-frame for such a mission.

We are particularly concerned about the situation
in the ground safety zone in southern Serbia, and we
therefore welcome the agreements reached between the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) command and the Yugoslav side
on arrangements for returning Yugoslav army and
police units to that ground safety zone. We also note
that, in parallel, KFOR is stepping up control over the
administrative border between Kosovo and in the
Kosovo sector of the Yugoslav-Macedonian border.
Taken together, we think that these measures will be
able to put an end to the illegal activities by the
Albanian armed fighters. Incidentally, the decision on
the return of the Yugoslav armed units to the ground
safety zone shows, albeit somewhat belatedly, a
recognition that ensuring reliable security in the region
is simply not possible without the direct participation
of the Yugoslav authorities.

We hope that in this explosive situation the
Presevo Albanians who have made a commitment to
this ceasefire will strictly respect that commitment. In
that way, appropriate conditions would be established
so as to implement the programme for resolving the
crisis in southern Serbia, as proposed jointly by the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
Serbia.

Recent events in Kosovo and beyond its borders
show that Albanian extremists are calculating that
through provocation and whipping up tension in the
region they will be able to attain their own nationalist
goals by force. We welcome the steps that have been
taken, but we would like to emphasize once again that
it is necessary not only to end such actions by those
fighters, but also to provide a public assessment of
terrorist actions and of the provocative statements that
are regularly made by Kosovo Albanian leaders. We
call on the UNMIK leadership to draw attention to the
need to provide such an assessment of attempts to whip
up nationalist fervour. We must all learn from the sorry
experience of a certain overlooking of separatist
tendencies on the part of the leaders of the Kosovo
Albanians.

We would expect the UNMIK leadership, in
cooperation with KFOR, to take additional steps to
really achieve and complete the demilitarization of the
former Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) fighters so that
the so-called post-KLA structures would not be able to
have an impact on the political situation. It is also
necessary to put an end to illegal transporters'
deliveries of arms. Security Council resolution 1160
(1998) is still quite valid and applicable with regard to
interdicting attempts to bring arms into Kosovo.
Unfortunately, such activities continue. Of course, one
must not forget that the weapons being used to whip up
violence in the Presevo Valley and in Macedonia are
coming out of Kosovo. Everybody knows about this.

We are convinced that the activities begun by
UNMIK and KFOR must be continued and stepped up.
It is important to stop the expansion of this terrorism
that is being cultivated by Albanian extremists, because
otherwise the international community will simply be
faced with the outbreak of a new and even more
destructive regional crisis. We believe that the Security
Council, pursuant to its mandate, must follow closely
these threats to international peace and security in the
region and must be able to take the measures that might
prove necessary. In any event, we support the
international presence there in its efforts to implement
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), with the
understanding, naturally, that a solid system of security
in the Balkans must be based on utter respect for the
territorial integrity and inviolability of the borders of
all States in the region.

