Mr. Nesho (Albania): Allow me, at the outset, to
congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency of the
Security Council and to wish you every success.

I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno for his comprehensive briefing and
substantive remarks.
The violent events in Kosovo last month, already
strongly condemned by broad international opinion as
well as by the Kosovo people and their institutions,
indicate that both its democratic process and its future
cannot and should not be allowed to be taken hostage
by extremists of any side, nor by old nationalistic ideas
or by scenarios that may try to exploit and flourish in
destabilized situations.

On the other hand, as clearly defined in Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999), in the document on
standards and other acts of the Security Council,
Kosovo's future lies in the building of a free, multi-
ethnic and democratic society in a country that aspires
to its place within the European family. The presence
and the efforts of the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK) and KFOR clearly
reflect the determination of the international
community in that direction.

The Government of Albania reaffirms its
appreciation for the work of UNMIK and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri,
and reiterates its continuous support for their mission
in Kosovo. Albania commends NATO's quick response
in sending additional peacekeepers to Kosovo as a
clear indication of its commitment to protect peace and
stability in the region.

We have praised, as a correct reaction, the critical
analysis of the situation by the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government in Kosovo, as well as the public
commitment of the Government and Prime Minister
Rexhepi to rebuild the houses and the Orthodox
churches damaged during the violence. The Albanian
Government has immediately offered its contribution to
that endeavour. For Albanians, religious cults are part
of our common civilization and our cultural identity,
and not symbols of division and hatred.

The Albanian Government believes that the
people of Kosovo and their institutions will increase
their respectability by helping to bring to justice the
perpetrators of the violent events.

We are confident that Kosovo will continue to
cooperate closely with the international community,
UNMIK in particular, for the implementation of the
political process as defined in the Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan. Continuation of this process for
meeting the standards requires the support and
contributions of all communities to help restore
confidence and establish a constructive dialogue. A
multi-ethnic society in Kosovo can be the product only
of a sincere and broad commitment of the entire
spectrum of Kosovar society, including minorities.

The accomplishment of the Security Council's
objectives for Kosovo and the process ahead demand
serious efforts by all the relevant actors, including the
international structures there. They all - Kosovars and
their Provisional Institutions first and foremost -
should cautiously and courageously draw the right
lessons from the recent sad events. They should all
redouble their efforts for the implementation of the
standards, revitalize dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade, and adjust their approaches and strategies to
have a more practical impact on the daily lives of all
citizens in order to help achieve a clearer perspective
and to speed up the fulfilment of the standards.

These accomplishments also require the
strengthening of institutional cooperation. We think
that transferring greater power to the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo will raise
their sense of obligation and responsibility for the
better functioning of the rule of law, the fight against
organized crime and the protection of human rights and
minorities.

Albania is concerned by the increasing existence
of parallel structures in Kosovo, which impede the
establishment of a multi-ethnic society and challenge
the work of UNMIK. The March events in Kosovo, of
course, are both condemnable and intolerable, but they
should be misused neither as a rationale for such
parallel structures, or for nationalistic policies, nor as a
way of solving internal political problems.

Let me stress, as my final remark, my
Government's strong confidence in UNMIK and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Holkeri, and its full support for the policy and process
of standards in Kosovo. We share the optimism that
this process will successfully move ahead and open the
way to the indispensable solution of its final status.

