Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Peacebuilding
and peacekeeping-peacebuilding are and will remain
core activities of the Council in the immediate future.
Let me therefore begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for organizing this meeting today on post-conflict
peacebuilding. The results of such initiatives will play
a key role in determining the relevance and
effectiveness of the Council and of the larger United
Nations system in the decades to come.
Let me also thank the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) for its detailed and insightful report
(S/20ll/4l), as well as Ambassador Peter Witting,
under whose able stewardship the report was prepared
and who has presented it to us today. I also thank
Ambassador Gasana for his statement.

The Peacebuilding Commission, through its
Organizational Committee and country-specific
configurations, has a central position in the global
peacebuilding architecture. The working relationship of
the Commission, the newest organ of the United
Nations, with the Security Council and the General
Assembly is thus of critical importance.

My delegation has been a member of the
Commission since its inception. We favour close,
regular and substantive interaction among the
Commission, the Council and the Assembly so that the
United Nations can deliver as one when it comes to
setting the peacebuilding agenda.

Peacebuilding is a cooperative effort. The United
Nations requires working with other peacebuilding
actors, including international financial institutions.
My delegation has noted the growing focus on the
special characteristics of post-conflict situations
involving an increasing number of development and
economic actors. That, we expect, will have a positive
impact on peacebuilding and on the growing need for
resources for peacebuilding initiatives.

In an arena with many players, however, the
United Nations must be conscious of the need to
maintain the high ground in developing the normative
basis for peacebuilding. An international effort is under
way to understand the linkages between development,
peace and security and to suggest solutions. The
Council itself debated this issue six weeks ago under
the Brazilian presidency. We must ensure that this
effort is able to resist the temptation to create a new
peacebuilding orthodoxy. Many of these efforts end up
talking down rather than listening. That must be
avoided at all costs.

My delegation stresses that the United Nations
must play the central role in identifying a common
peacebuilding vision, in bringing together the various
actors and in acting as a bridge between national
authorities and various peacebuilding and development
actors.

Some of these issues were addressed by the
Working Group on Lessons Learned - an effort with
which we have been associated. We believe that its
conclusions - inter alia in relation to the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in marshalling resources,
on the imperative of national dialogue in post-conflict
situations and the role of young people - are
particularly relevant to the further evolution of
peacebuilding.

Peacebuilding emerged from peacekeeping. The
United Nations has made enormous investments of
manpower and resources in multidimensional
peacekeeping operations mandated to operate in fragile
States. We are now in the midst of another
paradigmatic shift into peacekeeping/peacebuilding
operations or purely peacebuilding operations.

India brings to the table the experience of almost
60 years of peacekeeping. We have contributed more
peacekeepers to more peacekeeping operations than
any other country. We have also participated in every
type of peacekeeping operation, from truce supervision
to the current generation of purely peacebuilding
initiatives.

Based on this experience, my delegation stresses
that peacekeeping is early peacebuilding. Our
peacekeepers in the United Nations Transitional
Authority in Cambodia, the United Nations Operation
in Somalia II, the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan, the United Nations
Mission in Liberia and the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti have been early peacebuilders. We
believe that the process of implementing a peace
agreement must run side by side with the provision of
humanitarian and emergency assistance; with the
creation of political institutions that can resolve
conflicts, reconcile parties to conflicts and allow
dialogue between the State and the governed; with
security sector reform; with administrative and
economic restructuring; and with empowering the
weak, building a human rights culture and resuming
economic activity.

National ownership is the key determinant of
success in peacebuilding. The international community
can encourage, motivate and facilitate. It cannot solve
those problems which require national will and
national ownership.

We believe, however, that the international
community has the duty to make available appropriate
capacities to national authorities. The solutions and
capacities that these authorities seek are those that
have been tried and tested in similar environments
elsewhere. Countries like India have successfully
surmounted many of the challenges that have produced
these conflicts. The shared colonial legacy that
produced these challenges and our experience and that
of other nations which have faced similar difficulties
has particular relevance to the problem at hand. The
success of the all-female Indian formed police unit in
Liberia is a good example of how the capacities and
experience of the global South can be leveraged in
peacebuilding situations.

It is also the responsibility of the international
community to provide the resources. Complex
peacekeeping operations usually have a lifespan that is
measured in years. Peacebuilding operations will last
for decades and require a predictable and appropriate
level of resources over extended periods of time.

India strongly supports the role and relevance of
regional players in post-conflict scenarios. We are
greatly encouraged by the African Union's efforts to
develop post-conflict reconstruction capacities. The
success of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development and the African Peer Review Mechanism
has many lessons that are relevant to the strengthening
of national ownership.

The Secretariat and the funds and programmes
must do a great deal more to become effective players.
Skill sets and expertise that are relevant to these
societies need to be augmented. In an earlier debate, I
spoke about the ponderous nature of the United
Nations bureaucracy and pointed out that an
organization that takes up to 200 days to fill positions
in the field can hardly be a model worthy of emulation
when it comes to institution-building.

In concluding, I would like to point out that India
has engaged bilaterally with a number of nations on the
peacekeeping/peacebuilding agenda in response to
national requirements. We also have contributed, along
with my fellow delegations of Brazil and South Africa,
through plurilateral mechanisms, such as the India,
Brazil and South Africa Trilateral initiative, that are
active in peacebuilding. We are committed to this
process and will continue to remain fully engaged.

