Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): As
usual, the Permanent Representative of Israel to the
United Nations has taken the lead in making statements
that are so negative and self-contradictory that there is
no option but to respond. In our opinion, the statement
by the Permanent Representative of Israel yesterday
was worse than what we are used to. It was so full of
contradictions and, I would perhaps also say, lies -
claiming that Israel's actions are in conformity with
international law and that Orient House was used for
terrorist purposes, et cetera - that we thought we
would not respond to it. It was, in brief, a statement
that was not worthy of response.

Despite that and despite the statement made
yesterday, something related to the integrity of the
Secretariat of the United Nations caught my attention.
Yesterday, the Permanent Representative of Israel
talked about a report by the fact-finding mission on the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
and criticized it. I simply ask: is there a report
unknown to everyone save the Permanent
Representative of Israel, or is there a report that was
distributed to some Member States and not to others?
Probably the ladies and gentlemen in the Secretariat of
the United Nations could enlighten us in this regard.
What is the real status of the report to which the
Permanent Representative of Israel made reference?
And how could he have read that report if it was not a
general document available to all Member States of the
United Nations?
Going back to the statements of the Permanent
Representative of Israel, I will say that in his statement
today, though his French language is far better than his
English, the meanings are essentially not different from
those of yesterday's statement. It seems that the
Permanent Representative of Israel did not understand
the interventions of more than 50 speakers, including
the 15 members of the Security Council.

I may be wrong, but it seems to me that the
overwhelming majority of the members of the Security
Council, if not all of them, did support the idea that the
Security Council must do something specific and
tangible. The majority, if not all, supported the full
implementation of the recommendations of the
Mitchell report without any conditions. The
overwhelming majority support the establishment of a
monitoring mechanism to help in the implementation
of those recommendations. Regarding the situation on
the ground, the majority was against the bombings that
took place in Israel. This again is our position, as well.
There was a majority against the oppressive measures
taken by Israel against the Palestinian people, a
majority against collective punishment and the closure
of areas, against Israeli occupation of Orient House and
other Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem, and a
majority against extra-judiciary killings and all such
measures. Most importantly, an overwhelming majority
was against the Israeli occupation.

Despite all this, the Permanent Representative of
Israel tells us today that the Mitchell recommendations
could be implemented if the violence stops. Again, the
same logic is used to assume that calm could lead to
the implementation of the recommendations, and not
the fact that implementing the recommendations will
help de-escalate the situation. This is the logic of
someone who does not accept this report and who is
not at all keen on implementing those
recommendations.

It must be said that with the same arrogance and
disdain in addressing others, whatever their viewpoints
may be, the Permanent Representative of Israel has
referred to The New York Times today. Of course, The
New York Times cannot be accused of supporting
Palestinian positions. I do not know how he felt when
he read the editorial in The New York Times and the
front-page article on the Israeli checkpoints and how
these checkpoints make the life of the entire Palestinian
populations hellish.

Is it not time for some moderation on the part of
the Israelis? Is it not time for some honesty,
introspection, some sort of respect for the international
community, and some change from the previous
positions, which will only lead us all to catastrophe?

The Israeli position extends even to the draft
resolution, which was tabled informally - it has not
yet been formally tabled for the members of the
Security Council. Illogical and irrational criticism was
directed at its language. This informal draft contains
language agreed to by the entire membership of the
Security Council last March. In fact, some deletions
were made in the language agreed upon. Some issues
opposed by one member of the Security Council were
deleted, of course. The purpose was to attempt to have
that member change its position. The draft resolution is
not a Palestinian position, nor is it an Arab position. It
is, however, a Palestinian attempt to remind the
members of the Security Council what they agreed
upon last March. What is the problem here with calling
for the implementation of the recommendations of the
Mitchell report or calling for an observer mechanism
and the resumption of the peace process? What is the
problem with this, except for some strange notions that
the resolution uses language that takes the side of the
Palestinians? What is the meaning of all this?

Quite frankly, we hope that the Council will take
all this into consideration, that it will take into
consideration the language submitted to it in the draft
resolution and the positions of the Members of the
United Nations. We also hope it will take into account
the deep sense of frustration among many of the
Members due to the lack of action by the Council on
this situation and its lack of commitment and non-
fulfilment of its responsibilities as contained in the
Charter of the United Nations. We hope that this will
be the end result.

Finally, I should like to comment on the possible
meeting between Arafat and Peres. The Palestinian side
has never opposed such a meeting - it has never
opposed serious dialogue. The problem has been on the
Israeli side. Were such a meeting to occur - neither
the time nor the place for such a meeting has been
determined - it would be subject to certain conditions
dictated by the Prime Minister of Israel: no serious
political questions could be discussed, but only issues
related to the current security situation on the ground.

Frankly speaking, we do not believe that a
meeting held in such circumstances would change
anything, even though we will try. We have tried before
and we will continue to try. However, if we are to be
successful there must be a real change in the Israeli
position - a change that will lead to different results, a
change based on a political vision, not on manoeuvres
aimed at hoodwinking the international community and
at further eroding the Palestinian position.

We have not yet lost hope. However, if our hopes
are to be fulfilled, we need the help of the Council. We
appeal to the members of the Council, as
representatives of the international community, to act
in accordance with their duties and responsibilities
under the Charter.

