Ms. Shalev (Israel): This month has proven to be
a complicated one. Allow me to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate. I further wish to thank Under-
Secretary-General John Holmes for his informative
briefing and to thank him and his team for their
important and ongoing humanitarian work, in
particular in our region at the present difficult time.

This debate is, to be sure, considering a wide
range of issues related to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. All of them are important. Yet there
exists one major threat, one distinct danger to civilians,
that the Security Council must not and cannot ignore:
terrorism. Terrorism causes enormous harm to civilians
in armed conflict. Terrorism turns civilians into targets,
shields and weapons. "Acts, methods and practices of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations are
activities aimed at the destruction of human rights"
(A/CONFJ57/23, attachment, part 1, para. 13: so stated the United Nations in clear and unambiguous
terms.

Nowhere is this more apparent than in Hamas's
terrorist war against Israeli civilians and the Palestinian
people.

It is on Israeli civilians that Hamas rockets rained
down for eight long years. For more than one million
Israelis, daily life included rocket and mortar attacks
against houses, schools, kindergartens, markets and all
forms of civilian life.

These are not indiscriminate attacks as some like
to classify them. Hamas's attacks are very
discriminate: directed deliberately at civilians - men,
women and children. These attacks kill and maim
Israelis, creating a living nightmare, a nightmare that
forced Israel to act in self-defence.

As Hamas launches those attacks, they cower
behind Palestinian civilians, knowing full well the
danger they invite. Civilian casualties in Gaza, as a
result, are the heartbreaking consequence and sole
responsibility of Hamas's terrorist actions. Hamas
hides weapons and explosives in mosques and uses
minarets to launch attacks. What kind of person, we
must ask, uses a house of prayer as a weapons depot?
The answer is Hamas terrorists.

Evidence against Hamas abounds. Hamas
terrorists launched rockets from school yards and
rigged Palestinian schools with explosives as booby traps.
What kind of person, we must ask, uses schools - places
where children gather - as a battlefield? The answer
is Hamas terrorists.

Hamas commanders and leaders set up shop in
the basement of Gaza's largest hospital, the Shifa
hospital. Hamas fighters and members have entered
hospitals and donned doctors' coats in an effort to
blend into the civilians of Gaza. What kind of person,
we must ask, uses hospitals to cower behind injured
civilians? The answer is the same: Hamas terrorists.

As Israel has facilitated the movement of
humanitarian aid into the Gaza Strip - more than 800
trucks totalling over 25,000 tons of aid - there are
repeated and horrifying reports that Hamas terrorists
have seized aid, distributing it to its own members and
supporters and selling what is left to the impoverished
civilians. What kind of person, we must ask,
confiscates humanitarian supplies from civilians in a
conflict zone? The answer is the same again: Hamas
terrorists.

It is Hamas and terrorists like it that view
civilians not as a population to be avoided in an armed
conflict but as a population to be exploited in an armed
conflict.

We must use today's debate to ensure that we
denounce the harm that terrorism inflicts on civilians.
In recent years, more civilians were killed, maimed and
injured by terrorists than by legitimate armed forces.
And we must act against terrorists and their inhumane
methods. Failure to act simply because terrorists are
using civilians as cover would broadcast an invitation
to every terrorist group in the world to set up shop
inside a hospital or a kindergarten.

Hamas's despicable and cynical use of targeting
civilians is an appalling example of the toll that
terrorism takes on all civilians. When civilized people
look at children, they see the future. When terrorists
look at children, they see targets and human shields.
The Security Council must offer no refuge to those
who drag civilians into armed conflicts.

