Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, the Russian delegation too
would like to express its gratitude to the Presidents and
Prosecutors of both Tribunals for today's briefings and
for the reports submitted to the Council, pursuant to
resolution 1534 (2004). On the whole, we agree with
the positive evaluations of the Tribunals' activities, and
we note with satisfaction that since the last Security
Council discussion, in November 2004, of the
implementation of the completion strategies of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), there has generally been
a marked improvement in effectiveness in all key
areas.

We continue to advocate the mobilization of all
resources and the use of all possibilities to ensure
scrupulous implementation of the completion strategies
of the Tribunals within the time frame set by the
Security Council. In that connection, we welcome the
establishment of the two Working Groups of Judges.
One way in which the Tribunals could be helped to
meet the completion strategies' time frame would be
the creation of conditions for the transfer of medium
and low-level defendants to national courts. In that
connection, I would like to point out the growing
efforts to strengthening the capacity of the judicial
bodies of the republics of the former Yugoslavia.

We welcome the inauguration on 9 March of the
War Crimes Chamber of the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to which the ICTY has already referred
one case for consideration. We look forward to its
successful work. The Tribunal and the States of the
region should intensify their cooperation in expediting
the transfer of defendants to the judicial bodies of other
countries, in particular Croatia and Serbia and
Montenegro. In that regard, we have great expectations
with regard to strengthened cooperation between States
and the Tribunals. This pertains first and foremost to
the ICTY, which at previous stages has had particular
difficulties in that regard.

Regarding the Russian Federation, official
information transmitted to Russia on the alleged
presence on its territory of individuals sought by the
ICTY will be brought to the attention of the authorities
immediately; the search is under way. At present,
endeavours are taking place to search for Djordjevic
and Zelenovic. On the whole, we are convinced of the
need to seek out those individuals who have been
indicted and are accused of committing crimes that fall
under the jurisdiction of the ICTY and the ICTR, and
we are prepared to further render assistance to the
Tribunals in completing these tasks.

In conclusion, I would like to mention one
current issue: the forthcoming election of ad litem
judges to the ICTY. As members know, 11 June marked
the expiration of the term of office of the judges in that
category, with the exception of nine judges who,
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1581 (2005),
will continue their work until the conclusion of the
cases on which they are engaged. The Security Council
has already repeatedly extended the deadline for
nominations, but the number of candidates is still much
lower than the minimum required by the ICTY Statute
for the holding of elections.

This gives us cause for serious concern, since the
ability to involve ad litem judges in trials in a timely
manner is of great importance for maintaining the pace
of the Tribunal's work, and, in the final analysis, for
the successful implementation of its completion
strategy.

Unfortunately, no views were expressed here
regarding the reasons for that. In our View, the Security
Council should have a clear understanding of whether
the prestige of the Tribunals' judges has been
diminished, and of why this is happening. We would
explain that phenomenon by the international
community's fatigue with regard to ad hoc tribunals.
We view that as a strong signal that we should not
delay the work of the Tribunals. Perhaps, given that
situation, the Council should seek alternative solutions.
We would like to hear the View of the Tribunal officials
on that issue.

