Mr. Kubis: I am very honoured to brief the
Security Council for the first time in my new capacity
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). Allow me to give the Council
some impressions and findings based on the first two
months of my work in that new capacity.

First of all, 10 years after the creation of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, we
face a set of ground realities that is very different from
those we found at the beginning. The international
military presence is gradually transferring full security
responsibility in Afghanistan to the Afghan National
2

Security Forces and will finish its current mission by
the end of 2014. Efforts continue to make institutions
of national and sub-national governance increasingly
capable of providing governance, the rule of law,
development and social services to the population, in
order to ensure their fundamental rights and freedoms.
Voices in support of Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
peace and reconciliation are stronger, both from the
various parts of Afghan society and from the region.

The profile and work of the United Nations in
Afghanistan must reflect those realities and take full
account of the principles and requirements of the
transition process. Active support of those positive
trends and developments, in partnership with Afghan
authorities and society, must be at the very core of the
way we work.

During the first two months of my work in
Afghanistan, I met Government officials, political
leaders and civil society actors in Kabul and the
provinces and across the region. Starting with
President Karzai, each and every individual offered me
a warm welcome. If there was one thing I drew hope
from, it was the strong expressions of the desire for
peace. The message of the people is clear - it is time
to wind down this war.

News about the nascent peace process has
prompted a lively debate that needs to be harnessed
and fed into constructive policymaking. Under the
People's Dialogue supported by UNAMA, Afghans
across the country share their vision of and road map
for a peace process. The Dialogue also revealed that
corruption, lack of justice and abuse of authority are
seen by many as the biggest problem facing ordinary
people, coupled with a lack of work prospects for the
growing urban population of young people.

Another important point I drew from my
meetings was a near universal recognition of the value
of the United Nations work and a great desire for
UNAMA's continued presence.

Finally, I need to mention the recent tragedies
that marked my first weeks in Afghanistan. I again
offer my condolences and sympathies to the families of
all casualties of the recent instances of violence, be it
civilian or military. And I applaud the commitment to
full accountability.

At the same time, I passionately emphasize the
need for non-violent means of protest, even in response
12-26920
to such grave, albeit unintentional mistakes as the
recent burning of the Holy Quran. I commend the
appeals and actions of the majority of religious leaders
and community elders, who ensured that deep anger
was expressed at peaceful community gatherings. And
I condemn the sermons and appeals of those few who
called for violence. They have only brought death and
destruction, first and foremost to Afghans.

A series of killings also targeted international
troops there to help and train Afghan forces and
institutions. This is unacceptable. Such malicious acts
have potentially profound implications for these
essential efforts, for public support and for the
enduring commitment of the international community
to assisting Afghanistan and its people.

The United Nations has also been singled out for
violence by some. Notably, the UNAMA office in
Kunduz was directly attacked, which brought back
frightening memories of the seven dear colleagues of
ours killed a year ago in similar circumstances in
Mazar-e Sharif. The timely actions of the Afghan
National Security Forces ensured that no United
Nations personnel were hurt, but six persons lost their
lives. We regret these losses.

In response, international staff members have
been temporarily relocated while security is reassessed.
This may have an impact on some programmes in the
short term, and local leaders have already issued
statements appealing for their return. However, the
security of all our staff, national and international, is of
critical importance. We continue to work with the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), and
increasingly with the Afghan authorities, to address
this. I expect, and indeed request, the support and
understanding of the Afghan authorities for our
security requirements. They are sine qua non for our
continuous work and presence in the country.

Regardless of those recent tragedies, let us not
loose perspective. Recent events should not eclipse or
overshadow positive trends and developments or push
the international community, Afghanistan or the
transition process off agreed plans and timetables. The
transition so far has been on track and on target, and
the Afghan National Security Forces have so far proven
that they are up to their tasks. The Chicago summit
should firm up these developments and plans by
reaching specific and solid commitments. The absence
of such commitments would be a setback to the
12-26920
transition and stability in Afghanistan and the region.
In looking to the future, we must demonstrate that we
have learned from our mistakes of the past.

Transition, however, also encompasses
accelerated Afghan leadership, responsibility and
accountability in governance, the rule of law, justice,
economic development and combating corruption and
poverty, to name but a few. Stronger efforts in
combating drug production and trafficking are
critically important, given the increase in poppy
cultivation and opium production and the consequent
increased threat to security, stability, development and
governance in Afghanistan and the region. Security
gains must be supported by progress in these areas to
make them and the transition sustainable.

Last year's international conference in Bonn saw
commitment to enduring partnership also during the
transformation decade beyond the 2014. Mutual
commitments need to be respected by both the
international community and Afghanistan. The
challenge now is to translate political commitments
into predictable funding for the national priority
programmes, and to define a follow up mechanism for
mutual accountability between Government and its
partners for the coming decade. Tokyo will provide that
opportunity. In the coming months, the Government
and its international partners must intensify their
engagement to ensure that properly sequenced national
priority programmes serve as the basis for strategic
public and private funding and the achievement of
development outcomes identified by the Government
as fundamental to self-reliance.

Long-term support and predictability are further
enhanced by a number of comprehensive partnership
agreements between Afghanistan and its bilateral
partners. This process continues. UNAMA is working
consistently for coherent approaches on the part of the
international community in support of Afghanistan's
development and governance challenges, including as
co-chair of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board.

Many of my Afghan interlocutors have placed
emphasis on the 2014 presidential polls. Already the
focus of intense debate and political mobilization, the
leadership change coincides with the planned
culmination of the security transfer. Elections are an
Afghan process to be managed by independent Afghan
electoral management bodies. If the results are to be
3

trusted, the majority of my Afghan partners gave me a
clear message - there is a need to strengthen and
improve Afghanistan's electoral process, including
electoral reform, in order to increase its sustainability,
integrity, transparency and inclusiveness. A United
Nations supporting role, at the request of the Afghan
authorities, is welcome and, indeed, needed.

The value of UNAMA's human rights work has
been repeatedly emphasized to me by all parties. As
confirmed by UNAMA's impartial tracking and
verification of civilian casualties, 2011 was the fifth
year in a row that civilian deaths rose. Insurgent tactics
of suicide attacks and the use of victim-activated
pressure-plate improvised explosive devices account
for the majority of this toll. This is unacceptable and
contradicts even the publicly declared ban on land
mines by anti-Government forces.

Improvements in the condition of Afghan
detention centres and a reduction in the torture and
mistreatment of detainees are another concrete
outcome of our efforts. Both ISAF and Afghan
authorities have undertaken measures to address
abusive practices in Afghan detention facilities. It is
important to build on gains made to date.

In spite of legal and constitutional protections for
women, violence against women and girls remains
pervasive in Afghanistan. Improvements require the
enforcement of laws - notably the law on the
elimination of violence against women - that
criminalize and penalize violence and harmful
practices against women and girls. UNAMA will
continue to work to improve protection and to promote
the rights of Afghan women, including their
participation in public life and peace and reconciliation
processes and with regard to equal opportunities in
education and employment. Similarly, we will continue
our work for the benefit of Afghan children.

Recent months have seen some potentially
positive developments in support of peace and
reconciliation. To turn that potential into a successful
process, efforts must first of all be fully Afghan-led,
but also comprehensive and genuinely inclusive and
involve representatives of all relevant forces and
segments of Afghan society. At the same time, peace
should not be achieved at the expense of the basic
achievements of the past decade, as confirmed by the
Kabul communique and the Bonn Conference. In
moving towards a peace process, reducing civilian
deaths and injuries should be of the highest priority.

A much repeated request has been for UNAMA to
continue to support the High Peace Council and
generally make use of its good offices and services in
support of peace and reconciliation. Many have called
for a United Nations role in those nascent processes,
and there are different ideas on what form and shape
that could take and when.

Support for Afghanistan in the region has gained
momentum, as reflected, among other similar efforts,
by the recently held trilateral summit at Islamabad
between the leaders of Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan,
who spoke in favour of an Afghan-led peace process. I
have been particularly impressed with the Afghan
leadership of the regionally owned Istanbul process, as
well as with how the process is progressing. I also
welcome the commitment of the supporting countries.
The work currently focuses on seven specific
confidence-building measures and on preparations for
the Kabul ministerial meeting in June, which will be
preceded next week by an important meeting in
Dushanbe of the Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan.

My recent visits to Pakistan, Turkmenistan, India
and Iran provided invaluable opportunities for an
exchange of views on the support of those countries for
Afghanistan and UNAMA. We spoke about
opportunities, but I also heard words of strong concern.
I would like to thank those countries for the valuable
meetings and for their hospitality.

One of my top priorities is to ensure greater
coherence of United Nations efforts in all areas -
pragmatic, operational and policy - and to ensure that
our activities are outcome-oriented, transparent and
cost-effective. My deputy, Mr. Michael Keating, is
working with the entire United Nations system to
ensure full United Nations alignment behind a national
development strategy and the national priority
programmes, which will serve as the basis for the
United Nations pragmatic and operational coherence.
As Humanitarian Coordinator, he is working with the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to
promote and provide practical support for an effective
response to humanitarian needs, whether as a result of
chronic vulnerability, disasters or conflict. Also,
decades-long ongoing problems with regard to refugees
and internally displaced persons should be addressed
12-26920
on the basis of sustainable solutions that link
humanitarian efforts with development.

From the beginning of my work in Kabul, I have
been clear that the Mission and the 28 United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes present in
Afghanistan must work in support of increasing the
capacity of Afghan authorities, institutions and systems
to meet the needs of the Afghan people. That will also
guide my work in the future.

