Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the delegation of Benin, I wish to express our great
appreciation to Ambassador Motoc of Romania for his
dedication and the professional approach he has taken
towards the great responsibility entrusted to him by the
Security Council. Under his able guidance, the
Committee established to ensure and monitor
implementation of Security Council resolution 1540
(2004) has now organized its work and adopted the

basic documents it needs to ensure its functioning.

The Chairman's first report to the Council clearly
shows the methodical approach he has taken towards
the work of the Committee. The Committee has
established its structure, taking into account the
complexity of its task and the sense of urgency
required in order to eliminate the risk of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and to
ensure that such weapons are neither acquired by non-
State actors nor fall into the hands of terrorists.

Members of the Committee participated
constructively and productively in the lively
discussions on the resolution. The international
community is in agreement as to the relevancy and
usefulness of the resolution as a way of filling the legal
gaps identified within the international instruments that
seek to deal with the problem of the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction.

We confirm our commitment to the Council's
goals, which are that States should take appropriate
measures as part of collective and vigilant efforts to
combat that particularly worrisome threat, which could
give rise to such extensive destruction. We would urge
the Governments of Member States to follow up on the
resolution and to rationalize their domestic measures
for monitoring the production and transfer of sensitive
materials. We believe that since the adoption of the
resolution, Member States have become fully aware of
what is at stake and have rightly perceived the need for
all involved to actively and fully participate in the
ongoing and cooperative efforts to prevent any illegal
transfers of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery.

I would recall the importance of the presentation
of the first report pursuant to the resolution. This report
will enable us to assess national policies' alignment
with the objectives of the resolution. We welcome the
diligence of those States that have already submitted
their initial reports. Those reports provide the
Committee with information that is critical for
assessing States' efforts to implement the resolution for
the benefit of all.

