Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Madam President, for giving us the
opportunity today to hear some of those who were
at the front line of the response to the epidemic and
reconstruction and development efforts of the countries
affected. Their opinions and views are essential to
Member States in making informed decisions on the
steps to take in the future in order to put an end to
the final remnants of the epidemic and in helping to
strengthen the response and adaptation capacity of the
local, regional and national authorities and institutions.

Today, Dr. Chan has sent us a very optimistic
message. Naturally, we share that optimism, which
is the result of a series of assertive decisions made
over the past months and year. One of those is clearly
illustrated by the example of Nigeria's swift and
transparent reaction when the threat of Ebola crossed
its borders. That was a model of good practices from
which we all need to draw the appropriate lessons. The
initiatives aimed at strengthening regional cooperation
mechanisms are also extremely encouraging. Those
include the initiatives of the Mano River Union, the
Economic Community of West African States and, in
particular, the African Union, which Ambassador Tete
Antonio has just outlined for us. Furthermore, it is
important to acknowledge the recovery plans that were
presented at the high-level conference convened by the
Secretary-General by the affected countries of Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone. Spain fully endorses those
recovery plans.

We find ourselves at a time of cautious optimism.
Thanks to the work of thousands of professionals and
volunteers, many of whom have given their lives, we are
closer to the end of the crisis. Above all, this has been
made possible thanks to the work and commitment of
local communities, as Dr. Fallah and Dr. Nabarro have
described so eloquently, which have made it possible
for us to speak today of being close to the end of the
crisis. We are close to the end, but not there yet. As
several speakers have stated, we must not let down our
guard. While Ebola is no longer in the headlines and
the number of infections fell to zero only a short while
ago, we need to be aware that the Ebola virus has not
disappeared but remains hidden, and we need to be
prepared for it.

We have spoken at length today of the need to be
prepared, and preparation should accordingly focus on
three areas. First, we should focus on research. We have
had very encouraging news about the new experimental
vaccine, and Spain is strongly committed to the new
initiative, which will make it possible - once properly
tested and verified - for the vaccine to be made
available to all those in a vulnerable situation.

The second area of preparedness is, as we have
just heard, the need to make rapid response resources
constantly ready for deployment on the ground. The
United Nations has had ample experience in this area
over the past year that should enable us to determine
where we have succeeded and where we need to
improve.

Thirdly, we need to focus on the rebuilding and
improving of the health-care systems of the countries
most affected and of those that could be vulnerable in
the future. We need to recognize that local health-care
assistance and regional assistance at the first signs of
an outbreak of an epidemic are two of the weakest links
in the chain. Once acknowledged, it is essential that we
strengthen our focus to try to solve those problems.

Exactly one year ago today, the Spanish priest
Miguel Pajares died in Madrid. Just a few weeks later,
another Spanish priest succumbed to Ebola. Both men
gave their lives helping those affected in Liberia, and
through their memory I pay tribute to all the victims
of the epidemic and all the humanitarian workers who
have paid with their lives in that crisis and in others.

A year ago, the impact of the virus demonstrated
that it could spread beyond the countries immediately
affected. We also realized that the crisis had become
more than just a localized health emergency. That
led the Security Council to take action. At the time,
although not a member of the Security Council, Spain
co-sponsored resolution 2177 (2014), which was a
milestone in the evolution of the Council itself. Spain
co-sponsored the resolution because we thought at that
time - as we still do - that the concept of threats
to international peace and security should cover not
only traditional threats, but also others that, like the
Ebola epidemic, could threaten millions of lives and
the stability of entire regions and countries that, in
many cases, are already vulnerable and fragile, thereby
undermining post-conflict achievements and undo
progress towards sustainable development.

The cases of Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia
have been exemplary models in that regard. We
therefore believe that any security sector reform in
those countries, or any plan for stabilization or border
management, cross-border mechanisms for fighting
organized crime or the trafficking of illicit goods and
drugs - in short, anything that could pose a threat to
peace and security - must resolutely take into account
the new threat of an epidemic or pandemic that, while
starting off as a health issue, has a far broader impact.

In that area, I fear that our attitude has been more
reactive than proactive. I shall therefore conclude by
stating my belief that it would be a good idea for the
Council to consider how we could better incorporate the
lessons learned from this crisis into the peacebuilding
architecture and into Peacebuilding Commission, in
particular. That would be the question that I ask on the
issues raised today.

