Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): I commend the convening of this
important meeting and thank the speakers for their
valuable briefings. I should also like to thank, in
particular, Minister Annen and you, Madam, for your
presence today.

Seventy years after the adoption of the Geneva
Conventions and 20 years after the Council placed the
protection of civilians at the centre of its agenda, it is
still relevant - perhaps more than ever - to address
the impact of armed conflicts on the civilian population,
as well as the serious human consequences that derive
from violations of international humanitarian law. It is
still relevant also because in too many existing contexts,
defenceless populations are caught in the middle of
confrontations between non-State armed groups or
under the yoke of terrorist groups that respond to no
rule other than the use of those populations to further
their nefarious aspirations.

Also, and all too frequently, the affected States
Violate their obligations under international law and
undertake military offensives that obviate their priority
role of protecting and safeguarding the human rights
of all persons within their territory and jurisdiction.
That has resulted in the fact that the majority of
those killed in today's conflicts are civilians and that
vulnerable groups such as women, children and people
with disabilities become objects of aberrant war tactics
such as starvation, trafficking and sexual violence. For
example, at this very moment in Yemen, impediments
to humanitarian access are putting more than 12 million
people at risk offamine, mostly children. That must stop.

We emphasize that the absence of solutions
and policies and the inability of the international
community at all levels to effectively address the root
causes of conflicts remain determining factors in the
rise of insecurity, social instability and the proliferation
of violence. All of that indicates that much remains to
be done.

We wish to highlight the important progress
made by the Security Council in adopting protection
mandates for peacekeeping missions that are adapted
to the civilian populations they serve. We also believe
that the Council has managed to make progress towards
a better coordination of the United Nations protection
system, and we stress that the protection of civilians
concerns not only the humanitarian sphere but also
the areas of peacekeeping and human rights, the rule
of law, security, disarmament and development. We
also recognize that the protection of civilians also
requires the reduction of the prevalence and risk of
war. In this regard, we emphasize the importance of
high-quality education and the role of young people in
the construction of a culture of peace, tolerance and
social cohesion.

We cannot fail to recognize as a significant step
the Council's establishment of monitoring mechanisms
in compliance with the protection mandates of
peacekeeping missions. That step is both a recognition
of the need for mandates to be adapted to the often-
changing reality on the ground and a means of
strengthening the preventive approach by which many
lives can be saved.

The particular needs of women and girls in armed
conflict must remain systematically at the centre of
humanitarian action and of the decisions and mandates
of the Security Council. That is why the deployment
in missions of advisers for the protection of women
and children is fundamental, as are the monitoring and
reporting mechanisms I mentioned.

People with disabilities are among the least
accessible and most needy members of a community,
with restricted mobility and communication and
informational barriers. Ensuring the adequate protection
of persons with disabilities in armed conflicts requires
a well-integrated and implemented policy approach that
produces solutions based on the realities on the ground.
We also believe it is vital to collect population data on
disabilities and other information that can better inform
humanitarian responses and protection activities.

Young people in conflict are exposed to numerous
risks and violence in many forms, especially considering
that there is no legal mechanism or framework that
ensures the rights and specific needs of young people.
The Security Council could fill that gap. Young people
tend to be the first targets of armed or extremist
groups as well as being victims of social exclusion
and injustice. Protecting their lives and human rights
must therefore be a priority, and that includes the lives
and human rights of young peacemakers, human rights
defenders and members of youth organizations, who
are liable to face reprisals for their work. We therefore
hope that all of the Secretary-General's reports on the
protection of civilians and on specific countries will
include provisions relating to the situation of young
people on the ground.

In the face of a global humanitarian context of
growing and varied needs, many humanitarian actors
must provide assistance in conditions of extreme
insecurity, which limits their access to the affected
populations. Many have lost their lives in the service
of the most vulnerable. We therefore reiterate that it
is essential to guarantee their protection, security and
free movement as they carry out their functions. We
specifically want to highlight the importance of taking
every possible measure to protect medical personnel
and infrastructure in armed conflict and ensure that
those who carry out indiscriminate attacks on them are
duly brought to justice. In that context, we underscore
that the scourge of impunity and lack of accountability
significantly undermines the protection-of-civilians
agenda. We must be firm in ensuring that the
perpetrators of violations of international humanitarian
law, and human rights and refugee law, are prosecuted
and pay for their acts.

In conclusion, the Dominican Republic believes
that any action aimed at protecting civilian populations
in armed conflict should be undertaken in full respect
of human dignity and on a basis of impartiality,
inclusion and the specific needs of the populations they
serve, and thereby contribute to the welfare of the most
vulnerable in order to facilitate their recovery and give
them a better future.

