Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): It is my
pleasure at the outset to welcome Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and thank him for his
informative briefing on drug trafficking in West Africa
and its impact on security and stability in the region. I
also thank the presidency for convening this meeting in
order to address an extremely important issue related
to security and stability in West African States.

On Monday, the Security Council heard a
briefing by Mr. Fedotov (see S/PV.8426), in which he
underscored the close interrelationship between drugs
and instability in Afghanistan. We are of the View that
the same applies to West Africa as well. Continued
instability in certain States of the region creates an
environment that could be exploited by organized
criminal groups to step up illegal drug trafficking,
and gives them the opportunity to strengthen the use
of commercial routes to forward drugs to their final
destinations. Those groups use some States of the
region as drug distribution centres, especially since its
geographic location puts it strategically at the heart of
established trade routes and networks.

There is an inherent relationship between
corruption and drug trafficking. Political and security
instability in certain States of the region directly
contributes to facilitating drug trafficking. Weak
Governments and failure to enforce the law in certain
States allow criminal groups to use the region as part
oftheir criminal network. Therefore, the focus must be
on building the capacities of West African States.

We appreciate the efforts that are being made by
the United Nations through UNODC and the United
Nations Office for West Africa. We also appreciate
the efforts of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) to combat drug trafficking.
We would like to point in that regard to its Regional
Response Action Plan to address the growing problem
of illicit drug trafficking, organized crime and drug
abuse in West Africa for the period from 2016 to 2020,
and we call on the States of the region to continue their
efforts to implement it. We welcome the ECOWAS
Drug Unit's recent meeting in November on the issue.

We also welcome the midterm report of the
UNODC Regional Programme for West Africa, which
covers the most recent developments regarding efforts
by regional countries to enhance their capacities to
combat these threats. We commend the 924 activities
that UNODC carried out between July 2016 and July
of this year, and we urge the Office to continue its
efforts to advance the priorities outlined in the report,

including combating corruption, strengtheningjudicial
frameworks and supporting the Group of Five for the
Sahel in the area of cooperation between the police and
the judiciary.

In conclusion, the West African region has great
potential that if used well can undoubtedly bring about
steady increases in economic growth and development.
However, it is also facing many challenges, particularly
the presence of armed groups and illicit trafficking
networks, that threaten some States' stability and
security. We commend and encourage UNODC in its
efforts to combat transboundary crimes and the United
Nations Office for West Africa for its contribution to
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, with a View to achieving
stability and development for the peoples of the region.
We fully support their work in that regard.

