Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic is
pleased, Mr. Minister, to see you presiding over this
open meeting of the Security Council to discuss the
report of the Council mission to Ethiopia and Eritrea.
We appreciate the contribution of your friendly
country, which provided the facilities needed to ensure
the mission's success.

Let me also express our profound appreciation for
the enormous efforts of Ambassador Ole Peter Kolby,
who led the Security Council mission to Ethiopia and
Eritrea with success. We listened carefully to his
presentation of the mission's detailed report to the
Council.

The Syrian Arab Republic agrees with previous
speakers that this was a timely mission, taking place
soon before the decision of the Boundary Commission
that will demarcate the border between Ethiopia and
Eritrea by the end of this month. My delegation feels
that the message sent by the mission to both parties
was a direct reflection of the interest of the
international community and of the Security Council in
reaching a peaceful settlement of the situation of
conflict between the two countries. That conflict has
cost thousands of lives and has displaced many
innocent civilians on both sides.

We are confident that peace based on justice and
on the principles of international law will ultimately
lead to building relations founded on equality and
mutual respect between the two countries. Such a peace
would also help promote friendship and development
between the two neighbouring peoples.

Syria welcomes the possibility of a legal
settlement on the boundary in the near future, in
accordance with the Algiers Agreements. We commend
the leaders of the two countries for their statements
confirming their readiness to accept the decision of the
Boundary Commission. That demonstrates the
commitment of the two parties to the peace process.

My delegation pays tribute here to the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) for
the role it is playing, in cooperation with the two
parties, to improve the living conditions of the
population, especially in the Temporary Security Zone.
In that regard, my delegation is confident that the two
parties will fully cooperate with UNMEE in working
towards a common understanding on ways and means
to implement the forthcoming decision of the Boundary
Commission.

The report of the Council mission to Ethiopia and
Eritrea is comprehensive, transparently reporting on all
the mission's activities. We believe that the
observations and recommendations set out in part IV of
the report deserve the full attention of the Council and
of the two neighbouring countries. In particular, my
delegation supports the mission's appeal to the
guarantors, the facilitators and the witnesses of the
peace process, the Organization of African Unity and
the friends of Eritrea and Ethiopia to continue to
intensify their contacts with the authorities of both
countries, in order to promote a constructive dialogue
with the aim of opening a new page in the history of
their relations. We also support the recommendations
urging donors to respond generously to the United

Nations Trust Fund to Support the Peace Process
established for the purpose of promoting assistance
projects.

We believe that the renewal of the mandate of
UNMEE for a further six-month period, on which a
decision will soon be taken, would help strengthen
stability and peace in the region.

Over the years, the Horn of Africa has endured
fierce conflicts and disastrous situations. Consequently,
the international community is duty-bound to make
further efforts to put an end to those conflicts and those
disastrous situations by working towards stability and
development. Here, we are very optimistic about the
possibility of settling the conflict between Ethiopia and
Eritrea, which would be a first step towards settling
other problems in that important and sensitive region.

