Ms. Bavdaz Kuret (Slovenia): I would like to
begin by thanking the Polish presidency for organizing
today's debate and for the concept note (S/2018/417/ Rev.1, annex). Of course, Slovenia fully endorses
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union, but I would like to add some elements
in my national capacity.

When it comes to the peaceful settlement of
disputes, Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations offers good guidance and should be used
more often. We also want to encourage the Council to
explore ways of identifying crises and risks related to
international peace and security as early as possible in
order to address them and, if necessary, take collective
action. We encourage the Secretary-General to make
use of Article 99 of the Charter.

The Security Council should act to prevent
violence, which, unfortunately, it has recently failed
to do on numerous occasions. As a member of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group, we
stress once again that members of the Security Council
should not veto resolutions that seek to prevent or end
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.

Respect for international law, including
international humanitarian law and human rights,
always rests primarily with States. They must ensure
that governance is rooted in the rule of law, the
protection of human rights and respect for international
law. It is precisely the lack ofprotection of human rights
for all without discrimination that is often at the root of
armed conflict or other forms of violence.

The Security Council should emphasize the rule
of law and justice when drafting missions' various
mandates, and should cooperate closely with the
Peacebuilding Commission on this. Peace and justice
are not mutually exclusive but rather reinforce each
other.

We also see big potential in regional and
subregional organizations. They are essential and
uniquely equipped to address risks and conflict or
post-conflict situations. Europe has a long tradition of
such institutions, embodied not only in the European
Union but also in the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Council of Europe,
which have also proved excellent instruments for the
maintenance of peace by promoting cooperation and
respect for human rights and the rule of law. There are
a lot of good practices that we can share.

When it comes to responding to flagrant violations
of international law, the States that are members of the
Security Council have a particular responsibility to
react 4 if not preventively, then with collective action
that may include targeted sanctions. Here we would like
to echo the call of the European Union regarding the
Ombudsperson.

Accountability, in our view, would be best assured
by strengthening the system of international courts
and tribunals or by forming other accountability
mechanisms such as the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of those Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. Preventing
impunity for perpetrators of such abhorrent crimes is
not only an instrument of punishment but also reduces
the chance of their recurring in the future.

Slovenia continues to resolutely support the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and international
instruments regarding individual criminal
responsibility. With the powers vested in it, including the
ability to refer situations to the International Criminal
Court, the Security Council is a particularly important
partner of the ICC. In that context, we welcome the
consensus decision by the Assembly of State Parties to
the Rome Statute to activate the jurisdiction of the ICC
over the crime of aggression as of 17 July.

In conclusion, international law in general
offers many ways to settle disputes peacefully, from
the exercise of good offices to the decisions of the
International Court of Justice. States should always use
them when unable to reach a settlement themselves.
It goes without saying that all judgments and awards
of the international courts and tribunals must be
fully respected and implemented. That is a very basic
foundation of international relations based on the rule
of law.

Respect for international humanitarian law is of
utmost importance. Even in war there must be certain
rules that bind every side. We especially call for the
protection of civilians, for no price is higher than that
of human life.

