Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French):
I warmly thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and my
Kuwaiti colleague, Mr. Mansour Alotaibi, for their very
informative briefings.

As we noted prior to the last meeting of the
Security Council on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (see S/PV.8563), the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has been enjoying an atmosphere of optimism
since the 30 December elections. President Tshilombo
Tshisekedi has pledged his willingness to respond to the
desire for change expressed by the Congolese during
the elections, and several measures have been taken to
satisfy this desire. Several opponents have returned to
the country, prisoners of conscience have been released
and the country is experiencing a certain opening ofthe
political space.

On the security front, President Tshilombo
Tshisekedi has committed to working to put an end
to the conflicts affecting the country, particularly
in the east, and the intercommunal clashes that have
affected some regions recently. Several rebel groups
have announced that they want to lay down their arms
and return to civilian life. France is encouraged by
such developments and hopes that the path mapped out
in recent months will continue, both in terms of civil
liberties and national reconciliation.

Attending to the combatants wishing to demobilize
is a pressing need so as to prevent them from being
tempted to return to the bush and renounce civilian
life. The Security Council has mandated the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to
assist the Congolese authorities in this regard, but
the Mission will not be able to do so without their
determined leadership.

New steps must be taken very soon in the country's
institutional sphere to confirm the path upon which
it has embarked. I am thinking, in particular, of the
Government, the formation of which will facilitate a
re-engagement of partners and the holding in 2020 of
the first local elections in the history of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. At the regional level, President
Tshilombo Tshisekedi has undertaken commendable
initiatives to revive the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region. Meetings of the Heads of State from the
Great Lakes in recent months have been positive. France
encourages the countries of the region to respond to this
call and mobilize to fully implement the Framework as
they approach the next follow-up summit, scheduled to
be held in Kinshasa in the fall.

But the situation is not yet normalized. Several
challenges remain to be addressed. First, in the east,
the predatory action of armed groups persists, financed
by the illegal exploitation of natural resources. Efforts
have been made with the support of MONUSCO, which
is positive.

The announcement of the rotation of troops of the
Congolese armed forces, some of whom have remained
far too long at the front, is very encouraging, and
I hope that this will materialize soon. The sustained
professionalization of the army and the police is
crucial. However, military involvement will always
be insufficient without political dialogue, at both the
provincial and national levels, to convince the armed
groups to disarm. The restoration of the State and
the development of these regions will be essential
for a lasting return of peace. France therefore calls
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo and on all
the countries in the region to act in a concerted and
determined manner to put an end to these conflicts.

Women and children are the first victims of the
atrocities committed by these armed groups. France
is determined to protect them, which is why President
Macron has mobilized the Group of Seven to support
the foundations of Dr. Mukwege and Nadia Murad for
the benefit of victims of sexual abuse in conflict.

Coordinated regional action is also needed to
drain the finances of armed groups and put an end to
their trafficking. The work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has demonstrated that we need to tackle them
firmly and collectively if we want to stop their abuses.
The region will receive unparalleled benefit from the
formalization of the mining sector, trade, economic
advantages and peace. After all, Europe was built after
the Second World War on regional collaboration in the
mining sector. Natural resources can be a factor of
peace when the political will is there.
The Ebola epidemic continues in the east of the
country and must be controlled. I wish to commend the
exemplary commitment of the Congolese authorities,
the World Health Organization and humanitarian
actors in the fight against this epidemic, as well as the
support provided by MONUSCO. France welcomes the
appointment of Mr. David Gressly as the United Nations
Emergency Ebola Response Coordinator. We all know
his qualities as we have seen his work in the past within
MONUSCO. Once again, on behalf of France, I would
like to strongly condemn the attacks on humanitarian
personnel who come to the aid of the sick and who must
continue to receive our full support.

The humanitarian situation remains very worrying.
The tensions in Ituri and in the Kivus, in particular,
have provoked the displacement of people. There is
no funding to support these displaced persons. France
calls on the partners of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to rally to provide the necessary resources.

In all the aforementioned areas, France will
continue to stand alongside the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. During his visit on 20 May, our Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, announced
the relaunch of a long-term partnership between France
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo with a
pledge of €300 million euros over five years in three
priority areas. The first is education, with the increase
of our aide to training schools. The next priority area is
health, wherein we will continue our cooperation with
referral hospitals and do more in the fight against Ebola.
Accordingly, Professor Yves Levy has been appointed
French special envoy in charge of the fight against
the epidemic. The final priority area is stabilization
assistance via the training of senior executives and our
support for security sector reform.

I would like to conclude by commending the
exemplary action of Ms. Zerrougui and her entire team
at MONUSCO. The Council mandated MONUSCO
to protect civilians and support the Government in
the fight against armed groups. With the determined
involvement of the Congolese authorities and those of
its neighbours within the framework of an approach that
combines military pressure, if necessary, and dialogue,
it is possible to normalize the situation throughout the
country. France's stands ready to lend its support to
achieve this objective.

