Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his
presentation. I thank my friend and colleague Franciscus
Timmermans, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Netherlands, for the information he provided. I salute
his commitment and that of Ms. Julie Bishop, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Australia, and Mr. Anifah Aman,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia.

In adopting resolution 2166 (2014), the Security
Council condemned the destruction of the Malaysia
Airlines aircraft in Ukraine, which resulted, as we
know, in the tragic death of 298 people. The Council
expressed deep sympathy and condolences to the
families of the victims of that disaster. It is clear that
the absolute priority was the repatriation of remains
and identification of victims. It is essential to continue
that work to enable the families and friends of all the
victims to know with certainty the fate of their loved
ones.

In resolution 2166 (2014), the Security Council
called for a comprehensive, thorough and independent
international investigation into the accident in
accordance with international civil aviation guidelines.
The conduct of that investigation has been delegated
by Ukraine to the Netherlands. We have full
confidence in the investigation by the Dutch Safety
Board, in cooperation with international experts of
the International Civil Aviation Organization and in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Chicago
Convention. We welcome the serious and independent
work of by the Board that led to the publication, on
9 September 2014, of an interim report containing the
first results of the investigation.

We regret that illegal armed groups have hindered
access to the crash site in the days following the
tragedy. That has wasted valuable time and made the
investigation more difficult. We also regret that the
work of the investigators on the site was suspended on
6 August due to the deteriorating security situation.
Armed groups that control the site of the accident and
the surrounding area must permit the investigation to
resume without delay, giving full, safe and unhindered
access to investigators. That is a key provision of
resolution 2166 (2014). It is encouraging to see that
Russia is also insistently demanding the same thing,
as the representative of the Russian Federation has just
stated, and that it too is thus working in that direction.

Those who shot down Flight MH-17, those
responsible for this heinous act, will be held accountable.
Indeed, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights highlighted on 28 July the fact that this
act could constitute a war crime. We welcome the work
by the courts of the affected countries that have opened
criminal investigations. All Member States must be
fully involved in the efforts to establish responsibility
for the tragedy. We owe it to the victims and their
families, forjustice to be done, as was just energetically
highlighted by Frans Timmermans.

Let me conclude by emphasizing the urgency of
ending the conflict in Ukraine. Its tally in terms oflives
lost is overwhelming. More than 3,000 people have died
in eastern Ukraine since the conflict began. Repeated
attacks against the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine by pro-Russian separatists and their external
supporters claim new victims every day.

The conclusion ofa fragile ceasefire on 5 September
was a step in the right direction. Under the auspices
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, talks are ongoing within the trilateral
contact group, but we must now redouble our efforts.
We are encouraged by the concrete steps taken by the
President and Government of Ukraine to implement
the commitments undertaken in Minsk. It is high time
that the illegal armed groups to respect their own and
withdraw from the territory of Ukraine, as was agreed
in Minsk.

