Mr. Marhic: 1 have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia; the
countries of the Stabilisation and Association Process
and potential candidates, Albania and Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as the Republic of Moldova and
Ukraine, align themselves with this statement.

At the outset, let me thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this timely and useful briefing. 1 should
also like to thank the Chairs of each Committee for
their extensive updates and summary of actions and for
the initiatives taken within the last six months.

The recent dreadful attacks in Kenya were further
evidence - as if any were needed - that terrorism
remains one of the major global threats. The fight
against terrorism is one of the highest priorities of
the European Union and its member States and should
continue to be a priority for the United Nations. In that
context, we are convinced that the work of all three
Committees is of vital significance, as it contributes to
the prevention of and response to terrorist threats.

We are of the view that the scourge of terrorism can
be overcome only by measures that adhere to the highest
human rights standards and are in full compliance with
the rule of law. That is one of the reasons why the EU
fully supports the establishment of the International
Institute for Justice and the Rule of Law in Malta.

Sanctions remain a vital part of our counter-
terrorism mechanisms. With regard to the targeted
sanctions regimes, we acknowledge the importance of
the recent case law in the European Court of Justice.
We remain convinced that fair and clear procedures and
respect for the rule of law are necessary to uphold the
legitimacy and efficiency of such regimes. We welcome
the significant steps taken by the Security Council to
further reinforce fair and clear procedures for Umited
Nations sanctions, including through enhancing the
role of the Office of the Ombudsperson and publishing
delisting procedures online. We commend the work
of the Ombudsperson. We welcome the renewal of
the mandate of the Ombudsperson last December
with further enhancement to the Office, including its
effectiveness and transparency.

We note with appreciation that in her sixth report to
the Security Council (S/2013/452), on 31 July 2013, the
Ombudsperson emphasized the strong and continued
cooperation with Member States. We call on all Member

States to extend their full cooperation with the Office
of the Ombudsperson in each and every case.

We commend the work ofthe Committee established
persuant to resolution 1373 (2001), in particular with
regard to enhancing State capacity-building and
strengthening regional cooperation. In that regard,
we praise the 2 October launch by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
of the Global Initiative on Effective Counter-Terrorism
Investigations and Prosecutions while Respecting the
Rule of Law and Human Rights. This project, to which
the European Union has pledged 63 million, intends to
build effective cooperation at the regional level and to
support the efforts of States to strengthen the capacity
of criminal justice and law enforcement officials
to effectively investigate, prosecute and adjudicate
terrorism cases. Additionally, the EU is going to
finance the Nigeria/EU/UNODC/CTED partnership
on strengthening criminal justice responses for
multidimensional security, which is due to start very
$0011.

The EU also supports and promotes multilateral and
regional counter-terrorism cooperation. In cooperation
with other countries and regions, the EU has started
to develop comprehensive counter-terrorism strategies,
in partnership with countries in the Sahel, the Horn of
Africa, Yemen and Pakistan. Those strategies reflect
our long-term engagement, building on national and
regional counter-terrorism approaches and therefore
ensuring ownership and participation.

Increasing efforts regarding countering violent
extremism, radicalization and recruitments, as well
as terrorist financing, is one of our top priorities.
Regarding Prevent, the EU anticipates €7 million in
this area this year, €2 million in the Horn of Africa and
€5 million in South Asia.

We welcome United States Secretary of State
Kerry's announcement of the establishment of a global
fund to support efforts to counter violent extremism.
The EU looks forward to discussing the details of
that initiative and will actively participate in its
establishment.

We also regard the establishment of Hedayah - the
first International Centre of Excellence for Countering
Violent Extremism, generously hosted and supported
by the United Arab Emirates - as a key achievement
of the Global Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF) in that

area. The EU already supports the work of the Centre,
both financially and through knowledge and expertise
from all our member States. We will also address
countering violent extremism issues through regional
workshops starting on 3 December 2013, focusing
on the Horn of Africa/Yemen, Sahel/West Africa,
North Africa, and South Asia. We are also working
on updating our strategy to combat radicalization and
recruitment. The recent CTED briefing on the action
plan for implementing resolution 1624 (2005) was
particularly useful and timely in that regard.

Taking a geographical approach, we see the Horn of
Africa and Yemen as a region ofprimary importance to
follow closely. It is crucial that we support international
efforts to stabilize the region, as was underlined during
the recent New Deal for Somalia Conference held in
Brussels on 16 September, which the EU co-hosted with
the President of Somalia. Following the last meeting of
the GCTF Ministerial Plenary and the renewal of the
terms of the co-chairs of GCTF working groups, the
EU will continue to co-chair, with Turkey, the GCTF
Horn of Africa region working group. In light of the
recent events in Nairobi, the EU will reflect jointly
with its co-chair on how to enhance our focus on
border security, terrorist travel and countering violent
extremism in that region.

The Sahel is another region where we must focus
our efforts. We therefore welcome the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, which puts forward
an integrated approach by focusing on three strategic
objectives: security, governance and resilience. It is of
vital importance to start implementing such strategy.

I would like to share a few comments regarding
the 1540 regime. The risk of proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction to non-State actors remains a
significant threat to international peace and security.
We should spare no efforts to increase our capacity
in proliferation prevention. Although in recent years
we have fortunately been spared an attack using such
weapons, we cannot be complacent. As technology
progresses and more people get access to advanced
systems and the know-how to operate them, the threat of
a chemical and biological weapons attack in particular
is increasing.

The EU and its member States are fully committed
to the implementation of the 1540 regime and to
offering assistance to the Committee and other States,
as appropriate. There is a shared understanding that no
single member State can handle the threat alone and
that continuous cooperation, exchange of information,
outreach activities and assistance play an important
role in building tools to counter the mass-destruction
capacity of terrorism. We also recall that cooperation
with international, regional and subregional
organizations is essential, as it provides the Committee
with specialized expertise.

I would like to conclude by stressing that while we
have witnessed significant progress in the fight against
terrorism, our resolve to defeat terrorism must never
weaken or falter. All acts of terrorism are criminal and
reprehensible, wherever and by whomever they have
been committed. The active promotion of counter-
terrorism policies and actions must therefore remain a
priority for the United Nations and its Member States.

