Mr. Burian (Slovakia): We wish to thank Judge
Fausto Pocar, President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and Judge
Dennis Byron, President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), as well as the respective
Prosecutors for both Tribunals, for their assessments
and reports concerning the progress made towards the

implementation of the completion strategies as set out
in resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004).

Slovakia appreciates efforts that both Tribunals
are devoting to meeting time frames and deadlines for
the completion of their work. We would like to express
our support in full recognition of all who are
participating in this process. We commend the
strengthened cooperation of the Tribunals with the
national authorities of their respective countries, in
particular, with the domestic courts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Serbia and Rwanda. We highly appreciate
the increasing number of referrals of cases involving
intermediate and low-ranking accused individuals to
competent national jurisdictions and the efforts of the
ICTY and the ICTR to help to build the capacities of
national courts in order to deal with those cases.

We believe that these measures should enable
both Tribunals to focus on the prosecution and trials of
the most senior leaders suspected of being most
responsible for crimes under international law.
Slovakia insists on strict compliance of trials on the
national level with international standards of fairness
and due process.

Regrettably, as we heard from Judge Pocar and
Judge Byron, some of the most important indictees
remain at large, running away from international
justice. We wish to underline that it is not acceptable
that perpetrators of serious international crimes evade
justice and legal proceedings. In this context, we
reaffirm our strong appeal to States concerned to
cooperate fully and expeditiously with the Tribunals, in
particular in the tracking, arresting and transferring of
remaining fugitives to the Tribunals. Without bringing
these suspects to justice, the work of the Tribunals
cannot be fully completed and their main mission will
not be fulfilled. We cannot - and must not - allow
the perpetrators of the worst crimes under international
law to go unpunished.

Slovakia also gives high marks to the Outreach
Programmes' activities to strengthen the understanding
of and the confidence in the work of the ICTY and
ICTR among the people of their respective regions as a
contribution to national reconciliation. Extending
current outreach activities, especially to members of
communities affected by crimes being prosecuted by
the Tribunals, and leaving a clear legacy of
international jurisprudence are key components of a
wider system of international criminal justice.

Residual issues of the Tribunals seem to be the
most crucial issues for the next months. We call upon
the respective States to pay adequate attention to this
problem and to solve questions connected with the
completion of the Tribunals' work on the basis of the
final legacy report submitted by the Tribunals.

In conclusion, we would like to use this
opportunity to thank Ms. Carla Del Ponte for several
years of outstanding work in her capacity as Prosecutor
of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, and we wish her success in her future
work.
