I would like to begin by thanking the briefers - Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mrs. Adela Raz, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, and Mr. Saad Mohseni - whose presentations reminded us of the attention we must pay to the freedom of the press and the safety of journalists around the world, and especially in Afghanistan. While inter-Afghan peace negotiations could begin soon, I would like to recall that the peace process can only succeed in the long term if the democratic and human rights gains of the last 20 years are preserved. We cannot accept a return to the past. Human rights, the freedom of the press, the effective participation of women in political life and consideration for the needs of the victims of the conflict are all sine qua non conditions for lasting peace. The Afghan Government has committed itself to the path of peace by taking confidence-building measures and appointing a negotiating team. It is up to the Taliban to respect the commitments they made under the 29 February 2020 agreement, notably by severing their ties with international terrorist organizations, particularly Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Reducing violence must be a priority if we are to create conditions conducive to the launch of inter-Afghan negotiations. The conflict in Afghanistan continues to claim the lives of too many civilians, particularly women and children. The continuing spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic is greatly exacerbating the humanitarian situation. Attacks on civilians and health infrastructure are absolutely unacceptable. Every effort must be made to implement resolution 2532 (2020), with an immediate cessation of hostilities and a humanitarian pause. Respect for international humanitarian law is, of course, an obligation for all parties. The protection of civilians, women and children, including humanitarian and medical personnel, must be a top priority. Furthermore, the economic and social development of Afghanistan must continue, with the help and support of the international community. In that regard, I welcome the progress made in preparation for the donors conference, to be held at the end of the year. However, I would like to recall that the European Union's support will be conditional on respect for key principles, in particular with regard to democratic governance and respect for human rights. Afghanistan's development will be sustainable only if we continue the fight against the scourge of drugs while we support the country's economic and social development. As we all know, the persistence of drug trafficking feeds terrorist groups and endangers the lives of thousands of Afghans. The commitments made in the fight against drugs and terrorism and in ensuring respect for fundamental rights must be kept. Afghanistan will continue to be bound by the freely ratified international conventions, particularly those relating to respect for human rights. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that we must, more than ever, remain united. The international community, in particular, must remain united to support Afghanistan on its path towards peace, stability, democracy and economic and social development. France will continue to stand by the Afghan people and fully support the peace process. Finally, I would like to commend the essential role of the United Nations and the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, whose mandate we are going to renew this month. I also thank Special Representative Deborah Lyons, who has our full support.
