Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to welcome Baroness Ashton,
High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, and to thank her
for her briefing on the contribution of the European
Union to the achievement of United Nations goals, in
particular the prevention of conflict, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding.

On the basis of its status as a model of integration
and its concrete and substantial commitment to peace,
development and the respect for human rights, the
European Union remains a privileged partner of the
United Nations. The Nobel Peace Prize awarded to it is
eloquent testimony to that fact.

Today's debate continues the recent momentum
launched by the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations aimed at strengthening
their partnerships in order to deal with active or latent
conflicts and multifaceted crises that destabilize entire
regions and affect millions ofpeople. Morocco attaches
great importance to the role of regional and subregional
organizations and to the cooperation of those
organizations with the United Nations, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and within the
parameters established by Council resolutions.

The European Union has contributed significantly
to efforts to promote the resolution of conflicts. Its
cooperation projects and its economic and technical
assistance provide significant support to socioeconomic
development efforts. The work of the European
Union aimed at entrenching stability and democracy
strengthens international peace and security. With
its influence and experience, the instruments it has
established and its special relations with several
regions of the world, the European Union can continue
to provide essential support to international peace and
security and to the strengthening of United Nations
multilateralism.

In that regard, I would like to highlight the
importance of the European Neighbourhood Policy,
which seeks to strengthen Europe's relations with
countries to the east and south; the Union for the
Mediterranean, the goal of which is to promote
economic integration and democratic institutions
in the 16 countries of the Mediterranean basin; and
the Instrument for Stability, which has strengthened
European efforts aimed at preventing conflicts,
managing crises and peacebuilding.

Morocco welcomes the efforts of the European
Union to support international and regional efforts
aimed at resolving the conflict in the Middle East, in
particular through its contribution as a member of the
Middle East Quartet. We believe that the European
Union will continue to support the Middle East peace
process and work to clear away the obstacles to the
resumption of negotiations, so that the Palestinian
people can fully enjoy its legitimate rights, including
the establishment of its State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. All the people of the region, together with
the international community, hope that 2013 will be the
year of the prompt and effective implementation of the
vision of two States, Palestine and Israel, living side by
side. No effort must be spared in making that vision a
reality that is experienced by all peoples of the region,
for the good of all.

The Kingdom of Morocco welcomes the sustained
and ongoing commitment of the European Union
to peace, security and development on the African
continent. That commitment is not a new one. It has
been progressively strengthened over the past decade
to become an important vehicle for stabilization and
development for countries in crisis or emerging from
crisis, as shown by all of the work that the European
Union has undertaken or continues to undertake in
Africa, whether it is in Somalia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Chad, the Central African
Republic, Guinea-Bissau, the larger Sahel region or,
recently, Mali.

With respect to the crisis in Mali, the swiftness
of the French and African response was decisive.
The European Union, for its part, has shown its
commitment to stand with the Malian people and
all of Africa, in particular through its support it has
given to the reform of the Malian security forces, the
contribution it announced at the donors conference and
the announcement made as recently as yesterday by the
European ministers for development of the progressive
resumption of its development aid to Mali following the
adoption of the Malian transitional road map.

The situation in Mali cannot be understood outside
of its regional context, namely, that of the Sahel. The
region is confronted with multifaceted and complex
challenges. We hope that, once it is laid out, the
comprehensive United Nations strategy for the Sahel
will also receive the active support of the European
Union.

With respect to the Syrian Arab Republic, we
welcome the humanitarian assistance from Europe for
Syrian refugees, and we call on the European Union
to continue its efforts, in cooperation with the United
Nations and the League of Arab States, aimed at
putting an end to the horrific situation of the Syrian
people by bringing about an end to the violence and
by facilitating an agreement on a political solution
ensuring a transition, in response to the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people and in full respect for
the country's territorial integrity and national unity. In
that respect, it is important to support the work of Joint
Special Representative Brahimi and to ensure that the
Security Council can take unified action to put an end
to the suffering of the Syrian people.

Morocco supports and contributes to international
and regional disarmament and non-proliferation efforts
and to the development and implementation of a collective
response to global threats, including terrorism. The
weakening of the non-proliferation regime threatens to
put the goal of nuclear disarmament, to which Morocco
remains committed, out of reach. Based on its belief
in the virtue of dialogue and diplomacy, Morocco
supports the E3+3 dialogue and hopes that the Almaty
meeting will make further progress towards arriving at
a diplomatic solution for the Iranian nuclear issue.

At this point I wish to reiterate the importance of
getting all Middle Eastern States to sign the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and
conclude comprehensive safeguards agreements with
the International Atomic Energy Agency. We also
count upon the European Union's support of efforts
to establish a zone free of nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.

Morocco, which enjoys advanced status in
its relations with the European Union, values its
commitment. We hope that the EU's cooperation with
our Organization will strengthen both Organizations,
as that is in the interest of the European Union, the
United Nations and even beyond - it is in the interest
of the entire international community.

