The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Canada, Colombia, Finland, Israel,
Lebanon, Myanmar and Norway, in which they request
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ian Egeland,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Egeland to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by Mr. Jan Egeland. Before giving him the floor, I wish
to note that this is Mr. Egeland's last appearance in the
Security Council in his capacity as Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator. On behalf of the members, I wish
to extend our thanks and gratitude to Mr. Egeland for
his dedicated efforts in addressing humanitarian
2

concerns, as well as in bringing humanitarian issues to
the attention of the international community. We
understand that upon his departure, he will not
immediately take up any challenging tasks, but will
take some well deserved rest instead. We hope he will
be able to implement that plan. In bidding him
farewell, we wish him success and fulfilment in his
future endeavours.

I now give the floor to Mr. Egeland.


