Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): Mr. Foreign
Minister, it is good to see you here again guiding our
deliberations, and we look forward to your able
stewardship again tomorrow. I should like also at this
point to thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for
a very exhaustive and useful briefing.

Ambassador Schori of Sweden will speak on
behalf of the European Union later in this debate, and,
since my delegation fully supports what he will say, I
should like to raise only a few points during this
intervention.

The first point that I think we should bear in mind
on this occasion is the tribute we owe to Mr. Kouchner,
who left Kosovo last weekend after a stint of 18
months. His commitment has been remarkable. He has
achieved a major transformation, and I would not like
to let this occasion pass without reiterating the United
Kingdom's thanks to him for his hard work. As he
takes up the reins, Mr. Haekkerup will have the support
of a now very experienced United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) team.
The tasks he faces will be as challenging as they have
been over the last year and a half.

Despite the honest differences of opinion to
which Ambassador Holbrooke referred and of which I
picked up tinges in Ambassador Gatilov's statement, it
is most important that Mr. Haekkerup should know that
he has the full weight of the Council behind him,
because his task will continue to be very difficult. I can
assure him, and the Council, that he will have the
United Kingdom's full support.

The security situation in the Presevo Valley and
in southern Serbia continues to be of serious concern.
We condemn the ongoing violent action by armed
groups. We welcome the action that the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) has taken to address the problem, and I think
that Under-Secretary-General Guehenno's briefing
testifies to the effectiveness of that action. We also
welcome the restraint shown by the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and the Serbian forces.

A lasting solution to the problems in the Presevo
Valley can be achieved only through dialogue between
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Serbian
authorities, and representatives of the local Albanian
communities. My delegation urges a start to that
dialogue as soon as possible in order to bring about the
earliest possible resolution of the situation.

At most Council meetings on Kosovo over the
last year, my delegation, like many others e and I
particularly noted the strong statement this morning by
Ambassador Chowdhury - has expressed its concern
over the situation of detainees and missing persons. In
this connection, we strongly welcome the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia Federal Cabinet's approval of a
draft amnesty law. We call on the authorities there to
release all Kosovar Albanian prisoners held on political
grounds as soon as possible. It goes without saying that
a swift conclusion to this sensitive issue would be a
very important step towards reconciliation between the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Kosovo.

We have got a busy morning, and I will leave it
there. Ambassador Schori will, as I have said, speak
more exhaustively on behalf of the European Union
later on in the debate.

