The President: The Council has before it the text of
a statement by the President on behalf ofthe Council on
the subject oftoday's meeting. I thank Council members
for their valuable contributions to this statement.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members of the Council, I shall take it
that the members of the Security Council agree to the
statement, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2015/1l.

It is so decided.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania.

Let me start by paying tribute to all of our
peacekeepers. Today is the International Day of
United Nations Peacekeepers, and last year alone 126
peacekeepers were killed; that is a very large number.
Let us remember them all and pay tribute to them.
I thank the Secretary-General and the briefers for
their contributions. I am pleased that this briefing on
foreign terrorist fighters has drawn so many high-level
officials in charge of counter-terrorism actions. This
clearly demonstrates the importance and urgency of the
matter we are discussing today.

Today's briefing is taking place eight months after
the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014) at the Security
Council summit meeting chaired by President Obama
(see S/PV.7272) and six months after the high-level
Australian debate (see S/PV.7316). This allows us to take
stock of the progress made in implementing resolution
2178 (2014) and address existing gaps in tackling the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters.

Countering foreign terrorist fighters is only a
part of broader counter-terrorism efforts, but it is a
significant one, for a number of reasons.

It is an increasingly global threat. As noted earlier,
there are now more than 25,000 foreign terrorist fighters
originating from over 100 countries. Most of them end
up in Syria or in Iraq, where they carry out crimes of
exceptional barbarity and brutality. Their eventual
return to their countries of origin would pose enormous
new problems and challenges to local law and order
as well as to counter-terrorist bodies. It is a complex,
mutating, and shifting threat. The age, gender and
social background of foreign terrorist fighters; where
they come from and why; how they travel to conflict
zones; how they get recruited; and how they organize,
train, arm and finance themselves varies from case to
case. No typical profiles or patterns can be drawn, and
standard solutions to the problem are hard to apply.

It is a threat that puts existing counter-terrorism
measures to an unprecedented test. While certain
frameworks exist to tackle the phenomenon, significant
implementation gaps persist, including lack of capacity,
resources and even awareness of the problem at hand.
Our responses to this threat need to be constantly
adjusted and modified if not to outpace, then at least to
match the level of adaptability and dynamics of foreign
terrorist fighters themselves. The phenomenon must be
tackled in a systematic and coherent way, involving the
countries of origin, transit and destination, as well as

neighbouring States, all of which have a specific role
to play.

Let me refer briefly to some of the priority actions
that need to be taken with all due urgency. These include
the review and update of national criminal laws in the
light of resolution 2178 (2014); strengthening border
protection and border security; improving national
judicial and prosecutorial capacities; increasing
traveller information collection, analysis and sharing;
greater regional and international cooperation; and
the more robust use of tools and services provided by
Interpol, the International Civil Aviation Organization,
the Financial Action Task Force and other relevant
bodies. The World Customs Organization and the
World Tourism Organization, too, have important roles
to play, the latter in particular, as terrorist recruits
are devising new ways of avoiding being detected and
tracked down by using tourism to disguise their travel
to conflict zones, including ever more complex broken
itineraries.

At the national level, too, more effective inter-agency
cooperation and coordination among all relevant
authorities - ministries of foreign affairs, home affairs
and justice and law-and-order institutions, transport and
communications bodies, financial crime investigation
service, intelligence, counterterrorism, and prosecutor
general's offices - are truly essential.

On the other hand, a more coherent and comprehensive
response by the United Nations system in support of
national and regional efforts is needed, including closer
and more coherent coordination among the various
United Nations bodies tasked with counter-terrorism
mandates, inter alia, to reinforce one another's efforts
and build on one another's strengths.

No country can consider itself immune to the threat
of foreign terrorist fighters. Waiting until it strikes
would be the worst possible choice. We all must take
very seriously our obligations under resolution 2178
(2014) as well as other relevant counter-terrorism
resolutions and international instruments.

The Lithuanian criminal code, for instance,
establishes as criminal offences various foreign
terrorist fighter-related activities. Those who commit
acts forbidden by international agreements, including
terrorist acts, can be held responsible under Lithuanian
law irrespective of their citizenship, their place of
residence, the place of the commission of the crime,
or whether the act is punishable under the laws of the
locality where it was committed.

Lithuania relies on some well-established measures
to prevent the travel of terrorists across its borders
as well as to disrupt facilitation of their travel. They
include effective border control, which is also part of
the Schengen system, and the routine use of various
INTERPOL databases. Lithuania also employs a
variety of measures to prevent money-laundering and
terrorist financing, in compliance with Financial Action
Task Force and European Union (EU) standards. We
also stress the importance of providing a determined
response at EU level and within the Schengen space.

Let me also stress that in the fight against terrorism,
it is crucial to address not only the consequences but
also the underlying factors of radicalization. Our
efforts to prevent foreign terrorist fighters will only
have a limited effect ifthe phenomenon itself continues
to grow. In that regard, we need a comprehensive
cross-sectoral approach guaranteeing the involvement
of all policies relevant to counter radicalization and
violent extremism, including through upholding human
rights for all, promoting inclusiveness and tolerance
and adequate education, social, development and
regional policies. Creating effective counter-narratives,
including on social media, is also very important.

Respect for fundamental rights is crucial in the fight
against terrorism. Our common work must be based on
a proper balance between security and fundamental
rights. As we seek to curb and contain that dangerous
phenomenon, we must do so in full respect of human
rights, fundamental freedoms, pluralism, rule of law
and democratic governance.

Finally, let me express my thanks to the United
States delegation for the initiative of today's presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/ll, and to Council members for
their active engagement in negotiating the text which
lays down clear guidelines about what needs to be
done by all of us to combat the foreign-terrorist-fighter
phenomenon.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.

