Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights,
Mr. Ivan Simonovie, for his briefing to the Council on
the human rights situation in Ukraine, as well as for
his efforts and those of the human rights monitoring
mission in Ukraine. The delegation of Jordan would
also like to underscore its support for the mission's
work and the importance for all parties to cooperate
with it in carrying out the recommendations contained
in the report of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights on Ukraine,
particularly in light of the delicate and sensitive
situation experienced by the country.

The report reveals the direct relationship between
the widespread and significant human rights violations,
including the right to freedom of expression, the
previous Government's corruption, and the protests and
insecurity that have swept Ukraine since November
2013. Attacks on the protesters, particularly in Maidan
Square, and the use of excessive force against them
have led to rapid political changes in Ukraine, the
establishment of a transitional Government and
the appointment of an acting President. The tense
situation in eastern Ukraine as a result of the ongoing
rebel movement must be addressed responsibly and
reasonably by all parties. As we have said previously,
the Ukrainian Government has the right and is duty-
bound to end the rebellion and preserve the country's
territorial integrity and unity. Given the current
situation, all efforts must be made to ensure as peaceful
a settlement to the rebellion as possible.

International norms and human rights must be
respected in imposing the rule of law in those regions.
We underscore our call to bring pressure to bear on
the rebels to end their protests and engage in dialogue
with the Government in Kyiv on all matters related
to Ukraine's future. By the same token, we welcome
the convening of the quadripartite meeting in Geneva
tomorrow, which we hope will lead to the proposal of
suitable solutions to end the crisis and persuade the
stakeholders to de-escalate the situation and work to
restore stability and security in Ukraine.

The current situation in Ukraine requires urgent
measures to be adopted and steps taken to build
confidence among all parties. It is necessary to limit
extremist national and political diatribes. We call
upon influential Powers to use their sway to end to the
problem, which underpins current events in Ukraine,
especially in the eastern regions. We also underscore the
need for continued dialogue between the Government
of Ukraine and the country's diverse communities,
factions, linguistic groups and political parties in order
to agree an appropriate political course of action that
addresses the interests of all parties and charts a path
for Ukraine's future with regard to the rule of law, its
institutions and human rights.

The dialogue must begin forthwith. States and
influential parties must also create a climate conducive
to the successful holding of presidential elections in
May. Ukraine's future depends on a successful political
transition that is based on human rights, sovereignty and
the rule of law and that represents all parts of society,
without regard to language, ethnicity or religion.

We stress that there must be no interference in the
internal affairs of Ukraine, or threat of force and that
the people of Ukraine will be allowed to determine
their own future. The international community must
assist Ukraine at this stage of its political transition
to overcome the obstacles to security and stability and
preserve its sovereignty and territorial integrity.

