Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): The decision to hold this
open debate on the working methods of the Security
Council indicates a growing understanding of the need
to make the body more transparent and accessible to
non-members and, therefore, more effective. The
positive response to widespread expressions of interest
in the work of the Council is certainly to be
encouraged. My delegation also wishes to express
appreciation for the efforts of Costa Rica, Jordan,
Liechtenstein, Singapore and Switzerland to promote
today's debate. Brazil supports their continued efforts
related to this issue, as well as many of the concrete
proposals and ideas that they have presented in the
past.

Both the justifications for that interest and the
political guidance for consideration of the issue before
us are found in the Charter. Article 2 incorporates the
principle of the sovereign equality of all Member
States, and Article 24 establishes that the Council acts
on behalf of all Members on matters regarding
international peace and security. The latter provision,
as interpreted and implemented in the light of the
principle of sovereign equality, implies that the quite
exceptional authority given to this organ entails the
obligation of accountability to those on whose behalf
the Council acts. Therefore, transparency to and
interaction with all Member States, as appropriate, are
imperatives arising from the Charter itself.

In giving concrete meaning to those imperatives,
every possible measure should be taken to ensure that
relevant information is adequately provided to
non-members and that their inputs are obtained in a
timely manner and seriously considered by the Council
in its decision-making process. Progress has been made
in pursuing those goals, and credit must be given to
several delegations that have been particularly keen to
hold the Council accountable to all Member States, in
accordance with the Charter.

However, as indicated in the concept paper
prepared for this debate (S/2008/528, annex), further
progress is needed in implementing or consolidating
the implementation of measures to which Council
members have already committed. Some examples are:
substantive and detailed briefings to non-members
shortly after informal consultations of the whole; the
sharing of draft resolutions and draft presidential
statements, as appropriate, as soon as they have been
introduced within informal consultations of the whole;
meaningful communication with Member States that
are parties to a conflict and/or with other interested and
affected parties; and a preference for the holding of
open meetings, particularly at an early stage in the
consideration of a matter.
Brazil Views the discussion on the working
methods of the Security Council as intrinsically linked
to a meaningful change in the Council's composition
and therefore in its structure: the two aspects of reform
must go hand in hand. Just as transparency and
accountability cannot take deep root in a Council that
is insufficiently representative of a diverse membership
and that does not reflect contemporary political
realities, an enlarged Council will need new working
methods in order to become fully accountable. It is not
politically realistic to expect to meaningfully and
permanently alter the Council's working methods
without expanding its composition. It is no coincidence
that no progress has been made on either aspect of
Council reform since the mid-19905.

That is one of the reasons why Brazil believes
that intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform must commence without delay or
preconditions and on an inclusive basis, in accordance
with the Charter. It is also one of the reasons why
Council expansion must take place in both membership
categories. A larger number of non-permanent
members would increase the possibilities for small
countries to participate in the work of the organ. By the
same token, the addition of new permanent members
that are able and willing to contribute to peace and
security and to promote greater Council openness to
non-members would strengthen initiatives promoting
enhanced accountability to the membership. It is
therefore essential to adopt an integrated approach to
Security Council reform, one that reinforces the mutual
support that the two aspects - working methods and
composition - can provide to each other.

We very much hope that those considerations, as
well as the wealth of ideas to be communicated by
other delegations in today's debate, will be duly
reflected upon by the Council and thus that they will
prove to be useful to this organ in its efforts to increase
the involvement of non-members in its work.

