Mr. Brencick (United States): I too thank Special
Coordinator De Soto for his briefing this morning.

The United States remains committed to two
democratic States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace and security. The Road Map and the
principles contained therein remain the only agreed
international basis on which to move forward towards
that goal.

The United States is committed to a diplomatic
effort to engage moderate leaders, to help the
Palestinians strengthen and reform their security sector
and to support Israeli and Palestinian leaders in their
efforts to come together and resolve differences.
United States and other diplomatic efforts have helped
the Israeli Government and President Abbas make
progress on some important immediate issues,
including implementation of the Agreement on
Movement and Access and improving the situation on
the ground in order to rebuild confidence between the
two parties.

To continue progress on the Road Map requires a
valid and responsible Palestinian partner. The
Palestinian Authority Government must recognize
Israel, renounce violence and accept previous
agreements. We echo the call for the immediate and
unconditional release of Corporal Shalit.

The Quartet has welcomed efforts by Palestinian
Authority President Abbas to form a Government
committed to Quartet principles. The United States
stands ready to renew engagement with and assistance
to a Palestinian Authority committed to peace.

We remain mindful of the economic and
humanitarian needs of the Palestinian people. The
United States continues to work with the Israeli
Government and Palestinian Authority President Abbas
to help meet critical humanitarian needs in the West
Bank and Gaza, where humanitarian conditions have
deteriorated, largely as a result of the Hamas-led
Palestinian Authority Government's refusal to govern
responsibly. The United States remains committed to
assisting the Palestinian people and has committed
$468 million in direct assistance to those people,
including more than $275 million in humanitarian aid.

Following the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006) in August, the international
community has had an opportunity to support the
people of Lebanon and the people of Israel in building
a new foundation for a stable, sustainable and
comprehensive peace. The United States will continue
to work vigorously with all parties to promote full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and to
support the democratically elected Government of
Lebanon in asserting its sovereignty and upholding its
responsibility to secure its borders. In this context, we
call for the immediate and unconditional release of the
two Israel Defense Forces soldiers kidnapped on
12 July.

The deployment of the Lebanese Armed Forces to
south Lebanon for the first time in almost 40 years
demonstrates Lebanon's commitment to uphold the
principles of resolution 1701 (2006). The rapid
deployment of an expanded United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) to Lebanon has already
helped Lebanon begin to secure its own borders,
facilitate the withdrawal of Israeli forces from southern
Lebanon and allow the legitimate armed forces of the
democratically elected Government of Lebanon to
operate throughout their territory.

Resolution 1701 (2006) included a legal
obligation for all States to prevent the sale or supply of
arms and arms materiel into Lebanon, except when
explicitly authorized by that Government or by
UNIFIL. The international community, Syria and Iran
in particular, must fulfil their obligations under
resolution 1701 (2006) by enforcing the embargo on
illicit arms shipments.

The international community and the countries in
the region continue to face significant and serious
challenges in moving towards the ultimate goal of a
stable, secure and prosperous Middle East. But these
challenges are not insurmountable. The path towards
that goal remains clear: a renewed commitment to the
Road Map, acceptance of Quartet principles and full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1701
(2006).

