Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): Allow me, Sir, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council during the month of April.

I would like to join others in expressing our
sincere condolences to the People's Republic of China
on the loss of life caused by the earthquake.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement. We also wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his comprehensive
briefing on the situation in the Middle East.

As we have stated many times before, it is our
strong view that the Security Council should shoulder
its responsibility in this matter in a fair, just and
consistent manner. As we meet here today, the
insecurity in the Middle East continues to affect the
occupied Palestinian territories and the State of Israel,
as well as the Middle East region as a whole. This
insecurity is the result of the continued illegal
occupation of the Palestinian territory by the State of
Israel, the continuation of the unlawful blockade of the
Gaza Strip, the unlawful settlement activities within
the occupied territories of Palestine, the failure to
address the legitimate right of return of Palestinian
refugees in the diaspora, as well as the continuation of
retaliatory Qassam rocket attacks from the Palestinian
territory into Israel. These activities are compounded
by the failure to achieve a negotiated settlement with
respect to the occupied Palestinian territory.

The South African Government has noted with
concern Israel's recent settlement announcement
regarding East Jerusalem and its decision to declare the
holy shrines in Hebron and Bethlehem in the West
Bank as national heritage sites.

South Africa maintains that these settlement
activities and the decision by Israel regarding these
holy shrines in two West Bank cities erode trust and
threaten the peace process. These actions by Israel
constitute yet another attempt to extend its control over
the West Bank and create a new reality on the ground.
South Africa reiterates that these actions on the part of
Israel make a resumption of negotiations in the stalled
Middle East peace process difficult and undercut the
confidence and trust required to take the process
forward. We therefore call on Israel to cease all
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory immediately and to abstain from further
actions in East Jerusalem that could lead to an
escalation of violence in the region.

My delegation also notes with concern the
activities and policies of the Israeli Government and its
military forces aimed at creating a new reality on the
ground. These provocative and defiant actions of the
occupying Power - as witnessed in its settlement
policies, recent orders threatening the deportation of
thousands of Palestinians, aerial raids on Palestinian
areas and the illegal blockade on Gaza - continue to
cause suffering and destruction and adversely impact
health and educational services and the socio-economic
and humanitarian situation in Palestine.

South Africa is deeply concerned about Israel's
prohibition of the importation of construction materials
into Gaza, which undermines and negatively impacts
reconstruction efforts following the devastating and
destructive attacks on Gaza. As an occupying Power,
Israel has specific and clear obligations under
international law. The international community's
demand that Israel end the illegal blockade, which has
exacerbated the suffering of ordinary civilians, must
complied with. The blockade and the restrictions
imposed are in Violation of international humanitarian
law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention, and
contrary to the will of the international community, as
expressed in resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
1515 (2003) and in the Arab Peace Initiative.

My delegation welcomes the recent meeting of
the Quartet held on 19 March 2010 in Moscow and the
ongoing efforts of the Government of the United States
of America to launch proximity talks that should lead
to negotiations with a view towards resolving all final
status issues.

In conclusion, South Africa maintains that the
creation of a viable and independent Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, existing side by side
the State of Israel within the 4 June, 1967, armistice
borders, as well as the complete withdrawal of Israel
from all occupied Arab territories, including the West
Bank and East Jerusalem, as encompassed in
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), along with a
guarantee of the right of return of all Palestinian
refugees as set forth in General Assembly resolution
194 (III), is the only means of finding a just, lasting
and comprehensive solution to the conflict in the
Middle East.
In this regard, mere words and good will from the
international community are no longer good enough.
Meaningful action to bring about peace in the Middle
East and the realization of Palestine's legitimate
expectation of statehood is required. Israel must be
held accountable for its actions. Action on the part of
the Security Council, which shoulders the noble
responsibility of securing international peace and
security, would certainly be a step in that direction.

