Mr. Kobler: It is a great pleasure and an honour
for me to be here today. I would like to thank you, Sir,
for having invited me to introduce the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/736) on the activities of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
and to brief the Council on the latest developments in
that country.

I am also grateful for the Secretary-General's
decision, with your support, to entrust me with the
responsibility of leading the activities of the United
Nations in Iraq at a particularly historic moment. Like
my predecessors, I look forward to fulfilling the
mandate this Council has entrusted to UNAMI, in close
cooperation with the Iraqi authorities. In that regard, I
would like to express my deep and sincere appreciation
to Iraqi leaders for their warm and cordial welcome
and interaction thus far.
Let me begin by condemning in the strongest
possible terms yesterday's terrorist attack on Ashura
pilgrims, which killed dozens and injured many more.
My condolences go to the families of the victims. Iraqi
religious and ethnic diversity is the ultimate strength of
the country. That diversity is at the heart of the
country's efforts to establish a peaceful, prosperous
and all-inclusive society.

It has been almost two months since I took up my
assignment in Iraq - a country I left four years ago in
a different capacity and under very different
circumstances. Since my arrival, I have met with many
Arab and Kurdish political and religious leaders,
including in Najaf, to take the pulse of the country. I
have visited all UNAMI hubs in Erbil, Kirkuk and
Basra to better familiarize myself with the activities of
the Mission and of the United Nations country team.
Finally, on 23 and 24 November I travelled to Kuwait
to discuss the outstanding issues and points of common
interest between Iraq and Kuwait.

During that initial period, I must say that I
witnessed a great number of changes and
improvements, and despite many obstacles ahead there
is significant degree of good will and determination to
achieve further progress. Yet, I also came to realize
that some of the pressing challenges of yesterday
remain the same today. They are covered in greater
detail in the report of the Secretary-General, and
include wealth distribution, power-sharing, delivery
and access to basic services, strained relations between
communities that have lived together in Iraq for
centuries, and unresolved issues between Iraq and
Kuwait.

Today, I would like to focus on the following five
areas: first, the significance of the withdrawal of
United States forces from Iraq for the Iraqi people and
the United Nations; secondly, the current political
situation; thirdly, United Nations activities on the
ground; fourthly, the possible impact in Iraq of events
unfolding in the region and the state of affairs between
Iraq and Kuwait; and last but not least, the issue of
Camp Ashraf, which has monopolized much of the
attention and efforts of UNAMI and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) attention over the past several months.

The withdrawal of the United States forces from
Iraq by the end of the year will lead to a remarkable
change for the Government and the people of Iraq. It
11-62375
will also be an important milestone in Iraq's history as
the country rebuilds and strengthens its relations with
regional and international partners. Yes, there will be
challenges ahead and many seem concerned by what
the future may entail. However, it is above all an
opportunity for all Iraqis to prove to themselves and to
the world that they can build a peaceful and better
future for their children, and an opportunity for all
political leaders and elected official to respond to the
legitimate aspirations of their constituencies and bring
democracy, political stability and economic prosperity
forward.

UNAMI and the United Nations country team
stand ready to work with the Government and redouble
its efforts to consolidate the country's democratic gains
and economic recovery. The United Nations has a
proven track record in assisting to build up strong
institutions and mechanisms for good governance,
including in the fight against corruption. I am pleased
that Prime Minister Al-Maliki himself has made this
topic one of his Government's priorities. I look forward
to building upon the work that has already been done,
especially with regard to human rights and electoral
and legislative support, all of which could contribute to
fostering political stability in the years to come.

The task ahead should not be underestimated and
will require further progress on the security front. For
several months now, the Iraqi security forces have
assumed full control of the security of the country.
However, they continue to face armed opposition and
terrorist groups carrying out complex mass-casualty
attacks that affect the lives of hundreds of citizen
across the country. As noted in the report of the
Secretary-General, they also pose significant
challenges to the delivery of United Nations assistance
on the ground.

Let me now turn to the latest political
developments. As Iraq makes further progress in
regaining its rightful place in the community of
nations, it is even more crucial that its leaders from all
sides work collectively to overcome their differences
and promote confidence and tolerance. In my
consultations, in particular with Kurdish interlocutors,
I have sensed a growing discontent at delays in fully
implementing the Kurdish-Arab agenda. As called for
by the Secretary-General in his report, Iraqi leaders
should take the steps necessary to overcome the current
stand still in the appointment of security ministers and
11-62375
to resolve other pending issues regarding the
Government formation process.

Arab-Kurd relations and issues pertaining to
disputed internal boundaries have always been at the
core of UNAMI's mandate. They represent a major
element in the country's stability and remain one of
UNAMI's top priorities. I am pleased that Prime
Minister Al-Maliki has asked me for UNAMI's
continued involvement and assistance on this matter.
To this end, we are currently exploring ways to
reinvigorate the standing consultative mechanism as a
forum for addressing the issues of the disputed internal
boundaries through dialogue.

I have already initiated discussions with all
concerned on the issue of Kirkuk, including holding
elections and improving security, and a possible third-
party role for UNAMI in the combined security
mechanism. The recent deployment of the Iraqi Army
around the Kirkuk airport was viewed with concern by
leaders of the Kurdistan Regional Government and
further underlined the need to ensure that the necessary
mechanisms are in place for settling disputes. In this
regard, I call upon the parties involved to use existing
mechanisms to avoid confrontation and to provide the
necessary space for UNAMI to assist.

After the withdrawal of the United States forces
from Iraq, it will be of particular importance that
democratic standards, including respect for the rule of
law in relation to electoral processes and human rights,
be safeguarded and further advanced. There must be no
rollback.

The transparency and professionalism of future
electoral processes are essential to ensuring that Iraqi
citizens accept the results. Iraq has a busy electoral
calendar ahead, for which a professional and
independent electoral commission is essential. The
appointment of the new Board of Commissioners of the
Independent High Electoral Commission, to be
completed by April 2012, will be the foundation of the
credibility of all upcoming elections. I am pleased to
report that the Council of Representatives has formally
requested UNAMI to perform an advisory role in the
selection process of the next Board of Commissioners.

I turn now to the situation of human rights. Much
has still to be done to address the difficulties faced by
all Iraqis in their daily lives. Every month, an average
of 600 to 800 incidents, resulting in at least 10 civilian
deaths per day and many more injuries, continue to be
reported. I would like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the victims of these atrocious acts, and I call
on the Government of Iraq to do everything in its
power to protect the victims of violence and to ensure
that those who perpetrate such acts are held
accountable according to law.

More specifically, the confirmed recent killing of
a human rights activist by an improvised explosive
device attached to his car in Kirkuk on 20 November
brings the number of reported violent incidents against
human rights defenders to 11 since the beginning of
October. Of equal concern are attempts against
freedom of expression - a fundamental right in all
democracies. During the reporting period, journalists
continued to be the targets of attacks. UNAMI's Office
of Human Rights continues, together with the
Government of Iraq, to follow up each and every
individual case. They will be included in the Mission's
upcoming regular report on the situation of human
rights in Iraq.

On the development side, the United Nations
country team's partnership with the Government
continues in the implementation of the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework. The
Government's efforts to allocate a specific line of
funding for development projects within its investment
budget for 2012 demonstrate its commitment to
supporting the country's key development priorities.
The United Nations stands ready to provide the
Government with support in implementing those
priorities.

With respect to integrated development priorities,
UNAMI will in the coming months focus on three
issues with political, security and governance
implications: youth, water resource management and
environment. I strongly believe that these provide
opportunities for a cross-cutting impact across Iraq's
critical development challenges. They are at the core of
Iraq's potential to realize sustainable development and
achieve the Millennium Development Goals.

I would also like to focus on question of
improving the situation of women. Specifically, I will
focus my efforts on three priority activities: first,
promoting the participation of women and their role in
building Iraq's sustainable and peaceful future;
secondly, combating all forms of violence against
women and girls; and thirdly, promoting education for
women and girls, including vocational training.

Democratic and economic development can
prosper only in a stable regional environment and
Iraq's stability depends on good-relations with its
neighbours. Those relations, however, could be
significantly affected by various unfolding events in
the region.

As mentioned in the report of the Secretary-
General, tensions escalated in northern Iraq following
the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) terrorist attacks on
19 October against Turkish forces in the south-eastern
province of Hakkari, which resulted in the deplorable
loss of 24 lives and led to subsequent air and ground
offensives by Turkish forces against PKK terrorists in
Iraqi Kurdistan. Despite that difficult situation, the
Governments of Turkey and Iraq, together with the
Kurdistan Regional Government authorities, have
proactively engaged in constructive crisis management.
To date, those mitigating efforts have proven
successful, and I would like to thank all concerned for
those efforts.

As one can easily imagine, unfolding events in
Syria are of concern to many of my interlocutors, who
fear possible repercussions in Iraq. A contingency plan
has been prepared by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), with a
view to addressing any movement of population into
Iraq and is being regularly updated to take into
consideration the fluid situation in Syria.

Of particular importance are the relations
between Iraq and Kuwait. Both countries share a
difficult past. The 2009 report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/385) envisaged a road map for the
normalization of Iraq's international status. There has
been, however, little progress. In my recent discussions
with the Iraqi Government, I have encouraged them to
quickly implement Iraq's outstanding Chapter VII
obligations, as outlined in that road map. That in turn
would open the door for the early normalization of
Iraq's status in the international community by the
Security Council, which is now long overdue.

Further efforts are therefore needed to promote
confidence between the two countries and facilitate
solutions to deal with outstanding bilateral issues. I am
encouraged by the resolve that both Iraq and Kuwait
have demonstrated to improve bilateral relations,
particularly through reciprocal high-level visits earlier
this year and the establishment of a Joint Ministerial
Working Committee. I hope that following the
forthcoming visit of Prime Minister al-Maliki to
Kuwait, the two sides will be able to resume the work
of the Joint Ministerial Working Committee in the near
future.

During my recent meetings with Iraqi leaders, I
was encouraged by the goodwill they have expressed
towards improving relations with Kuwait. Similarly,
during my recent visit to Kuwait, I was encouraged by
the goodwill towards Iraq shown by my Kuwaiti
interlocutors. While reiterating the importance they
attached to a letter from Prime Minister al-Maliki
reaffirming Iraq's land and maritime borders, in
accordance with resolution 833 (1993), they responded
positively to my suggestion that the focus for the time
being should be on the implementation of Iraq's
Chapter VII obligations on a priority basis, for
example, border management projects, maintenance,
and compensation and relocation of farmers.

I believe that UNAMI is well placed to help
normalize Iraq's relations with Kuwait in the
framework of concerted United Nations engagement
and with the support of the Security Council. UNAMI
and I, personally, stand ready to assist, including by
exploring new avenues to address the standstill
between the two countries and facilitate progress
towards Iraq's full compliance with, and eventual exit
from, Chapter VII, while providing Kuwait with the
necessary safeguards and assurances it is looking for.

I would now like to draw the Council's attention
to the situation with regard to Camp Ashraf, which
remains a matter of great concern. The Government of
Iraq has asked the United Nations to help facilitate a
peaceful and durable solution to the matter, and we are
making an exhaustive effort to do so. We believe that
such a solution is possible. However, the positions of
the Government of Iraq and of the Camp residents and
their leadership continue to remain far apart.

The Government of Iraq repeatedly emphasized
its intention to close down the camp by 31 December
of this year and to transfer its residents to another
location until countries are found outside Iraq where
they can resettle. That deadline is fast approaching.

The position of Camp Ashraf residents is to
remain in the camp until countries are found to receive
them. They still do not agree to be transferred to a new
location outside the camp without the protection of
Blue Helmets.

I am pleased by the progress made so far and by
the Government of Iraq's agreement to allow UNHCR
to play the role it has under its mandate. The
Government of Iraq is also committed to the principle
of non-refoulement and gave assurances to the
Secretary-General of its commitment to find a peaceful
solution. There is, however, a real danger of
confrontation and even violence unless a mutually
acceptable solution is found. We are therefore calling
on all concerned to act with restraint and flexibility to
ensure that such a peaceful solution can be found.

The United Nations efforts are being led on the
ground by UNAMI and UNHCR. Those efforts have
intensified in recent weeks in the context of a working
group on Camp Ashraf, which has been meeting
frequently with the Government of Iraq. UNAMI
continues its regular visits to Camp Ashraf, the most
recent of which took place this past weekend. Those
visits provide the opportunity to listen to the concerns
of the residents and to brief them on the proposals
being discussed.

The Secretary-General has spoken personally to
Prime Minister al-Maliki to appeal for flexibility and
full support for the United Nations efforts to facilitate
the peaceful solution the Government has assured that
it seeks. He has asked me to attach the highest priority
to that issue.

In trying to facilitate a solution, we are
emphasizing a number of important points. First, we
must keep in mind that lives are at stake and must be
protected. The Government has a responsibility to
ensure the safety, security and welfare of the residents.
Any forced action that results in bloodshed or loss of
life would be both ill-advised and unacceptable.

Secondly, we believe that any workable solution
must be acceptable to both the Government of Iraq and
to the residents of Camp Ashraf. A solution must
respect Iraqi sovereignty, on the one hand, and
applicable international humanitarian, human rights
and refugee law on the other hand.

Thirdly, a solution must also respect the principle
of non-refoulement. No resident of Camp Ashraf
should be returned to his or her home country without
his or her consent.

While some progress has been made in our latest
discussions in Baghdad, many obstacles remain to
arriving at a plan that would meet the concerns and
requirements of all interested parties. Subject to all
conditions being met, UNHCR is ready to begin the
verification and interviews for the purposes of refugee
status determination. However, the process will take
time to complete. Clearly, the situation cannot be fully
resolved before 31 December. I therefore appeal to the
Government of Iraq to extend the deadline in order to
permit adequate time and space for a solution to be
found.

I also appeal to the leadership and residents of
Camp Ashraf to engage constructively and with an
open mind to the proposed process. They should give
serious consideration to the proposals under discussion.
There should be no provocation or violence from their
side nor a challenge to Iraqi sovereignty.

Finally, I appeal to the international community
to do more to help. A lasting solution cannot be found
unless Governments step forward and offer to accept
Camp Ashraf residents for resettlement in their
countries. I will be travelling to Brussels today and
will emphasize that point, in particular with my
interlocutors there. In that context, I also welcome the
readiness of the Islamic Republic of Iran to receive
those residents of Camp Ashraf who express a desire to
voluntarily return to their home country with the
assurance that their welfare, security and safety will be
respected.

Let me say that the situation of Camp Ashraf is a
complex one but that the problems are not
insurmountable. A process is under way, and if all
concerned act responsibly at this time, it will be
possible to arrive at a peaceful, durable solution that
respects both the safety, security and welfare of Camp
residents and Iraq's understandable desire to assert its
sovereignty.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the members
of the Security Council for their continued support. I
would also like to express my deepest appreciation for
the security support provided to the United Nations by
the Government of Iraq and the Member States
contributing troops and police to UNAMI.

Finally, I would also like to pay tribute to the
United Nations national and international staff who
work in Iraq, under the most challenging
circumstances. I am confident that with their
determination and the support of the Council, we can
achieve more in Iraq, in line with our mandate. I
appreciate, in this context, the openness of all my

interlocutors and their stated expectation to see the
United Nations engaging with the people and the
Government of Iraq to consolidate the significant gains
made thus far.

