Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Let me begin by thanking
the Ukrainian presidency of the Security Council for
convening today's open debate and for conducting the
consultations on resolution 2341 (2017), which we have
just adopted. The consensus behind it underlines the
open and inclusive process that led to its agreement, as
well as the importance that we all attach to that vital
issue. Out of respect for all Member States that want to
participate in this debate, I will make an abbreviated
statement now and make the full version available
through other means.

Objects of critical infrastructure have long been
attractive targets for terrorist attacks. Through turning
off the lights, contaminating or shutting off water
supplies, or undermining individuals' willingness
to travel, such attacks achieve the core objective
of terrorism to cause as much fear and disruption
as possible. It is hard to imagine the devastating
consequences that a terrorist attack on a nuclear power
plant could have on human lives and the environment,
both in terms of immediate impact and the long-term
effects. Mr. Heinonen has reminded us that that is not a
wholly unrealistic scenario.

We live in an increasingly interconnected world.
That is particularly true when it comes to our critical
infrastructure. Interconnectivity - whether physical
or in terms of communications technology - means
that the ripple effects of a large attack in one country
have the potential to be felt not only in neighbouring
countries, but globally. For that reason, today's
discussion is all the more timely and relevant. Efforts
to protect critical infrastructure from terrorist
attacks require cooperation - across borders, across
sectors and across public and private stakeholders.
Regional and global approaches help build resilience
and preparedness. All public agencies in Sweden are
required to undertake a security analysis to identify
vital critical infrastructure within their remit, and to
identify and assess potential risks.

The purpose of our policy is twofold. The first goal
is to improve awareness, build resilience and prevent
attacks, and to respond and recover from incidents
and crises where they do occur. The second aim is to
increase cooperation for prevention among all relevant
stakeholders, including public and private actors, at the
regional and international levels.

Sweden's Counter-Terrorism Cooperation Council
brings together relevant actors to jointly increase
national capacity. Our approach involves law
enforcement, intelligence and security authorities, the
Civil Contingencies Agency, sector-specific agencies,
regional and local authorities, and the private-sector
actors that own and operate critical infrastructure. In
20l6 we launched a national system for the mandatory
reporting of information technology incidents for
all Government agencies. Next year, as part of the
European Union (EU) directive on security in network
information systems, such reporting Will become
mandatory for both public and private actors.

Moreover, at the level of the European Union, the
EU and its member States are committed to acting in
solidarity within any member State that is the object of
a terrorist attack, the so-called solidarity clause. The
EU has put in place a range of initiatives to address
the protection of critical infrastructure. The approach
is not only focused on threats from terrorist attacks,
but also on those resulting from criminal activities,
natural disasters and accidents. We supports several EU
programmes aimed at protecting critical infrastructure
within the broader region, which includes the Balkans
and Turkey.

There are a number of regional organizations
created to improve the capacities of member States in
matters related to civil protection and preparedness,
such as the Council of the Baltic Sea States, the Arctic
Council and the Barents Euro-Arctic Council, which is
a forum aimed at supporting and promoting regional
cooperation in the northernmost parts of Sweden,
Norway, Finland and the north-western parts of Russia.
Iceland and Denmark are also members.

There must be accountability for all acts of
terrorism. Perpetrators, organizers, and sponsors of
terrorist attacks must be held responsible. As reflected
in resolution 2341 (2017), adopted today, measures to
counter terrorism must be taken in accordance with
international law, including human rights law and
international humanitarian law.

We welcome the fact that the resolution encourages
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism,
to continue to examine these important issues. The
country visits by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate have resulted in valuable
knowledge and expertise, and the potential for States
to draw on best practices. More, not less, international
cooperation is key to countering these threats. We
appreciate Ukraine's leadership on these issues in the
Security Council.

