The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Algeria.

(spoke in Spanish)

I should like first of all to express my gratitude
and appreciation to Ambassador Heraldo Mufioz for
the detailed information that he provided to the
Council on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). His dedication and
his excellent work as Chairman of the Committee have
had an important impact on its work, making it a
dynamic and effective body in our common fight
against terrorism.

(spoke in French)
I would like to thank the Monitoring Team. I have
taken note of its second report, submitted on
15 December. We note that the Committee's efforts
during the period under consideration included, in
particular, a review of the recommendations contained
in the first report of the Monitoring Team, making it
possible to gain a better understanding of many of the
topics highlighted in the report, such as the asset-
freezing techniques and the legal aspects of the
consolidated list.

The written evaluation pursuant to resolution
1455 (2003) is a further achievement that is to the
Committee's credit. That written analytical evaluation
on the implementation of sanctions by States is the first
of its kind in the work of the sanctions committees. In
this connection, we would like to thank the Monitoring
Team for the quality of the analysis of the 130 reports
submitted by States.

With respect to the activities of the Monitoring
Team, we note that, in addition to the written
assessments of the implementation of sanctions
measures by States, as required by resolution 1455
(2003), which inform us about the successes and
challenges that States face in applying the freezing of
assets, travel bans and arms embargoes, the Monitoring
Team has made a contribution in other areas, such as
certain technical corrections concerning the names of
individuals and entities on the list. The members of the
Team also carried out visits to several countries in
Asia, Africa, the Middle East, Europe and the
Americas.

The cooperation between the Committee and
Member States will make the Committee more visible
and give it greater exposure. That is the context in
which we view the visits carried out by Ambassador
Munoz and certain members of the Committee, as well
as the Monitoring Team. The two visits that were made
recently by Ambassador Mufioz to certain countries in
Asia, Europe and North Africa have further informed
the Committee about the implementation of sanctions
measures by States, the growing awareness of the
threat posed by Al Qaeda and the need that certain
countries have for assistance.

Consideration should be given to the appeals
launched by certain States, and we hope that the
Security Council will pay attention to them. First, there
is a double standard when it comes to treating the
phenomenon of terrorism. Secondly, exchange of
information and intelligence in combating terrorism is
important, because we believe that one-way
information will not effectively serve the fight against
terrorism. Thirdly, it is essential to combat drug
trafficking, since its links with terrorist networks are
increasingly close; such networks are found not only in
Asia, but also in other parts of the world. Fourthly,
there is a need to come to the aid of States that require
assistance. Fifthly, the use of propaganda and
justifications of terrorism should be dealt with very
seriously. Sixthly, there is a need to avoid any
confusion between Islam and terrorism.

Lastly, we share the opinion of Ambassador
Munoz about the future work the Committee:
improving the list, continuing visits and strengthening
cooperation between the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and its Executive Director, as
well as the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and the relevant international
and regional organizations, are among the Committee's
priorities.

I would like once again to express my thanks to
Ambassador Mufioz and his team, in particular
Mrs. Carla Serazzi.

I resume my functions as president of the
Council.

(spoke in Arabic)

The next speaker is the representative of Japan. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.

