The Deputy Secretary-General: Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and your country, once
again, for the truly historic start you have given to the
Council's activity in the new millennium. Seldom, if ever,
can this Chamber have been graced in the space of one
month by so many heads of State or Government and by
such distinguished representatives of the host country.

You have brought both the executive and the
legislative branches of your Government here at a very
high level. I believe it may be true to say that as a result,
the United Nations and the United States now understand
each other better than they have for many years. It may
not be too much to hope that this will mark the beginning
of a new era of positive engagement by the United States
in all aspects of this Organization's work.

It is particularly gratifying that you have used this
opportunity to focus attention on the challenges that face
us in Africa. No part of the world is in greater need of
our help, and none has greater potential to reward our
efforts if we apply them in a wise and timely manner.

Sub-Saharan Africa, according to the Economist
Intelligence Unit, is likely to be the world's fastest-
growing region this year in economic terms. And which
country is leading this impressive spurt of growth?
Mozambique, a country which only a few years ago was
in the grip of a civil war apparently as intractable as any
of those still raging or smouldering on the continent.

If there is one country in the world where the efforts
of the United Nations in peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peace-building have made an incontrovertible difference,
I suggest that Mozambique would be that country. So let
no Afro-pessimist say, therefore, that you in the United
States, or we in the Secretariat, or any of the members of
this Council are wasting our time in trying to help
Africans solve their problems. On the contrary, I am
convinced that, if only we can sustain the momentum, the
Council's efforts to mobilize the international community,
as well as the continent itself, will make a tangible
difference to peace, stability and prosperity in Africa.

 

I am glad to see that on Friday, European Union
ministers, in their turn, began a historic debate on a new
and strategic relationship with Africa, focused on reducing
poverty and conflict.
In the course of this "month of Africa", we have seen
real and encouraging signs of the understanding, interest,
determination and commitment which all sides need to
demonstrate if we are to address the root causes of conflict
and bring an end to the suffering of so many Africans. We
have benefited from the wisdom and sustained attention of
several outstanding African leaders, whose interest in
solving the continent's problems clearly goes well beyond
the immediate national interests of any one African country.
Let me salute, in particular, the contributions made by the
African leaders who have stayed with us for this final
meeting. I salute President Chiluba of Zambia, as well as
the President of the General Assembly, Mr. Theo-Ben
Gurirab. I am also very happy to salute the presence of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa, Ms. Dlamini-
Zuma.

As the Council knows, the Secretary-General of the
United Nations has also followed its proceedings with
intense interest. A long-standing conflict in another part of
the world, Cyprus, requires his presence in Geneva today.
But I assure members he is very much with us in spirit, and
I shall give him a full account of the Council's
deliberations when he returns to New York tomorrow.

By devoting its very first meeting of the new
millennium to the question of AIDS, the Council
recognized the epidemic as a security threat for Africa, both
as a direct killer of millions of Africans and as an agent of
social, economic and political instability. Members of the
Council showed a clear understanding that it would make
no sense for the international community to try to address
peace and security issues on the continent Without bringing
HIV/AIDS into the picture.

Many important proposals were made during the
debate and must be followed up energetically. All in all, a
new impetus has been given to the fight against this most
cruel of diseases and to the alliance against AIDS in Africa
which is currently being built under the leadership of the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS).
I particularly welcome the pledges of material support for
this struggle given by Vice-President Gore and other
representatives of donor Governments.

The discussions on Burundi also yielded clear signs of
a stronger intent to overcome the current stalemate.
President Mandela's wisdom and faith once again proved
invaluable. In thank him most sincerely for the trust he
showed in the Council by coming to take part in its
debate, and for the unforgettable statements he delivered
both here and in Arusha.
Similarly, when it came to the even more complex
problems of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, no
fewer than seven African heads of State joined your own
Secretary of State, Mr. President, in giving us new hope
by their presence and by their words. They reaffirmed
their commitment to finding a peaceful solution to what
Mrs. Albright has aptly named "Africa's first world war".

The Lusaka Agreement - already in itself an
important example of Africa's renewed determination to
tackle its own problems - thereby received a major
boost. All the States which had signed it solemnly
reaffirmed their commitment to it. And the fact that a
statesman of such wisdom and moral authority as Sir
Ketumile Masire has agreed to act as facilitator in the
next phase of negotiations is certainly a source of hope.

The Council has since been working hard to finalize
a draft resolution which would enable us at last to deploy
the promised 500 military observers and support troops.
If all goes well, this should lead on to a major new
peacekeeping and peace-building effort, which will
demonstrate beyond any doubt the seriousness of the
international community's commitment to resolving
conflict in Africa.

In Sierra Leone, the peace process is further
advanced but still very fragile. Nowhere in Africa, at this
moment, has the United Nations taken on a greater
responsibility. I am glad that discussions during this
month have moved us closer to having the mandate and
the resources we need to carry out that responsibility, and
I hope that next week the Council will be able to adopt a
resolution to that effect, as planned.

In Angola, the Council's discussions have at least
helped bring the protracted conflict there back into clearer
international focus, and I am grateful for that. The
important work of the Council's Committee on sanctions,
led by Ambassador Fowler, must now be carried forward
in order to reinforce the push for peace.

No less important was the debate the Council held
on the harrowing problem of refugees and displaced
persons in Africa. These unhappy people merit our
attention every bit as much as their counterparts in other

 

parts of the world. I hope that the spotlight that the Council
has focused on them will result in more generous funding
of the humanitarian appeals which the United Nations has
launched on their behalf.

And I must thank the Council also for drawing
attention to the discrimination which often affects the
internally displaced, an issue which has long preoccupied
the humanitarian branches of the United Nations family but
which until now has seldom caught the eye of political
leaders or the international media.

If I were to sum up the achievement of this month in
a single phrase, I should say that the Council has
spectacularly reaffirmed its long-standing engagement with
Africa, and in doing so has shown a greater sense of
urgency than ever before.

But we all know that the real measure of our
achievements, if such they are, will not to be found in this
room. It can only be found on the African continent itself,
in the peace we are able to restore or maintain, and the
relief we are able to bring to the sufferings of so many
innocent people. So the real issue is: where do we go from
here?

Council presidencies come and go as the months pass,
but Africa, with its deep wounds and its heroic efforts,
remains with us month after month. Our commitment to
heal those wounds and to support those efforts is worth
nothing unless it matches deeds to words; unless it is strong
and, above all, sustained.

And African leaders on their side must not forget
something they have heard over and over in this Chamber
during the past few weeks: that no amount of international
support can help them unless they themselves show
statesmanship and real political will.

No one imagines that their task is easy. The cause of
peace and development requires many painful sacrifices and
courageous compromises. But the pain and the risk will
surely be worthwhile if they give the peoples of Africa a
real chance to build a peaceful and prosperous future for
themselves and for their children.

For my part, on behalf of the Secretariat, I pledge that
we will do everything possible to sustain the momentum
that this "month of Africa" has generated, and to make sure
that it is effectively harnessed within the United Nations
system. I am confident that members of the Council will do
the same.

