The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

I thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
question of Timor-Leste (S/2004/117) and thank
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his briefing. I
welcome once again, to today's meeting, Mr. Ramos-
Horta, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Timor-Leste.

Since Timor-Leste became an independent State
in May 2002, the Government and the people of Timor-
Leste, with the help of the international community,
have made significant progress on various aspects of
national development. Their external relations continue
to develop. They have also established extensive
relationships with international organizations,
including the United Nations. We express our
satisfaction at all those gratifying achievements and
extend our congratulations to the Timorese
Government and people. We also appreciate the
positive role played by the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) in that process.

As was noted in the report of the Secretary-
General, despite extraordinary achievements, Timor-
Leste is still faced with many challenges at a time
when UNMISET's current mandate is drawing to a
close. Indeed, as a new nation, Timor-Leste faces a
long and arduous task to achieve overall social stability
and sustainable economic development. In order to
consolidate the gains that have been made and to
enable the country to attain complete self-sufficiency at
an early date, the Government and the people of Timor-
Leste, on the one hand, should exert greater efforts in
all areas of national development, and the international
community, on the other, should continue to provide
Timor-Leste with necessary support and assistance.

We fully understand the request of the Timorese
Government that the United Nations continue to
maintain its presence in Timor-Leste. We support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that the
mandate of UNMISET be extended for a further year,
and we agree with the proposal to make appropriate
modifications to its size and mandate. We hope that the
Security Council can reach consensus on the future
arrangement of the Mission in time, before 20 May
2004. Clearly, that will be essential for the further
development and the stability of Timor-Leste.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

As another measure to optimize the use of our
time, I will not individually invite speakers to take
seats at the table and invite them to resume their seats
at the side. When a speaker takes the floor, the
Conference Officer will seat the next speaker on the
list at the table. I thank everyone for their
understanding and cooperation.

I call now on His Excellency Mr. Jose Ramos-
Horta, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Timor-Leste.

