Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): As mandated by
paragraph 11 (g) of resolution 1844 (2008), I have the
honour to brief the Security Council in my capacity as
the Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning
Somalia and Eritrea, covering the period from
November 2016 to February 2017.

I would like to take this opportunity to most
sincerely thank my predecessor Ambassador Ramirez
Carrefio of Venezuela for his able leadership and hard
work during the past two years. Today, my briefing will
focus on the activities of the Committee and on the
assessment of recent developments, based on the most
recent reports of the Monitoring Group on Somalia
and Eritrea.

During the reporting period, with regard to the
arms embargo on Somalia, the Committee received
two notifications pursuant to paragraph 11 (a) of
resolution 2111 (2013) and two notifications pursuant
to paragraph 10 (g) of resolution 2111 (2013). The
Committee also held three informal consultations.
On 16 December 2016, the Committee was briefed
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) on transnational terrorist threats in the IGAD
region. On 20 January, the Chair introduced the seven
newly appointed members of the Monitoring Group to
the Committee. The members presented their plan of
activities for the new mandate. In particular, the Group
intends to focus its efforts on investigating violations
of the arms embargoes and to expand its reporting on
the strength, structure and financing of armed groups
in the region. The coordinator of the Monitoring Group
indicated the Group's intention to maintain its close
working relationship with the newly elected federal
Government of Somalia.

According to the latest update of the Monitoring
Group to the Committee, AI-Shabaab remains the most
significant threat to peace and security in Somalia.
Despite the successful eviction of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/Da'esh faction from the
port town of Qandala by the Puntland security forces in
December 2016, the Group reported that this terrorist
organization continues to maintain its presence in the
surrounding mountainside.

The assessment of the Monitoring Group that
Al-Shabaab is a very critical threat to the stability of
the region was also confirmed by representatives of
IGAD during the briefing on 16 December 2016. They
also stated that no ideological rapprochement between
ISIL/Da'esh and Al-Shabaab has been observed.

With regard to the arms embargo, the Monitoring
Group reported that the interim Juba administration
and African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
contingents discovered approximately 25,000 blank-
firing pistols on board the SJ African vessel, docked in
the port of Kismayo. With full coordination between the
interim Juba administration, AMISOM. and Monitoring
Group arms experts, the Group is continuing its
investigation in order to establish the origin of the
cargo and its intended destination.

In the light of the ongoing drought, the Monitoring
Group reported that the hindering of humanitarian
assistance can result in additional threats to the
peace, security and stability of Somalia. The Federal
Government of Somalia pledged to ensure the removal
of all impediments to the delivery of assistance. The
willingness of federal and regional leaders to uphold their
commitments as well as the international community's
determination to implement the operational plan for
a pre-famine scale-up of humanitarian assistance in
January-June 2017 will be vital for saving lives and
preserving stability and security in Somalia.
The Group also remains concerned about the threat
to peace and security posed by illegal, unreported
and unregulated fishing in Somalia. With respect to
the charcoal ban, it remained unclear to what extent
Al-Shabaab was involved in the illicit export of
charcoal from Somalia. However, the Monitoring group
noted a possible tactical shift away from Al-Shabaab's
self-declared ban on trading in charcoal while taking
note of significant activity at the charcoal stockpiles in
Kismayo and Bur Gabo.

Furthermore, I would like to acknowledge the
timely receipt of the letter dated 30 March 2017 from
the Permanent Mission of Somalia transmitting the
report of the Federal Government of Somalia pursuant
to paragraph 7 of resolution 2317 (2016), on the
structure, composition, strength and disposition of its
security forces, including the status of regional and
militia forces.

Turning to Eritrea, pursuant to the Monitoring
Group's final report ofOctober 2016 that it had found no
conclusive evidence ofEritrean support for Al-Shabaab,
the Group reported on ongoing investigations into
support for armed groups as well as into potential
breaches of the arms embargo. Additionally, the Group
continues to seek clarification on combatants missing
in action since the Djibouti-Eritrean border clashes.

With regard to the upcoming review of sanctions
on Eritrea, the Monitoring Group intends to prioritize
investigations on Eritrea in its midterm update in
order to provide the Committee and the Council with
a comprehensive account of Eritrea's compliance with
the Council's measures, which would then feed into
the review. The Coordinator will present the Group's
midterm update to the Committee on 21 April.

Achieving sustainable global peace is impossible
without achieving full peace and security in Africa
and the Horn of Africa in particular. Severely affected
by conflict, the region demands a high proportion of
United Nations peacekeeping resources. In this vein,
during the reporting period, the Chair has been engaged
with members of the Committee as well as concerned
Member States on a possible visit of the Chair to the
Horn of Africa.

Finally, as the new Chair ofthe Somalia and Eritrea
sanctions Committee, I am committed to working
on an open, transparent and objective basis with all
the members of the Committee and beyond towards
national reconciliation and the restoration of peace in
the Horn of Africa.
