Mr. Danon (Israel): Once again, we meet as we
continue to hear calls for a one-sided draft resolution
against Israel. We have been hearing those calls all year.
In fact, we have been hearing calls to act against Israel
since wejoined the United Nations, 62 years ago. There
was a time when Israel could look to this institution
with a sense of hope - hope that, after the evils of the
Holocaust, the nations of the world could come together
to bring about an era of peace, and the Jewish people
would finally be free from hatred and prejudice.

But this institution has betrayed those hopes * day
after day, month after month, year after year - by
funding bodies that promote anti-Israel activism at
the United Nations. We see that in the endless stream
of biased reports and the one-sided resolutions whose
only purpose is to score political points, and not solve
pressing problems. When it comes to Israel, the record
of hypocrisy and dishonesty goes on and on.

Just last week, UNESCO had the nerve to adopt a
resolution denying the connection between the Jewish
people and the Holy City of Jerusalem.

"Ifl forget thee, 0 Jerusalem, let my right hand
forget her cunning."

That verse from Psalm 137, written by our King
David almost 3,000 years ago, was uttered by the Jewish
people as they were exiled from Jerusalem following the
destruction of their temple. It is also recited by every
Jewish groom on his wedding day. UNESCO's decision
is an embarrassing stain on the pages of the history of
the United Nations. But the Jewish people will endure.
The attempts to cut us off from our homeland and our
heritage will not succeed. We will remain in our capital,
Jerusalem, forever.

As we open the seventy-first session, it is time for
the United Nations to answer for the slander and the
defamation of the Jewish State by so many here in this
building. Let us take a look at that record together.

Just last Friday, this body was witness to a farce.
Israeli organizations were called to provide their expert
opinions on the latest developments in Judea and
Samaria. Let me be clear: Israel is a proud and thriving
democracy, and we cherish the freedom of speech. We
do not respect those who spread lies and deceit about
Israel. In 2016, three United Nations agencies provided
funding for B'Tselem. That is no coincidence. It is part
of a cynical cycle in which the United Nations funds
B'Tselem and similar organizations that have a particular
political agenda. They are then invited to provide so-
called expert testimony. That is direct interference in
our democratic process by anti-Israel elements here
at the United Nations. I call on the Council to put an
end to funding from the United Nations of extremist
organizations that seek to harm Israel.
Last May, at the meeting of the World Health
Organization, the General Assembly singled out Israel
as the only violator of health rights in the entire world.
Apparently, the innocent men, women and children who
have been burned and choked to death by al-Assad's
chemical weapons are of no concern to the World Health
Organization. Last July I visited the hospital in Safed,
in the north of Israel. I met with the Syrian people
injured in the ongoing civil war who were being treated
by Israeli doctors. The World Health Organization did
not mention those lifesaving efforts - not even once.

That absurd resolution does not stand alone. The
United Nations Commission on the Status of Women
concluded its annual session by condemning only one
country for violating women's rights anywhere on the
planet. The Commission had nothing to say about Iran,
where women can face execution by stoning for the so-
called crime of adultery. They were silent about places
where forced child marriage, official discrimination
against women and so-called honour killings are
widespread. Instead, the Organization condemned
Israel, where a woman is President of the Supreme
Court, where a woman sits as Governor of the Bank of
Israel, and where a woman serves as Minister ofJustice.

To make matters worse, a Commission on the
Status of Women report (E/2016/27) blamed Israel for
domestic violence committed by Palestinian men against
Palestinian women. Instead of making it absolutely
clear that there is never an excuse for violence against
women, the report followed the shameful United
Nations practice of giving excuses for violence and
blaming Israel for every ill in Palestinian society.

The anti-Israel bias is systematic and runs through
the organs and bodies of this institution. The Special
Information Programme on the Question of Palestine
and the Division for Palestinian Rights are the only
Secretariat bodies that are dedicated to a specific
conflict. And let no one be fooled - they are dedicated
to promoting only one side, one narrative and one
unequivocal message of anti-Israel propaganda.
The United Nations Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People has
also disgraced itself with its anti-Israel activity.
Non-governmental organizations, accredited to the
Committee, regularly post vile images on social media,
such as cartoons comparing Israeli soldiers to Nazis.
That is pure hatred from official United Nations bodies.

At a time when so many are in need of humanitarian
assistance, it is a disgrace that millions of dollars in
United Nations funds - money collected from taxpayers
around the world - fund bodies whose only purpose
is to spread lies, incitement and hateful propaganda
against Israel. Yet year after year, the United Nations
renews the mandates of those bodies. Year after year
the propaganda machine continues.

Just last month, the Department of Public
Information organized a United Nations International
Media Seminar on Peace in the Middle East in South
Africa. The seminar was completely one-sided. Almost
all of the speakers were well-known for their anti-Israel
positions. The current Palestinian representative to the
United Nations, the former Palestinian representative
to the European Union and other United Nations
representatives and officials were all invited to speak
at the seminar. But not a single Israeli official was
there to represent Israel, to tell our story. The speakers
expressed open support for the notorious Boycott,
Divestment, Sanctions movement, which is conducting
a global campaign of misinformation and outright
slander against my country.

And let us not forget about the United Nations hall
of shame, the Human Rights Council in Geneva. Let us
call it what it really is, with some of the world's worst
human rights abusers condemning the only democracy
in the Middle East. The only standard that it follows is
the United Nations double standard - one set of rules
for Israel, another set of rules for every other country.
The Human Rights Council has a special agenda item
dealing only with Israel. No other country - neither
Iran, Yemen, Syria nor North Korea - none of them is
singled out.

As we the General Assembly begins its seventy-first
session, we can count on the United Nations to continue
that systematic hostility towards Israel. In fact, the bias
in United Nations resolutions can actually be counted.
General Assembly resolutions have use the term "grave"
513 times to describe Israel's actions - 513 times. And
for the rest of the world, for the countries that engage in
systematic human rights abuses, in torture and ethnic
cleansing - only 14 times. Who will speak out against
that moral absurdity? More people have been killed in
Syria in the past few months than in the entire history
of the Arab-Israeli conflict, yet the United Nations has
adopted six times as many resolutions against Israel
as it has against all other countries. Not just more
than against Syria, but six times as many resolutions
against Israel than all other countries on the face of the
planet combined.

The box by my side contains piles and piles of
United Nations documents - an endless number of
pages, United Nations resolutions, reports, declarations,
decisions and statements, all denouncing Israel. And
that isjust from the previous session, from October 2015
until today. Year after year, this institution produces
the same documents, filled with the same outrageous
accusations and absurd demands. When people speak
about the United Nations obsession with Israel, that is
what they are talking about. That box is proof of that
obsession. It is a monument to the deep-rooted bias
against Israel. It makes a mockery of what the United
Nations should stand for, and all those who stand by
and let it happen year after year should be ashamed.

Let me ask the representatives in this Chamber,
let me ask the Palestinian representative, if they really
believe that the ongoing campaign to demonize Israel is
doing anything to help the Palestinian people. Do any
of those decisions create opportunities for Palestinian
women? Do any of those endless resolutions do anything
to help a single Palestinian child? Of course they do not.
Enough - enough with the incitement, enough with the
show. Let the Palestinian leadership start caring about
their people. Yes, the Palestinian leadership knows
how to mount shows, but it is not helping even one
Palestinian. Those thousands of debates and documents
do not help the Palestinian people.

Now that we have seen and understood the United
Nations shameful record, let us take a look at the real
Israel 4 the Israel that is left out of those reports. For
68 years, the people of Israel have woken up every
morning with the threat of war and terror hanging over
their heads. Yet, despite all the challenges, we have
built a vibrant democracy and a thriving economy. In
the twenty-first century, Israel is a place of equality and
opportunity. Thanks to the creative spirit and energy
of our people, Israeli innovation is helping to improve
lives and create opportunities around the world, in
agricultural technology, in cybersecurity, solar energy
and so many other fields. We are always looking to
share what we have learned with others, to build strong
and mutually beneficial partnerships with nations
around the world.

Now, let us take a look at the countries that are
leading the disgraceful campaign of discrimination
against Israel. When was the last time we heard ofIran,
Libya, Tunisia or Venezuela making any advances in
medicine or in water technology that could help the
world? Those are some of the nations that are leading
the efforts to demonize Israel. Standing back and
allowing them to use the United Nations as a platform
for their blatant hypocrisy undermines the integrity of
this institution.
Anti-Israel bias here at the United Nations is not a
law of nature. As Prime Minister Netanyahu said when
he came to the United Nations last month,

"The sooner the United Nations obsession with
Israel ends, the better - the better for Israel, the
better for other countries, the better for the United
Nations itself" (A/7I/PV.I4, p. 30).

There is a way forward. It is time for the United
Nations to start thinking outside the box. Those acts of
political theatre do not help the Palestinian people, nor
do they help to bring the two sides together. But we will
not give up. We will continue to fight back against the
slander and the lies. The founding vision of the United

Nations is still a symbol of hope for the Jewish people,
for the State of Israel and for all humankind.

