Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes this briefing on the review of
the Secretary-General's report on the situation in
Somalia (S/2019/661), as well as the implementation
of the mandates of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS). We congratulate
Mr. James Swan on his recent appointment as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
UNSOM. and on his excellent briefing. My delegation
also commends Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose Madeira,
Special Representative ofthe Chairperson ofthe African
Union Commission for Somalia and Head ofthe African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), Ms. Pramila
Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and Ms. Amina Arale,
Executive Director of the Somali Women Development
Centre, for their enlightening briefings.

The presentation of the Secretary-General's report
on Somalia calls for comments from my delegation
in the political, security, economic and humanitarian
fields, as well as on the question of human rights.

With regard to the political situation, Cote
d'Ivoire notes with concern the persistence of tensions
between the Federal Government and the federal
member states fuelled by differences over electoral
processes in the federal member states and the draft
electoral law. In our View, this institutional crisis is
likely to undermine initiatives to revive the political
process and reconciliation between the Somali Federal
Government and the member states of the federation,
slow down the pace of the Government's reform efforts
and prevent the swift implementation of the country's
stabilization plans.

My delegation therefore urges both sides to make
every effort to overcome their differences in order to
create conditions conducive to the holding of fair and
credible regional elections, the conclusion ofagreements
on power- and resource-sharing, constitutional review
and the establishment of Somalia's federal model.
We also welcome the resumption of collaboration
between the two Chambers of the Somali Federal
Parliament, which should lead to legislative progress.
From this point of View, the adoption of the law on
the establishment of an anti-corruption commission to
strengthen the framework for managing public finances
is to be welcomed.

On the security front, Cote d'Ivoire notes the
persistence of targeted attacks by the terrorist group
Al-Shabaab, which continue to create a climate of
insecurity and instability in the country. The situation
is all the more worrisome given the surprising resilience
and adaptability of this terrorist group, despite, in
particular, the j oint air raids by AMISOM. and the Somali
security forces. It is therefore imperative that the joint
actions of AMISOM. and Somali forces be supported by
building the capacity of security institutions to enable
them to retain control over areas they have recovered.
This capacity-building should also increase their
strike force in the necessary campaign to stabilize the
situation as well as to fight violent extremism.

In the economic field, cote d'Ivoire welcomes the
International Monetary Fund's approval, on 1 August,
of the staff-monitored programme for Somalia,
which is an important step towards debt relief for the
country, as part of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Initiative. My country therefore encourages the
Somali Government to continue its efforts to meet the
remaining conditions for reaching the decision point set
forth in the Initiative.

Human rights violations, in particular targeted
killings and abductions, sexual violence against women
and children, as well as the use of child soldiers, as
Ms. Patten has just noted, remain a matter of concern
to the international community. Convinced that the
promotion and protection of human rights is part of the
process of strengthening security and peacebuilding,
my country calls on the Somali Government to continue
its relentless efforts to combat impunity. In that regard,
Somalia's ratification, on 31 July, of the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the measures
taken to strengthen the legal framework for protecting
human rights are encouraging signs.

The deteriorating humanitarian situation, marked
by increasing food insecurity, increased internal
population displacement and expanding needs for
assistance and protection, remains another cause for
concern. While it needs to be further strengthened,
we nevertheless prefer to commend the Somali
Government for its outstanding actions achieved
through its intensification of the drought response and
its full collaboration with aid agencies. My delegation
would therefore like to urge international partners to
further support the 2019 humanitarian response plan
and provide food assistance and increased protection
to populations in distress. We also call on the Somali
parties to ensure the safe and unhindered delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the affected areas.

Finally, C6te d'Ivoire would like to reiterate its
support for UNSOM, AMISOM. and UNSOS for their
indispensable role in Somalia. We call on them to
strengthen their cooperation with other international
partners on the ground, with a view to supporting the
Government's efforts to restore peace and stability
in Somalia.
