Mr. Valle (Brazil): My delegation extends its
deepest sympathy to the victims and families of the
peacekeepers deceased in the tragic events that took
place last Friday in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We also extend the same sentiments to the
Government of Bangladesh.

I would like to thank Mr. Hasegawa for his
briefing on the situation in Timor-Leste and on the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). I would like to thank him in particular for
his presentation of the recommendations of the
Secretary-General regarding UNMISET's mandate. I
also express my gratitude to Foreign Minister Jose
Ramos-Horta for having shared his Government's
views regarding the challenges ahead and the need for
a continued United Nations presence in Timor-Leste.
Before I express my delegation's preliminary views on
those recommendations - and taking into account the
concerns expressed by Foreign Minister
Ramos-Horta - I deem it useful to make a brief
assessment of the current situation.

First, it must be underlined that, during the past
six years, the people and the authorities of Timor-Leste
have been able to achieve quite promising progress
concerning the consolidation of the Timorese State and
its institutions. That improvement is even more evident
when compared with the achievements in similar
situations during the same period of time. The progress
achieved is the best guarantee for peace and stability in
the region. My delegation believes that the strong and
unequivocal commitment of the international
community to the advancement of the cause of
Timorese independence constitutes an important
component of the success story of Timor-Leste.

As recognized in the Secretary-General's report,
most State institutions and other relevant structures in
Timor-Leste were put in place thanks to an integrated
and comprehensive strategy, conceived under the
auspices of the United Nations and closely followed by
the Security Council, that has benefited from the active
support of the international community.

Secondly, it must be pointed out that despite that
undisputable progress, the integrated and
comprehensive strategy conceived by the Security
Council for Timor-Leste has not yet borne all its fruit.
Timor-Leste still faces considerable shortfalls and
limitations in terms of the capacity of its Government
and people to fully exercise their sovereignty and
independence in a sustainable manner. Timor-Leste's
vulnerability is evident in its dependence on expatriate
advisers, foreign economic aid and external assistance
to provide for almost all types of public goods and
services, from public planning and administration to
emergency security in case of imminent risk or threat.

In View of that, it is unlikely that Timor-Leste
will be in a position in May 2005 to assume by itself
the burden of consolidating State institutions and
promoting its recently achieved democratic status
without outside help. Consequently, the Council should
reaffirm its commitment to peace and stability in that
country, as was done in 1999. It should reaffirm its
commitment to the same long-term, integrated and
comprehensive strategy aimed at consolidating
Timorese independence. The withdrawal of the United
Nations from Timor-Leste at this time would lead to
setbacks that would put at risk the achievements
accomplished so far. We cannot afford to let that
happen.

Our assessment recommends that appropriate
adjustments be made to the Security Council's previous
strategy, taking into account the progress achieved and
the existing vulnerabilities. My delegation looks
forward to engaging in talks with all Council
delegations as well as the Secretariat, Mr. Hasegawa,
members of the core group on Timor-Leste and other
interested parties, such as the international financial
institutions and agencies of the United Nations system,
in order to facilitate the development of a new strategy.

We are open and flexible, but firm, when it comes
to the need to be constructive, objective, responsible
and far-sighted. Peace and development are
interconnected and require the renewed commitment of
the international community. My delegation suggests
that we should commence by trying to build a
consensus on the evaluation of the current situation in
Timor-Leste. We should also try to reach common
ground regarding the level and nature of the threats
now facing the country. We count on the very good
work being done by the transitional working groups,
devoted mainly to the various aspects related to civil
administration and public institutions. Only when we
have achieved that will we be in a position to move to
a substantive discussion on ways and means to address
Timor-Leste's problems and to elaborate a new strategy
to guide the international and United Nations presences
in the country. We should broaden our perspective so
as to encompass in our strategy the concern related to
post-conflict situations highlighted by the report of the
High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change.

My delegation strongly believes that next May,
when the Council decides on the future of UNMISET,
most of the Secretary-General's recommendations
should be adopted, including the reference to civilian
advisers in key positions, the continuation of training
in some of the national security agencies and
maintenance of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and his Office. In our opinion, they
are essential in order to marshal international efforts in
the best interests of Timor-Leste.

Finally, I wish to emphasize that the continued
United Nations presence in Timor-Leste after May
2005 should maintain its most important characteristic:
its multilateral, comprehensive and goal-oriented
nature. As part of the Community of Portuguese
Speaking Countries, Brazil is fully committed to the
future of Timor-Leste. We are proud to announce that a
number of recent bilateral initiatives have been
launched to enhance cooperation - particularly in the
field of capacity-building and training - in the area of
justice and in the military sector, and that many more
ongoing bilateral efforts are being pursued.

