Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
important briefing, and we welcome the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, to the Council. We are grateful for the
presentation of the fourth report to the Security Council,
in accordance with resolution 1970 (2011), as well as for
the additional information shared with us today.

In the context of Libya's complex transitional
process, we welcome the progress made by the Office
of the Prosecutor in the cases against Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi. We trust
that, as the transitional process advances, stronger
institutions will develop that will allow Libya to forge
a State that guarantees human rights, the rule of law
and the end of impunity. We therefore believe that it
is extremely important to maintain our cooperation
with the International Criminal Court and the Office
of the Prosecutor. It is crucial that those entities receive
the necessary support and assistance from all States,
including those that are still not party to the Rome
Statute.

Similarly, we believe that the Libyan authorities
have an obligation to respect the work of the Court
and the Office of the Prosecutor. To that end, we must
ensure that they will be able to work without hindrance
or restriction. Those assurances are all the more
important given the incident involving several Court
officials who were detained by the Libyan authorities
while on an official mission.

We appreciate the work done thus far by the
Office of the Prosecutor of the Court, but we also
see the involvement of the Libyan authorities in the
process and their interest in it as a positive sign. We
eagerly await the decision that the Court will take on
the challenge presented by the Government of Libya
on the admissibility of the case against Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi. We believe that this situation will make
it possible to determine the impartiality, independence
and capacity of the Libyan judicial system to respond
to those challenges. In any case, whatever the ultimate
decision of the Court will be on the admissibility ofthis
case, we agree with Ms. Bensouda that the Office of the
Prosecutor must remain informed on all the steps and
decisions that are taken on that matter.

As for the investigations on other crimes committed
in Libya, we believe it important for the investigations
of human rights violations and crimes against humanity
in Libya, regardless of their perpetrators, to continue.
We are extremely concerned by the gender crimes that
took place during the conflict, and we hope that the
investigations ofthose crimes can help to deliverjustice
to the victims of such serious offenses.

Lastly, and as expressed by our Minister for
Foreign Affairs in the open debate on 17 October
under the Guatemalan presidency of the Security
Council (see S/PV.6849), we reiterate our support for
and commitment to the International Criminal Court
and the Office of the Prosecutor. We believe that it is
necessary to take the necessary measures and to step
up international cooperation in order to bring an end
to impunity and to ensure that those responsible for
atrocious crimes be brought to justice. We believe
that cooperation is key if the Council is to be able to
support its own decisions and to provide a follow-up to
its referrals to the Court.

