Mr. Fernandez Revollo (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing. The information he provided is very useful in
order to understand the importance of the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Bolivia expresses its concern about the grave
violence spread by armed groups, which affects
civilians, increases the number of internally displaced
persons, incites intercommunal clashes and increases
insecurity, all of which the Congolese people are
victims of, in particular the most vulnerable - women
and children.

Similarly, we are concerned about the worsening
of the humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/565) points out that 1,444 human rights
violations were committed between March and May.
According to data by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, in the Kasai region, one of
the regions most affected by violence, more than 500
boys and girls were recruited by armed groups. There
have been 600 cases of sexual violence reported since
August 2016, and there have been many cases of human
trafficking, summary executions and arbitrary arrests.
Bolivia condemns any act of sexual exploitation and
abuse, which must be duly investigated and brought
to justice in the competent Courts so that this type of
violence does not go unpunished.

There are now 1.4 million internally displaced
persons in the Kasai region, and a total of 3.8 million
internally displaced persons throughout the entire
country. Moreover, more than 400,000 children under
the age of five suffer from chronic malnutrition in Ituri
province, and it is estimated that 3.5 million children
are affected throughout the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In half of the 26 provinces that
are affected by armed violence, civilians have suffered
not only the loss of lives, but they also lack access
to health and other service, as hospitals and medical
centres have been targets of attacks by armed groups,
which has led to a serious humanitarian crisis.

We call for the stepping up the efforts of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and its staff in order to bring security to civilians
and to neutralize the armed groups in the country,
including increasing the community alert networks
and improvements in early warning mechanisms.
MONUSCO is called upon to play a more active role in
that respect.

Concerning the political agreement signed on
31 December 2016 in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo between the Government and the opposition,
Bolivia believes that it is a solid basis that establishes
a road map for organizing the presidential elections,
in accordance with the Congolese Constitution and
resolution 2277 (2016).

With regard to the December 2016 agreement, we
are concerned that the monitoring mechanism has not
yet been set up and regret the lack of progress in the
implementation of the agreed confidence-building
measures. We call on all parties to step up those
endeavours. We highlight the efforts towards updating
the voter registry in 13 provinces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and we encourage authorities
to continue that process in the Kasai and Kasai
Central provinces with a view to implementing the
31 December 2016 agreement. We also stress the
need for an inclusive dialogue on compliance with the
Congolese Constitution that considers the viewpoints
of all parties, including the Rassemblement des forces
politiques et sociales de la Republique democratique du
Congo acquises au changement and the ruling majority.

We commend the active support of regional
organizations, the participation of the African Union,
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region and each of the guarantors of the peace
process which enhance their efforts through political
appeasement and cooperation initiatives for sustainable
reconciliation. We take note of the diplomatic efforts
of the Government that seek to broaden other regional
countries' support for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and for the implementation of the December
2016 agreement - including bilateral presidential
level meetings.

We call on all armed groups to lay down their arms
and on all parties to the conflict to set aside any interests
that might block fruitful dialogue that would enable the
consolidation of agreements that would bring stability
to the country. We encourage the Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo and MONUSCO to
coordinate their efforts.

Finally, we are convinced that the people and the
institutions of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
must be the ones that make decisions regarding the
future of their country. We believe that principle to be
a decisive factor in the promotion of peace, stability
and development that fully respects the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

