Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (spoke in Chinese): Allow
me first of all, on behalf of the Chinese Government and
people, to express our most profound condolences on the
passing away of King Hassan II of Morocco. We also
wish to express our sincere sympathy to his Majesty,
Mohammed VI, the royal family of Morocco and the
Moroccan Government and people.

The Chinese delegation wishes to thank Mrs. Sadako
Ogata for her briefing to the Security Council on the
question of African refugees. We also wish to express our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, and to the Malaysian
delegation for the efforts made to arrange this open
debate.

The African continent currently has over 3 million
refugees and over 2 million displaced persons, amounting
to almost one third of the world population in these
categories. Due to conflict and economic backwardness,
too many African refugees find themselves in a
lamentable predicament, eliciting the general concern of
the international community.

It is gratifying to note that, in recent decades, the
international community has made untiring efforts to
assist African refugees. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the relevant
agencies, donor countries and some international
organizations and agencies of civil society have provided
a certain amount of humanitarian assistance to African
refugees. This assistance has, to a certain extent, eased
their plight and we appreciate it.

The key to the resolution of the refugee problem is
to remove the root causes of this phenomenon. This has
become a widespread and shared understanding of the
international community. When we discuss the question
of African refugees, we must consider the underlying
causes of this issue. In recent years, the general trend on
the African continent has been towards alleviating the
problem, but low-intensity conflicts and turbulence
continue unabated. The relatively backward economies,
buffeted by the waves of globalization, also face

 

marginalization. Political instability and lack of economic
development are the basic forces behind the lack of long-
term solutions to and the growing intensity of the African
problem.

Many African countries clearly recognize this fact.
African leaders, at the recent thirty-fifth summit of the
Organization of African Unity, issued a strong call for an
end to conflict and for the revitalization of African
economies, and demonstrated firm resolve to take action.
This was a positive development for the resolution of the
question of African refugees. At the same time, we feel that
the international community should - on the basis of the
principles of respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity and
non-interference in internal affairs - increase assistance to
African countries and participate in the resolution of the
refugee problem.

In recent days, great attention has been paid to the fact
that, while every refugee in Kosovo receives $1.6 every
day, every African refugee receives a mere ¢11. As Mrs.
Ogata pointed out in her briefing a few moments ago, in
certain emergency situations one must concentrate the
resources necessary to meet the needs of a given situation.
However, this sharp disparity clearly demonstrates that
certain donor countries provide foreign assistance
selectively and conditionally in accordance with their own
political interests and wishes. This is extremely unfair to
African refugees. We strongly appeal to the international
community to abide by the principles of humanitarianism,
neutrality and fairness in providing assistance and to avoid
politicizing the provision of assistance and promoting
imbalance among the regions.

In April 1998, we held a comprehensive discussion in
this Chamber on the Secretary-General's report on the
situation in Africa, including refugees. In November 1998,
the Security Council adopted resolution 1208 (1998) on the
question of African refugees, proving that the Council is
capable of demonstrating its particular concern for the
refugee problem. We also feel that the Council - which
bears the primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security - should be actively
engaged in the resolution of conflict and strife in Africa
and maintain stability and peace there. Only thus can the
problem of African refugees be resolved at its source. Only
thus can the Security Council make an outstanding
contribution to the resolution of the problem of African
refugees.

At the same time, we also note that many developing
countries are frequently beset by natural disasters. The
resources for disaster relief, however, are increasingly
scarce. That should be a source of concern, because this
situation can also affect the stability of disaster-stricken
countries.

As a developing country, China has, within its
means and through multilateral and bilateral channels,
provided assistance to African countries at various levels
and in various forms. China enjoys a good cooperative
relationship with UNHCR, which we wish to maintain
and strengthen in order to make our contribution to the
solution of the African refugee problem.

