Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): Almost two
years ago the Government of Angola and UNITA agreed to
a ceasefire and to a process of military and political steps
aimed at achieving a durable peace in Angola. They
appealed to the international community to assist them to
achieve that peace. The Council responded by deploying
what is now the largest United Nations peacekeeping
operation in the world.

Since then, both sides have worked towards the
achievement of a durable peace. This is not an easy
process, and we are aware that sacrifices have been
demanded of both sides.

Nevertheless, the goals that have to be achieved and
the steps needed to reach them are clearly set out in the
Lusaka Protocol. The lack of progress over the last three
months has cast doubt on UNITA's willingness to abide by
their commitments to the peace process.

There are several outstanding issues which we had
expected to see resolved by now: the integration of the
armed forces, a special status for Mr. Savimbi, the return
of all 10 UNITA generals to posts in Luanda, and the
return of UNIT A Deputies to the National Assembly. But
all these issues are still pending. And, while UNITA have
quartered in excess of 62,000 troops, the high level of
desertions is worrying. UNITA should spare no effort to
ensure the immediate return of troops already registered at
the quartering sites. It is also important that the orderly

 

demobilization of quartered troops should be undertaken
without delay to prevent further desertions and unrest in
the camps, and that the process for selecting UNITA
troops to be integrated into the Angolan Armed Forces
should be accelerated.

UNAVEM. III must be able to count on the support
of the parties to conduct its work. It is particularly
important that the parties cooperate with mine-clearance
operations, as some of my colleagues have already
pointed out this morning. The reported restrictions on
UNAVEM. III and on humanitarian demining operations
are unacceptable. We are also concerned at reports of
more general harassment of the humanitarian
organizations in Angola. The parties, particularly UNITA,
should make every effort to allow freedom of movement
and security for the non-governmental organizations.

The innternational community has invested heavily
in this peace process, and is not prepared to see that
process fail. We agree with the Secretary-General that
continuing delays and unfulfilled promises are
unacceptable. A new spirit of cooperation and mutual
trust between the parties is essential for the peace process
to enter its final phase. We believe that an early meeting
between His Excellency President Dos Santos and
Mr. Savimbi should take place to resolve the outstanding
matters, and to create an atmosphere of genuine trust
between the parties.

In this respect, Mr. Savimbi clearly missed an
important opportunity for such a meeting when he failed
to attend the Southern African Development Community
summit in Luanda on 2 October, and we share the
Secretary-General's disappointment at this.

We have listened very carefully to the views of the
distinguished Foreign Ministers and other representatives
of the Southern African Development Community. We
welcome and support their engagement in the Angolan
peace process and we share their determination to ensure
that UNITA complies with its peace process
commitments.

Finally, on the question of the extension of the
mandate of UNAVEM. III, we agree with the Secretary-
General that the mandate of UNAVEM. III should be
renewed only until 11 December 1996.

The Council will no doubt want to send a clear and
unmistakable signal regarding the need for progress, and
we shall want to consider carefully the various

 

suggestions made in this debate and in other consultations
over recent days as to how this is best expressed in a
Security Council resolution at this critical juncture.

