Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to start by thanking the Secretary-General for his
presence here today and for the report he has given us
on the situation in the Middle East. I would also like to
thank His Excellency Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, for having
convened this important ministerial meeting on the
Middle East in a timely fashion, bearing in mind the
current political dynamics in the key States in the
region. I welcome the presence of the ministers, deputy
ministers and permanent representatives who are here
with us today.

Mexico believes that the establishment of two
democratic States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace within secure and internationally
recognized borders on the basis of Security Council
resolutions, is the only solution for lasting prosperity
and peace between Israelis and Palestinians and more
generally in the Middle East. In that spirit and
conviction, Mexico has participated in international
efforts for peace, in particular the Annapolis
conference, which seemed promising in its time in
terms of making progress in this process. We will
continue to actively support such initiatives, which will
make it possible to arrive at a definitive settlement of
the peace process in the Middle East.

Mexico also supports the efforts of the Quartet to
create conditions favourable to relaunching the peace
process and Security Council initiatives to ensure the
implementation of its relevant resolutions on the basis
of a consensus position. The delegation of Mexico
would like to express its resolute willingness to work
with the Russian Federation and the international
community to promote the exchange of creative ideas
on crafting new strategies that will make it possible to
overcome obstacles and achieve progress in the peace
process with all the urgency required by the situation.

Despite recent efforts, the situation in the Middle
East remains critical. We see trends running counter to
the peace process and to a lasting solution to the
conflicts in the region; these are a cause of concern for
my delegation. We can affirm that the necessary
political conditions for a long-term understanding are
lacking at this juncture.

In Gaza and southern Israel, despite the unilateral
cessation of hostilities, outbreaks of violence in the
field are still being reported and rocket attacks and the
consequent reprisals and incursions by the Israeli
armed forces in the Gaza Strip have continued. The
difficulty of access for humanitarian aid and the severe
restrictions on the supply of building materials, fuel
and cash in Gaza have caused living conditions to
significantly and continuously deteriorate, further
generating a feeling of frustration and injustice that
considerably affects the aspirations of the populations
of the region and the international community as a
whole.

In the West Bank, there are also reports of clashes
between Palestinians and Israeli settlers, incursions of
the Israeli armed forces and terrorist attacks on the
Israeli civilian population living in the surrounding
areas. Similarly, restrictions on the free movement of
people who live in that area remain, and the demolition
and settlement policy in East Jerusalem and the West
Bank continues.

My delegation again condemns all acts of
violence, especially those directed against the civilian
population, and urges all actors to comply with the
provisions of international humanitarian law at all
times.

We thank the Secretary-General for his executive
summary to the Security Council on the report of the
Board of Inquiry on the attacks on United Nations
installations during the recent conflict in Gaza. My
delegation hopes that in due course the report will be
examined in detail by the Security Council itself.

We note that, in the present circumstances, the
peace process not only may remain stagnant, but even
runs the risk of reverting to the status quo ante, which
would be unacceptable. The Government of Israel and
the Palestinian Authority must show the necessary will
to resume negotiations as soon as possible and to put
an end to the spiral of tension and violence that has
characterized this region of the world during the past
months.

Also, without question, the support of the
neighbouring States and of the entire international
community is necessary to overcome this obstacle to
the peace process. To that end, the provisions of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolutions 1850 (2008) and 1860 (2009), must be
implemented without reservation.

My delegation is concerned that the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council on the situation in the
Middle East have not been fully implemented. The
maintenance of international peace and security is the
fundamental purpose of the United Nations, and
Member States have agreed to respect and ensure
respect for decisions aimed at achieving that objective,
in keeping with the spirit and the letter of the United
Nations Charter.

Similarly, both parties will have to comply with
all the main elements of the Road Map and to avoid
undertaking actions that undermine trust and affect the
negotiations process. In that regard, we particularly
regret that the colonization, demolition and settlement
activities continue in the Palestinian territories, since
they infringe on the principles of the Road Map and
threaten the peace process as a whole.

It is also essential that the efforts towards
achieving intra-Palestinian reconciliation, fostered with
the support of the Government of Egypt, continue.
Only the creation of a united, democratic Palestinian
Government committed to the peace process, the
Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative, can
lay the foundations for a peace process leading to a
final solution to the conflict.

It is important to underscore the need for the
support of international community in achieving
tangible progress in the peace process. To that end, we
welcome the efforts undertaken by the Quartet, in
particular by United States President Barack Obama, to
direct the parties to resume dialogue. We trust that the
convening of an international conference in Moscow
will, when it takes place, help to re-establish the bases
for dialogue and negotiation.

We also welcome the commitment reaffirmed by
King Abdullah II of Jordan in favour of a "57-State
solution", thus demonstrating that peace can be
achieved only through a joint effort. It also confirms
the central position that the Arab Peace Initiative must
hold in that process. We also recall the relevance of
fulfilling the commitments made during the Sharm
el-Sheikh conference last March, which are
fundamental to the reconstruction of Gaza and the
normalization of the lives of its inhabitants.

As the delegation of Mexico has repeatedly
suggested, reconstruction and access for humanitarian
aid will be possible only through the establishment of a
monitoring mechanism that guarantees a lasting
ceasefire, the opening of the border crossings and
control of the illicit arms trade.

In parallel, it is essential that efforts towards
achieving regional peace continue. We invite Israel and
Syria to resume their indirect talks, which had been
under the auspices of Turkey, and we call on Israel,
Lebanon and Syria to fully comply with the provisions
of resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701
(2006). The normalization of relations among those
neighbouring countries and withdrawal from the
occupied territories will have a positive impact on the
peaceful settlement of the conflict.

In the current context, the most substantial
momentum that can be leant to the peace process must
come from the actors directly involved in it. To that
end, we urge Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
hold a constructive dialogue without preconditions, on
the basis of previous international agreements and
obligations. We hope that in the coming weeks the
political conditions to achieve that goal will be
established.

The Security Council will have to ensure that
both parties follow the guidelines of the Road Map,
whose end objective is the establishment of two
democratic States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace within secure and internationally
recognized borders.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
express its support for adoption of the presidential
statement drafted by the Russian Federation, which is
an extremely timely and appropriate contribution
towards promoting dialogue and negotiation to
establish long-term regional peace. Mexico is ready to
support and to actively participate in any initiative
leading to the lasting settlement of one of the main
conflicts on today's agenda, one that has an impact on
international peace, security and stability.

