Mr. Castro Cordoba (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): We congratulate you, Madam President, and
the Mission of the United States of America on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April. We also welcome the statement
made by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process.

Millions of human beings live every day in anguish
and despair and with the painful memories of armed
conflicts. Costa Rica deeply regrets the spread of
conflicts in the Middle East. The situation in recent
years has deteriorated, and it has not been possible to
achieve peace and security in the region. It is urgent that
we succeed in putting an end to the humanitarian crisis
confronting us and seek a prompt political solution.
The crisis has become a humanitarian tragedy of
scandalous proportions, an affront to all of humankind.
We therefore once again urge the Security Council to
fully exercise its mandate to maintain international
peace and security, as clearly set forth in the Charter of
the United Nations.

My country regrets the recurrent terrorist
attacks that have taken place in the Middle East. We
categorically condemn all acts, methods and practices
of terrorism and violent extremism in all their
manifestations, wherever they take place and whoever
the perpetrators are, regardless of their motivation. That
includes condemnation of financial, material or political
support for terrorism as unjustifiable under applicable
international law, given its detrimental effects on the
enjoyment of human rights and on democratic societies.
Such acts are a threat to the territorial integrity and the
security of States. Those activities must be addressed
and tackled through multilateralism, in accordance with
the provisions of international law and in full respect for
human rights. In the same spirit, Costa Rica condemns
unilateral actions carried out in contravention of the
Charter of the United Nations.

We reaffirm the primary responsibility of States to
prevent and combat violent extremism, but we appeal for
a human rights approach in combating it. That approach
should encompass the whole of society, including the
participation of Governments, civil society, local and
religious leaders and the private sector.

With regard to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, Costa
Rica reiterates the urgent need to resume negotiations
between the parties on the core issues of the conflict
that still exist, based on the obligations already made
and on previously signed agreements. We must find
a political solution to that conflict and create as soon
as possible a new peace architecture for resolving
the differences, one that will lead to the achievement
of the objectives set by the international community:
harmonious coexistence between an independent
Palestinian State and the State of Israel.

With regard to the conflict in Syria and the
insufficient action taken by the Security Council,
Costa Rica urges all States members of the General
Assembly to take on their share of responsibility and
assume their roles as set out under Articles 11, 12 and
14 of the Charter of the United Nations. The General
Assembly must act decisively on issues pertaining to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
That is a collective responsibility. We cannot continue
to ignore the suffering of the millions of people who
have fallen victim to that political and military game.

I therefore urge members that we carry out our work
and put multilateralism into practice so that solidarity
prevails. along with the commitment to satisfy the
interests of the entire international community and not
just those of one group of nations. The United Nations
must play its role as the epicentre of global governance
based on mutual respect and the collective search
for solutions.

We believe that we must urgently join forces in
investigating and condemning those responsible for the
most heinous crimes so as to halt any act that results
in the death of innocents, bring about justice and end
the suffering and losses of more innocent civilians.
The only thing worse than this human tragedy is that
impunity succeeds instead ofjustice.

Costa Rica reiterates its concern about the growing
tension generated by the conflicts in the Middle
East and vigorously calls on a united international
community to achieve peace in that region. We make
this call specifically to all permanent members of the
Council so that, in accordance with code of conduct
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
Group, they commit to refraining from the use the veto
when we are faced with the commission of the most
heinous crimes, so that the Council can act swiftly to
ensure the protection of civilians.

