Ms. McClean (Barbados): It is a pleasure to see New
Zealand seated among the 15 members of the Security
Council, where, typically, the perspectives of small
island developing States (SIDS) are not articulated. My
delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate on the peace and security
challenges facing small island developing States,
which for the first time brings the focus of the Security
Council to the specific concerns of SIDS.

At the Third International Conference on Small
Island Developing States in Samoa, the importance
of peace and security was reaffirmed. The preamble
to the Conference's SIDS Accelerated Modalities of
Action (SAMOA) Pathway outcome document (General Assembly resolution 69/15, annex) reaffirmed

"the importance of freedom, peace and security,
respect for all human rights, including the right to
development and the right to an adequate standard
ofliving, including the right to food, the rule oflaw,
gender equality, women's empowerment, reducing
inequalities and the overall commitment to just and
democratic societies for development."

The Government of Barbados continues to oppose
the proliferation of nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons. On a day-to-day basis, however, we must
focus on the trade in small arms and light weapons that
facilitates traffic in illicit drugs and other organized
crime, undermines our economy and can destabilize
society. In the 2011 Declaration on Small Arms
and Light Weapons of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), Heads of Government emphasized the
grave threat posed by small arms and light weapons and
their ammunition, and committed to implementing all
necessary actions at the national and regional level to
fully combat their illicit trade. Moreover, in 2013 the
Heads of Government of the Caribbean Community
adopted a CARICOM. crime and security strategy
entitled "Securing the Region". It lists a number of
immediate significant threats to the region, such as
transnational organized crime, gang crime, cyber
crime, financial crime and corruption.

The situation is of course made worse by the
many vulnerabilities peculiar to or common among
SIDS. They include narrow resource bases, small
domestic markets, a susceptibility to external shocks
owing to high degrees of openness, and environmental
vulnerability. The threats are made more significant
by the geography of SIDS. Often made up of small
land masses, SIDS have air and maritime borders
that are multiple times larger. The cost of protecting
national borders is thus prohibitive, and difficult in
circumstances where SIDS find it equally challenging
to exploit their important maritime resources and are
therefore unable to benefit fully from them. Taken
together, these threats to peace and security require the
diversion of already limited resources at a significant
cost to national development. They have a grave
impact on the socioeconomic development of Barbados
and other CARICOM. States, extracting a high toll in
human lives and productivity, lowering the quality of
life, impeding social development and undermining
economic growth.

In Barbados and throughout the Caribbean region,
we are aware of the need for international partnerships
in facing challenges to peace and security. We are
pleased by the decision of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime to re-establish a presence in
the Caribbean, and expect that its contribution as a
global leader in crime prevention will help us in the
burdensome task we must undertake. We look forward
to an early commencement of the project in Barbados.

It is often said that there can be no peace without
development, and no development without peace. SIDS
have made dedicated efforts towards both those ends.
We call on developed States and international financial
institutions to support small island developing States,
which are engaged in a constant fight to raise the level
of development they have attained. In the SAMOA
Pathway, member States recalled how critically
important international cooperation and partnerships
are to achieving SIDS' sustainable development. Peace
and security are integral enablers of that development.
We maintain that these issues are inextricably linked
and that a holistic approach must be taken to them in
order to ensure success.
As ocean States, SIDS attach particular importance
to maintaining healthy seas. We remain concerned by
the myriad threats facing our oceans. They include
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, pollution,
acidification and coastal runoff. As a region, we are
acutely aware of the deleterious effects that these
threats can have on our communities' food security
and livelihoods. We therefore welcome the ongoing
discussions taking place here at the United Nations
aimed at formal recognition of how important the
conservation and sustainable use of our oceans, seas and
marine resources are to the sustainable development of
SIDS. Barbados congratulates New Zealand and other
members of the Security Council for the constructive
role they continue to play in this issue.

As we engage in this dialogue on the peace and
security challenges facing small island developing
States, it is clear that the narrow postwar definition
of peace and security that has guided the work of the
Council in its 70 years of existence must be broadened.
Much has changed since 1945. The Organization must
keep pace and step into the twenty-first century. Change
can only serve to make it more inclusive and dynamic.

I would like to briefly mention the issue of climate
change. The existential threat posed to SIDS by
climate change can only be tackled by a comprehensive
international effort grounded in the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).
Barbados is supportive of the various arenas in
which this peril is being tackled and appreciates the
supportive framework that these multiple processes
offer. However, we maintain that the negotiations
process under the UNFCCC remains the pre-eminent
and most appropriate space for discussions on climate
change to take place.

In conclusion, the Government of Barbados thanks
you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative during your
presidency to organize this special event dedicated to
the unique challenges faced by SIDS. We look forward
to a time in the near future when the peace and security
challenges facing SIDS are an integral part of the work
of the Security Council. It is our hope that this debate
will be a step in that direction.

