Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank Special
Representative Yamamoto and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their
support of the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). Close
coordination with UNAMA is important to the overall
effectiveness of the 1988 sanctions regime.

The 1988 Sanctions Committee aims to deter the
Taliban and associates through tools such as an assets
freeze, a travel ban and an arms embargo. At the same
time, the 1988 sanctions regime is intended to support
the peace and reconciliation process, including through
the use of the delisting process and the process for
granting exemptions to enable a list of persons to
engage in peace and reconciliation negotiations and
other approved activities.

The existence of the 1988 sanctions regime matters
to the Taliban. Removal from what the Taliban call
the United Nations blacklist is consistently in the top
three demands of the group. The Taliban also follow
developments in the 1988 Sanctions Committee closely,
often issuing statements on reports of the Monitoring
Team and activities of the Committee. However, despite
the sanctions measures, the Taliban have retained the
ability to conduct attacks on Afghan forces, the Afghan
people and the international presence in Afghanistan.
The latest report (see S/2016/842) of the Monitoring
Team, which was presented to the Committee in October,
outlines how the Taliban continue their offensive
against the Government of Afghanistan following the
leadership transfer from Akhtar Mohammad Mansour
and Haibatullah Akhundzada in May of this year.

The Taliban's positions on peace talks with the
Government of Afghanistan have hardened and clashes
between the Taliban and Government forces have
increased between 10 and 13 per cent, as compared to
those in 2015. Such clashes continue to be funded mainly

by the narcotics economy and the illegal extraction of
natural resources. The situation is also complicated by
the presence of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and foreign terrorist fighters in Afghanistan.

While there are many structures and frameworks
in place, the implementation of the sanctions measures
can be uneven. The Committee continues to receive
reports of listed Taliban travelling without approved
exemptions from the Committee. That issue clearly
needs to be addressed. The Committee would also
like to encourage Member States to play a more active
role in providing information that would help to keep
the sanctions list as up-to-date as possible. If Member
States provide that information, it will support their
own implementation efforts. War could also be done
to target narcotics smugglers financially supporting
the Taliban.

The Taliban's income from narcotics is estimated
at around $400 million per year. Cutting off that
financial stream could have a significant impact
on the Taliban's ability to resource its offensive
against the Government of Afghanistan. Six of the
Committee's meetings this year were focused on the
nexus between narcotics smuggling and the Taliban.
The Committee received briefings on counter-narcotics
efforts from Afghanistan's Deputy Interior Minister,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Monitoring Team.
Such efforts help to identify individuals who may be
suitable for designation on the 1988 list.

The overall effectiveness of the 1988 sanctions
measures also relies on close coordination with the
Government of Afghanistan and with the region. That
is one of the reasons I recently travelled to Afghanistan
as Chair of the 1988 Taliban Sanctions Committee
and the Security Council Committee establishsed
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, to engage directly
with interlocutors and the Afghan Government. I was
pleased with the level of engagement the delegation
received while in Kabul, including meetings with
President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah, the
Minister of the Interior and the Governor of the Central
Bank of Afghanistan.

The meetings in Kabul showed that there is
potential for greater use of the 1988 sanctions regime
to deter the Taliban and to support the peace process.
The legal frameworks are in place to implement the
sanctions measures, for example, the Central Bank of
Afghanistan outlined a comprehensive framework for
the tracing and freezing of assets of listed individuals
and entities. However, such structures are effective
only against listed individuals, who are identifiable.
There are many associates of the Taliban who are not on
the list and others lacking sufficient identifiers. Such
structures are also effective only within Afghanistan.
Cross-border flows of money, narcotics, arms and
foreign terrorist fighters are challenges that extend to
the wider region.

The Committee therefore welcomes the various
commitments made by the Government of Afghanistan
during the visit to engage more actively with the
sanctions regime, including to provide the names of
narcotics smugglers who financially support the Taliban
and to request the listing of the Taliban leadership. In
turn, the Committee is working on providing forms
to assist with applying for exemptions from the assets
freeze and travel-ban measures and hopes to have
those available on its website shortly. The Committee
looks forward to continued close engagement with
UNAMA, Afghanistan and regional States, under the
chairmanship of Kazakhstan for 2017-2018.

