Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): Let me begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Miyet for his
informative briefing.

Five years after Dayton, there is progress in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but the progress is slow and
much remains to be done. One field of rather
spectacular progress this year has been that of refugee
return to minority areas. This year witnessed the return
of three times as many internally displaced persons as
the year before. We consider this a very positive
development. As refugee return is a sort of yardstick
for the assessment of the situation in the minds of
displaced persons, this sharp rise testifies to progress
achieved in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Unfortunately,
we also hear reports on growing tension in the
Republika Srpska on the issue of returnees. In this light
we reiterate our call on all parties to work towards a
democratic and multi-ethnic Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The Netherlands is concerned about the
relationship between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
financial institutions, especially the World Bank. A
review is due on 30 November, and it seems that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will have the greatest
difficulty in meeting the conditions for further
disbursements. The budgets of both the Federation and
the Republika Srpska show considerable gaps,
amounting to almost 30 per cent of the total. Measures
must be taken to address this situation.

We are aware that these budget gaps are partly
caused by revenues being much lower than estimated.
There may be several reasons for that, but two seem to
stand out. One is the weakness of the system of duty
and tax collection. There is a clear need for more
vigorous enforcement here, but this will be feasible
only once the institutional structures of law
enforcement and of an effective judicial system are in
place. We know that these structures are being set up,
but this is a field where progress is slow.

Another reason for the budget deficits is
corruption and crime. It has been estimated that every
year $500 million of domestic revenue is lost due to
smuggling, particularly of cigarettes. Without this loss
of revenue there would be no budget deficit.
Smuggling on such a huge scale implies that high-level
Government officials must be involved.

My delegation is aware of Bosnian efforts to curb
corruption and crime, but we feel that much more
needs to be done. It is obvious that crime and
corruption risk impeding the successful implementation
of the Dayton and Paris Peace Agreements. In this
connection, it has been pointed out that the country is
going through many simultaneous transitions. We grant
this, but the conclusion can only be that the Bosnian
authorities must redouble their efforts to stamp out
crime and corruption. They must be aware that foreign
aid is not an infinite commodity.

