Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We, too, wish to
thank the High Representative, Mr. Schwarz-Schilling,
for his comprehensive report and briefing. It is
encouraging to us to note the many positive
developments indicating that Bosnia and Herzegovina
is progressing on the road towards the establishment of
a fully functioning democracy.

Even though Bosnia and Herzegovina has made
tremendous strides in establishing a political system
that functions on democratic principles, work still
needs to be done, especially with regard to bridging the
ethnic divide and promoting reconciliation among the
various ethnic groups in the country. We are
specifically concerned about the developments relating
to Republika Srpska as well as the apparent regression
in Brcko district and the radicalization of issues
relating to ethnicity. Those factors have the ability to
undermine stability in the country.

The Balkans constitutes an area where peoples
are surrounded by States that often reflect the same
populations. Internal instability in any one country in
the region always has the potential to disrupt the entire
region, and Bosnia and Herzegovina is no exception.
One way of creating a multi-ethnic society is for
Bosnia Herzegovina to continue on its path of reform
and for parliament to work resolutely to adopt the
required amendment package, which would ensure the
broader process of constitutional reform that is
necessary to ensure effective government for all
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Bosnia and Herzegovina must remain focused on
implementing the reforms, since that will ensure the
long-term stability of a democratic and prosperous
society. A political agreement should be reached on
police reform and to finalize the full integration of the
armed forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina to ensure
enhanced cooperation with the justice system in the
fight against organized crime.

We have noted with concern the difficulties with
regard to the permanent return of refugees and
internally displaced persons, who are estimated to
number more than 130,000. Of specific concern is the
conclusion of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees that returnees belonging to
minority groups live in squalid conditions, with no
access or limited access to even basic services. We call
for more concerted efforts to enable those persons who
wish to return to do so with the assurance that their
rights and needs will be met.

Finally, we support the High Representative and
the policy of progressively handing over
responsibilities to the leadership of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is therefore important that progress be
maintained so that Bosnia and Herzegovina can
become an even more democratic, multi-ethnic and
stable country that contributes to the peace, stability
and economic development of the Balkans.

