Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his
briefing, which is a useful supplement to the report of
the Secretary-General. I wish to express to him once
again France's full support for his activities in Kosovo.
His determination, his energy and his leadership
qualities have made it possible to maintain a very
constructive climate for the international community's
efforts in Kosovo. We therefore thank him once again
for that. Our thanks go also to General Yves de
Kermabon, Commander of KFOR, who in full
cooperation with Mr. lessen-Petersen is leading the
stabilizing activities of the international military
presence in Kosovo.
The Permanent Representative of Luxembourg
will shortly make a statement on behalf of the
European Union. I associate myself with that
statement, and therefore I shall make only a few
comments.

First, I would refer to the Secretary-General's
report on standards implementation in Kosovo
(S/2005/88), which was issued last week, to note that it
welcomes the commitment of Kosovo's provisional
authorities to make progress on the eight standards set
out by the international community. But, together with
the Secretary-General, we also wish to note that
progress in many areas remains insufficient and that
there is still much to do to ensure the protection of
minorities, freedom of movement, the return of
displaced persons and refugees, the rule of law and the
fight against organized crime.

In particular, we agree with the Secretary-
General's emphasis on returns and the rights of
Kosovo's communities, and we expect concrete results
from the provisional authorities in that area. The
responsibility of the majority community is to create a
climate in which the members of minority
communities, particularly Kosovo Serbs, feel that they
can live in Kosovo in normal conditions of safety and
dignity.

I would also like to stress that we can move
forward towards resolving this matter only if
substantial progress is made in those priority areas.
That has been the consistent position of the Security
Council. The provisional authorities must not only
make progress in the areas that concern them, but also
permanently sustain the progress made. That is the
only way we will be able to decide whether to begin
negotiations following the comprehensive review that
must be carried out later in the year.

From that perspective - and this is my last
point - we appeal to all parties to participate actively
and constructively in the processes under way in
Kosovo. I would like to stress that my country supports
the Secretary-General's appeal to the Kosovo Serbs to
become constructively involved in Kosovo's
institutions and his appeal to Serbia's authorities to
encourage them in that regard. It is only through
participation in the institutions and implementation of
the standards - not through withdrawal or defiance -
that the legitimate interests of the various parties can
be taken into account.

