I express my gratitude to all humanitarian workers on the front lines in Syria. I also thank both Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Ms. Sirkin for their briefings. It is promising to hear that the number of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) cases in Syria has not exploded. Nevertheless, as we know and heard again today, owing to the lack of testing, the numbers are not telling us the whole story, and the situation could still change rapidly in a matter of days. Most vulnerable to the virus are those people in overcrowded internally displaced person camps across the country. Unimpeded access to these areas is crucial for an effective response to the COVID-19 outbreak and humanitarian needs. Despite the initial containment of the virus, other problems remain. The possible withdrawal of the Russian Federation from the United Nations deconfliction arrangement is a worrisome sign, as it increases the risk of escalation. Disengagement from a peaceful solution also reaffirms the findings of the Secretary-General's board of inquiry, which clearly established that the Syrian regime and its allies have deliberately attacked humanitarian locations around Idlib and elsewhere. We condemn those attacks and call on Russia to resume its coordination with the United Nations and other parties on the ground under the deconfliction mechanism. Better to have 10 years of negotiations than one day of war. Considering the challenges, Estonia supports all the efforts of humanitarian penholders Belgium and Germany to renew the cross-border mandate. It is clear that both cross-line and cross-border modalities are required to reach all Syrians. Council members also cannot overlook the acute need for aid in north-eastern Syria. Compared to last year, only one-third of facilities receive the necessary equipment and medicine. We need a durable solution. Reauthorizing the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing for cross-border deliveries is the most effective answer, but other alternatives could be considered. We cannot ignore the suffering of the people in that large area. Finally, as long as the Syrian Government avoids taking responsibility and refuses to genuinely engage in the political process, the European Union's economic sanctions will remain in place. Those measures are there to bring justice and force the regime to choose peace over destroying its own country, as was so vividly described by Ms. Sirkin just now. This is also an imperative for the fourth Brussels conference on supporting the future of Syria, which started today. We want to note that the European Union and the United States together contribute about 90 per cent of United Nations funding for Syrians.
