Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): While
congratulating you, Sir, and wishing you every success
during your presidency of the Security Council this
month, I would like to take this opportunity to praise
the commendable work accomplished by your
predecessor, Ambassador Sergey Lavrov of the Russian
Federation.

My country is grateful for the opportunity to
speak in this public debate, which enables us to support
the efforts of the international community, in particular
those of the Secretary-General and the Security
Council, aimed at achieving a just and lasting peace in
the Middle East and the occupied Palestinian
territories.

This is the third time in recent weeks that my
country has expressed its position in the Security
Council on a conflict whose global implications can
leave no one indifferent. Four resolutions have been
adopted on this issue during that time - resolutions
1397 (2002) of 12 March, 1402 (2002) of 30 March,
1403 (2002) of 4 April and, lastly, 1405 (2002) of 19
April. All of those resolutions contain clear provisions
and specific deadlines. All of them have subsequently
been ignored by one or both parties.

Our unreserved support for the norms of
international law prompt us to affirm today that we are
concerned and disturbed by the lack of cooperation
from one of the parties in clarifying facts that require
an urgent response, in accordance with the obligation
of the international community to ensure respect for
human rights and to protect the civilian population
from the disproportionate use of force, regardless of
the objective sought.

We have forcefully condemned the terrorist
attacks on the civilian population in Israel, but we
consider equally condemnable the grave humanitarian
situation that the Israeli invasion has created in
Palestinian towns and camps. We consider particularly
serious the events in the Jenin camp, which cannot fail
to awaken universal feelings of pain and powerlessness
and which require a detailed and complete
investigation, as indicated in resolution 1405 (2002).
We profoundly regret the Israeli Government's decision
to prevent it.

Chile believes that contempt for or liberal
interpretation of resolutions adopted by the Security
Council require united and resolute action on the part
of the Council, as such attitudes endanger the
credibility and effectiveness of the Council's work,
thereby weakening the role conferred upon it by the
Charter as the guarantor of international peace and
security. It also affects the national dignity of all
Members of this Organization.

My country calls, clearly and explicitly, for the
abandonment of rigid positions and the adoption of
constructive attitudes capable of helping to replace
with dialogue unilateral decisions that could
irremediably affect the efforts being made by various
international players to resolve the conflict.

