Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti, comprising
Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, France, Mexico,
Peru, the United States and my country, Uruguay, my
delegation would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and the delegation of Turkey for having
taken the initiative to organize this timely debate on
the situation in Haiti, as laid out in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/446) on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). This debate highlights, once again, the
continued strong commitment of the Security Council
and the international community as a whole to the
stabilization process in Haiti.

As coordinator of the Group of Friends of Haiti, I
would like to convey the Group's greetings to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Edmond Mulet, and to thank him for his
comprehensive and informative briefing today. I would
make particular mention of his extraordinary service in
leading United Nations efforts in Haiti since the tragic
earthquake of 12 January. I want to thank him and all
the personnel of MINUSTAH for their dedication and
selfless sacrifice. Allow me also to thank the
Permanent Representative of Haiti, Ambassador Leo
Merores, for his valuable briefing this morning.

Before sharing with the members of the Security
Council the Group's views on the issues underlined by
the Secretary-General in his most recent report, let me
reaffirm, once again, the Group's continued support to
the Government and people of Haiti as they rebuild
their country, build peace and stability and promote
recovery and sustainable development.

The most recent report of the Secretary-General,
dated 1 September 2010, highlights the progress made
in the implementation of MINUSTAH's mandate, as set
out in Security Council resolutions 1892 (2009), 1908
(2010) and 1927 (2010). It also provides a framework
for the evolution of the Mission over the coming year,
including through the identification of milestones with
respect to the fulfilment of the mandate of
MINUSTAH.

As regards political issues, our Group shares the
Secretary-General's assessment that Haiti is now
entering a period of change that will be critical to its
future political stability. The Group of Friends of Haiti
stresses the importance of holding peaceful and
credible presidential and legislative elections leading
to the election of a President and Government with a
clear and firm mandate to effectively lead the country's
reconstruction process.

The Group of Friends of Haiti welcomes the
activities in support of Haiti's recovery and
development undertaken by MINUSTAH in close
cooperation with the United Nations country team
during the reporting period.

The Group also welcomes the establishment of
the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission to coordinate
and oversee recovery and reconstruction efforts in the
country. As the report points out, to date, of the total
funds pledged for 2010, 18.9 per cent, or
approximately $506 million, has been disbursed, and
an additional 19.5 per cent, or $523 million, has been
committed.

In spite of some progress in the disbursement of
pledges made at the international donors conference
held in March, the Group of Friends of Haiti urges
donors to fulfil their pledges in a timely manner in
order to allow Haiti to meet its immediate needs and
lay the foundations for sustainable economic and social
development. The Group of Friends of Haiti also urges
donors to continue to help the Haitian Government to
strengthen its capacity to implement its Action Plan
and thereby take ownership of the reconstruction
process, including through the support of the Interim
Haiti Recovery Commission and the Haiti
Reconstruction Fund.

The Group of Friends of Haiti reiterates the
importance of MINUSTAH's role in providing
logistical support and technical expertise to assist the
Government of Haiti to build the capacity of its rule of
law institutions and to contribute to the implementation
of its strategy for the resettlement of displaced persons.
At the same time, the Group notes the importance of
the swift implementation of those measures, given their
temporary nature and the fact that they will be phased
out gradually as the country's national capacity grows.

Finally, the Group of Friends of Haiti stresses the
need to extend the mandate of MINUSTAH in order to
enable that stabilization Mission to continue to
discharge its responsibilities within the current
environment. The Group of Friends of Haiti also shares
the Secretary-General's view that current troop and
police levels need to be maintained until an assessment
of the security environment is conducted following the
installation of a new President and Government. In that
regard, in the coming days the Group will submit a
new draft resolution on the renewal of MINUSTAH's
mandate for the consideration of the Security Council.

