Mr. Gobinathan (India): We thank you, Sir, for
scheduling this public meeting of the Security Council
on an issue of considerable importance and great
concern to all members of the United Nations. We also
congratulate Ambassador Arias of Spain and his team
for their capable stewardship of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001).

Terrorism is not a new phenomenon and, contrary
to some popular misperceptions, the fight against
terrorism was not born out of 11 September. India has
been at the forefront of the fight against terrorism for
almost two decades. During this period, over 60,000
Indians, mainly women and children, have lost their
lives to terrorism. Most recently, in a major incident,
52 innocent bystanders were killed in the twin terrorist
attacks in the city of Mumbai.

The scourge and reach of terrorism has indeed
extended across the world. Globalization cannot be
seen today merely in the context of the success of free
enterprise or the pervasiveness of television and other
mass media. The very means that have facilitated the
success of the global marketplace - improved
communications, access to media, better transport links
and faster and easier means of international travel -
have contributed to the development of a global
network of terrorism, - a network that feeds on the
common message of hatred and seeks to attain the
common objective of carnage and indiscriminate
destruction, and to demoralize and thereby dominate
civilized societies, particularly those based on
pluralistic democracies.

Unfortunately, some States regard terrorism as a
low-cost means of inflicting damage to the social,
political and economic well-being of their supposed
detractors by pursuing a form of low-intensity warfare,
without its attendant costs or risks. Despite the claim
that they are part of the global alliance against terror,
they stand implicated by their past records and present
inability to come clean.

Contradictions persist but cannot persevere. In a
recent newspaper article, a senior envoy of a permanent
member of the Security Council has reportedly accused
a Government, also a member of this Council and
which professes to be a valued partner in the war
against terrorism, of allowing renegade Taliban forces
a safe haven from which to "regroup, recruit, cross into
Afghanistan and cause mayhem" - a fact that Afghan
leaders have sought consistently to underscore at the
highest levels.

The Secretary-General, in his report entitled
"Measures to eliminate international terrorism",
observes that "it has to be assumed that the grenades
used in this terrorist attack" - the attack on the Indian
Parliament in New Delhi on 13 December 2001 -
"were produced in Pakistan". (A/58/116, para. 22) We
in India did not require this corroboration of a fact that
we had already deduced on the basis of solid and
incontrovertible evidence gathered from the terrorists
and their accomplices themselves. But the fact that the
Secretary-General has brought this to light in a report
that considers measures to eliminate international
terrorism is in itself a telling story, as it is also
indicative of the double standards that we sometimes
seem to operate under.

An article published in The New York Times
yesterday refers to the United States Treasury
Department designating a charity, Al-Akhtar Trust
International, as a financial sponsor of terrorism. This
group is accused of financing Al Qaeda militants in
Afghanistan, terrorist acts in Iraq and of possible
linkages to the murder of The Wall Street Journal
reporter Daniel Pearl. Anyone looking for more
material available in the free press on the existence of
an epicentre of terrorism has only to read the
celebrated French author and philosopher Bernard
Henri Levy's recently released book, Who Killed
Daniel Pearl?

The CTC, for all its good work, will need to go
beyond the stage of inexhaustible reporting to a more
serious examination of the actual actions taken by
States in their international counter-terrorism effort.
The Committee would have to take advantage of the
momentum achieved since its establishment to go
beyond assisting in the creation of legal and financial
mechanisms to holding countries accountable for their
genuine commitment to and actions in the fight against
terrorism from territories under their control.

India was among the first countries to ratify all 12
Conventions on international terrorism. It has initiated
the draft comprehensive convention on international
terrorism, currently under consideration in the Sixth
Committee of the General Assembly, and supports the
adoption of the draft International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. Cognizant
of the possible threat to civilized and orderly societies
by terrorists and non-State actors equipped with
weapons of mass destruction, India sponsored a
resolution dealing with the linkages between terrorism
and weapons of mass destruction, which was adopted
by the General Assembly by consensus last year.

A number of countries have responded quickly to
the international call for the tightening of domestic
legislative and financial frameworks designed to
counter terrorist activities. Unfortunately, there is an
increasing feeling among Member States that the more
effective the response to the requirements and
questions of the CTC, the more voluminous and
intrusive the reporting process becomes. In our view, it
is important to avoid conveying the impression,
however erroneous, of an expanding bureaucracy,
represented by the CTC secretariat, indulging in an
exercise of self-preservation and self-perpetuation.

While we acknowledge fully that the
development of effective legislative and financial
mechanisms is the first step in enabling States to come
to grips with the fight against terrorism, we are
convinced that a system of endless reporting, without
any effort to keep sight of the larger objective realities,
can only disillusion States and ultimately impact
adversely on the efforts of the Security Council to
mobilize an effective international counter-terrorism
effort.

It is critical that a system of effective interface
between Council members and the larger membership
on the manner in which the CTC should operate be
arranged on a periodic and institutional basis. Feedback
from such exchanges needs to be monitored and
absorbed by the CTC. What are required are clear and
objective guidelines to govern the system of reporting
to which States are subject. Most important,
transparency and openness in the process will foster a
greater willingness among respondents, namely the
Member States, to cooperate.

The undue emphasis on cooperation with other
international and regional organizations in the work of
the Committee work will also require careful
consideration. States are accountable for their actions
but several partner organizations of the CTC that have
been placed on an equal pedestal with the States
Members of this Organization do not bear the same
responsibility or accountability. Often, they even lack
the mandate or competence to deal with the area of
work of the CTC.

In our view, the primary point of contact for the
CTC should continue to be the Member States, under
whose mandate the Committee operates. Discussions
with regional and international organizations should be
secondary to discussions with States. All interfaces
with partner organizations must be undertaken with the
full knowledge and consent of the States involved in
the organization concerned. Also, regional imbalances
in the number of partner organizations with which CTC
works will have to be taken into account.

Finally, issues such as the credibility and sources
of information and the independence of experts
working with the CTC are important, particularly if the
views of Member States are not always taken into
account.

We have provided those illustrations in order to
convey candid feedback of the impressions and
opinions of the larger membership. The ultimate aim is
to enable the Council and the Chair of the CTC to take
such opinions on board in the implementation of the
Committee's mandate. I should like to reiterate here
that they have been made in a constructive spirit.

The fight against terrorism is among the most
important issues currently on the agenda of this
Organization. It is being pursued simultaneously in
most, if not all, of the United Nations major organs,
including the Security Council. My Government has
been, and will continue to be, engaged fully in the fight
against international terrorism. I would like to take this
opportunity to express once again our deep
appreciation to the Chair of the CTC for his efforts in
leading that important Committee of the Security
Council and to assure him of our fullest cooperation in
the fulfilment of his noble mission.

