Mr. Wittig (Germany): I thank you, Mr. President,
for scheduling today's open debate and for the useful
concept note (S/2012/853, annex). We are also very
grateful for the work undertaken by the Chairman of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, the Ambassaor of Portugal, as
well as for his presentation today.

Germany welcomes the increased efforts of the
Council to interact with and seek input from a broad
range of relevant actors, including the wider United
Nations membership. Open debates, Arria Formula
meetings and the holding of interactive dialogues are
regularly and successfully used formats to ensure
communication and the exchange of information that
are vital for the Council's functioning.

Also, the briefings provided by the Department
of Political Affairs represent a particularly important
improvement, and we call on all Council members to
consider conducting one such horizon-scanning during
their respective presidencies. We also welcome the
increased use of modern technologies, such as video
teleconferencing, in enhancing the timeliness and
efficiency of the Council's actions.

An interactive and dynamic relationship with a
multitude of interlocutors, such as thematic Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, is crucial
to the fulfilment of the Council's mandate, and the
interactive dialogue held earlier this year of the
Council with the Chairpersons of the Peacebuilding
Commission's country configurations clearly
highlighted the potential for further cooperation
between the two bodies. For example, the participation
of the Chairpersons in Council consultations should
also be considered, not least to ensure a broader
peacebuilding perspective in the Council.

We also support the enhanced involvement of
regional organizations in the work of the Council.
Those organizations can play a crucial role in furthering
conflict prevention, mediation and peacebuilding
in their respective regions, and thus effectively
complement the role of the Council. In that regard, I
would like to recall the successful high-level meeting
held on 26 September on peace and security in the
Middle East (S/PV.684l), which focused on cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States.

While much has been achieved to improve the
Council's working methods, we are looking forward to
the completion of work that is currently in progress.
I would therefore like to provide a brief overview of
where Germany stands on some of the main points.

Regarding penholderships and chairmanships of
subsidiary bodies, we are of the view that all Council
members are eligible to fulfil those functions and that
elected members should therefore increasingly be
assigned penholderships. Germany is currently holding
the pen for Afghanistan, as well as the chairmanship of
several subsidiary organs. It has been a very positive
experience.

Consultations on the appointment of penholders
and chairs of subsidiary bodies for the following
year should take place soon after the elections of
non-permanent members and before the end of the
year, and they should be fully inclusive. The mandates
of working groups should be flexible and open to
necessary adaptations. In that regard, I would like to
state that Germany is ready to consider the expansion
of the mandate of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, so as to also include issues
relating to States' non-cooperation in the context of the
Council's referrals to the International Criminal Court.

On the issue of enhanced interaction in the context
of open debates, Germany views such debates as an
important opportunity for Council members to benefit
from the input of non-member States. We therefore
support the early circulation of concept notes to all
United Nations Members and the delivery of concluding
remarks by the presidency.

Both the Council's annual report and the monthly
assessments can be further improved. The presidency
responsible for the annual report should continue to
consult informally with non-members well ahead of
the report's issuance, and report to Council members
on the suggestions and expectations raised in those
consultations. Since the monthly assessment is
prepared under the responsibility of the presidency, it
should allow for a more substantive reflection of the
presidency's views and analysis of the Council's work
during the respective month.

The reform of working methods is part of a larger
comprehensive reform. Let me therefore be clear. We
must not stop at addressing working methods only.
What is required is a structural reform of the Security
Council - a reform that makes it more representative
of the world we live in today; a reform that lends the
decisions taken by the Council more credibility and
therefore greater effectiveness. The desire for real,
meaningful reform is more evident than ever. An
overwhelming majority of Member States small and
large, from the developing and the developed world,
see true structural reform as the best way forward.
Anything else would address only the symptoms and
not the root causes.

