Ms. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing and to
warmly welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Peru, Mr. Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, and wish him every
success in his new role.

Today is a special day for the United Nations
presence in Haiti, as we turn the page on a new chapter
with the end of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH),
after 15 years of a United Nations peacekeeping
presence there. A new chapter is being written with
the new phase of our involvement with the country in
continuing the work begun by MINUJUSTH and the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.

That historic transition is taking place under
difficult conditions, as many of my colleagues have
already emphasized. Haiti is facing multiple challenges
in the areas of governance, the rule of law, the Haitian
National Police, the fight against corruption and the
promotion of human rights. The humanitarian situation
and food insecurity are only making it more urgent that
the Haitian authorities produce an adequate response.
Belgium condemns the recent violence and urges all
the parties to refrain from violence and to express their
views through peaceful means. We especially deplore
the recent violence againstjournalists.

There is an urgent need to launch an inclusive
national dialogue to address the country's political,
social and economic challenges. The Haitian
Government has the primary responsibility to address
the factors creating instability and inequality. National
ownership and responsible political leadership will be
crucial during this time. The Haitian people's feelings
of impunity and insecurity are their main sources of
frustration. Reforming the judicial system, eradicating
corruption and protecting and promoting human rights
are essential if the confidence of Haitian citizens in
their authorities is to be restored. In that regard, we are
paying particular attention to the judicial follow-up to
the extremely violent events that occurred in La Saline
last year. We regret that no legal proceedings have been
initiated with regard to the murders committed in the
Grand Ravine and that the legal proceedings relating
to the ongoing mismanagement of funds have not yet
made it possible to see justice done for the victims. We
also deplore the fact that the elections scheduled for
October will not be held on time, which could be an
additional source of frustration for the people.

Looking ahead, I would like to reiterate our full
support for the new political mission, the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH), which starts work
tomorrow. Providing BINUH with the necessary staff
and resources to carry out its mandate will be crucial.
The benchmarks proposed by the Secretary-General
will be valuable tools for monitoring the country's
progress in key areas of the mission's mandate. We
commend the United Nations and its partners for the
preparation of those benchmarks. Strong collaboration
between BINUH and the country team will be essential
to the mission's sustainability and success.

To conclude, I wish to emphasize Belgium's sincere
gratitude vis-a-vis the women and men who have served
under the banner of the United Nations in Haiti over
the past 15 years. The circumstances were arduous,
but their commitment and dedication made a positive
difference. The men and women who perished in Haiti
remain in our thoughts.

In this period of uncertainty and transition,
Belgium reiterates its staunch commitment to working
alongside the Haitian people and Government to achieve
a democratic, peaceful and secure future.

