Ms. Malcorra (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank the Egyptian presidency for
the invitation to participate in today's open debate
on an issue of such importance to the international
community. I would also like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for his statement earlier and all the
briefers for theirs.

Argentina condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and considers terrorist acts to be a threat
not only to international peace and security but also
to human dignity, peaceful and Civilized coexistence,
the stability and consolidation of democracy and
the economic and social development of nations. My
country, which was a victim of bloody terrorist attacks
in the 19905, affirms that terrorist acts are criminal and
unjustifiable, regardless of why, when or by whomever
they are committed. Terrorism cannot and should not
be associated with any particular religion, nationality,
civilization or ethnic group.

Argentina has always repudiated the grave
violations and abuses perpetrated by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), with their resulting
impact on regional stability and international peace and
security. We reiterate our categorical condemnation of
all terrorist acts carried out by that group in all their
forms and manifestations and would like to express our
deep solidarity with the civilian victims of the cruelty
and evil acts committed by that terrorist group and
the groups associated with it. We cannot and must not
succumb to fear, however.

Although our region is a long way from the current
conflict zone, we continue to be concerned about the
threat of foreign terrorist fighters, which demands
preventive action. We monitor the issue through the
Southern Common Market's Permanent Working
Group on Terrorism, through which Argentina supports
the strengthening of cooperation with the countries of
the region through the exchange of information by the
relevant agencies and effective border controls. At the
global level, we also support efforts aimed at facilitating
the exchange of information that is helpful for the early
detection of flows of foreign terrorist fighters.

However, we cannot deal with terrorism solely
through defence and security measures. Our efforts must
be based on a comprehensive approach, as reflected in
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
founded on a balanced implementation of the Strategy's
four pillars and with full respect for international law
and international human rights, humanitarian and
refugee law. We must intensify our preventive action.
In many cases, the reasons for such extreme violence
lie in the underlying causes, which makes imperative an
approach based on international, multidimensional and
multidisciplinary cooperation, which, in turn, requires
commitment and interdependence between security
stakeholders and entities in the areas of development,
social policy and education. As my Dutch colleague
just said, it also requires trust.

It therefore becomes a priority to combat
radicalization through the Internet by developing
positive, constructive messages and counternarratives
in collaboration with service providers and the private
sector, while respecting the freedom of expression. We
are pleased that presidential statement S/PRST/20l6/6,
adopted by the Council today, covers many of those
elements, including the role that can be played by
victims, among other legitimate voices, in countering
the radicalization that leads to terrorist violence and
narratives.

We must take advantage of the opportunity
provided by the tenth anniversary of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy to reaffirm the consensus
that enabled us to adopt the Strategy in 2006. Through
its four pillars, the Strategy continues to be in full force
today as a guide for United Nations efforts. Argentina
has the great responsibility ofhaving been designated by
the President of the General Assembly as co-facilitator,
together with Iceland, of the fifth biennial review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We
call on all States to join in that exercise, which we want
to be open and transparent, in order to arrive at a solid
result that renews our Organization's consensus on its
action against terrorism.

