Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of October on
behalf of the United States. We wish you success in
dealing with some of the most difficult global issues
that we face.

Once more, the Security Council is called upon to
pronounce on whether it is ready to take action on one
of the most difficult issues on its agenda. The question
before us today is whether the Council is willing and
able to address the threat to international peace and
security that is posed by the separation wall that Israel
is building in support of its continued occupation of the
West Bank and Gaza. The draft resolution before the
Council simply demands the cessation and reversal of
the construction of the separation wall. The resolution
points out that the separation wall represents a
departure from the armistice line of 1949 and is illegal
under the provisions of international law.

South Africa has condemned, in the strongest
possible terms, the recent suicide attack in Haifa. We
have expressed our deepest sympathies to the families
of the victims. Atrocities of that nature cannot bring
about peace in the Middle East - or anywhere, for that
matter. Sadly, these tragedies only serve to further fuel
the cycle of violence and counter-violence in the
Middle East.

In defiance of world opinion and international
law, the Israeli Cabinet has approved the second phase
of the construction of the separation wall. According to
the plan approved by the Israeli Cabinet, the path of the
wall would follow a number of horseshoe-shaped
digressions to include Ariel and three other large Israeli
settlements deep within the 1967 Green Line. Israel has
also decided to proceed with the construction of
another 600 homes for settlers near Jerusalem. In the
process, Israel is separating Palestinians from their
workplaces, their places of worship and even their own
family members.

The ongoing construction activities are only the
latest in a decades-old effort to expand the territory of
Israel. As the Israeli media itself have reported, Israel
has spent approximately $10 billion since 1967 to settle
230,000 settlers in Palestine. The Israeli Government is
luring people from all over the world to come and
populate the settlements by offering generous
subsidies, including personal income tax breaks,
grants, loans, bonuses and career opportunities. The
settlements bring with them the creation of settler
roads that can be used only by Israeli settlers, as well
as security barricades and military outposts. Each
settlement diminishes the dream of Palestinian
statehood and guarantees that Israel will forever be
faced with the rebellions of the displaced Palestinians.

My delegation wishes to draw the Security
Council's attention to a report dated 8 September 2003
drafted by the Special Rapporteur of the Commission
on Human Rights on the situation of human rights in
the Palestinian territories occupied by Israel since
1967. In his report, Mr. John Dugard points out that the
ongoing expansion of Israeli settlements and the
construction of the separation wall suggest that
"territorial expansion remains an essential feature of
Israel's policies and practices in the [occupied
Palestinian territory]" (E/CN.4/2004/6, summary). He
submits that the time has come for the international
community to condemn the separation wall as an
unlawful act of annexation in the same vein that
Israel's annexation of East Jerusalem and the Golan
Heights has been condemned as unlawful.

We believe that Mr. Dugard is correct in his
assertion that we should avoid political euphemisms
and rather state in precise and legally accurate terms
that "what we are presently witnessing in the West
Bank is a visible and clear act of territorial annexation
under the guise of security" (ibid., para. 6).

Each time we have appeared before the Security
Council on this matter we have emphasized our belief
that the solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict is a
negotiated settlement that would result in a two-State
solution, that is, a sovereign State of Israel and a
sovereign State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its
capital.

The building of a separation wall is a pretext to
occupy more land and makes a negotiated settlement
even harder to achieve. Certainly, following the
determined efforts the world put into bringing the
Berlin wall down, the Council should be able to find
within itself the courage to deal with this separation
wall. We would expect that the Security Council, which
carries a solemn mandate to intervene on such matters,
would choose not to remain silent.

