Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
for his very enlightening statement. I also welcome
the presence around the table of the Malian Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation and
thank him for having made the trip to New York in
order to participate in our work.

As the Secretary-General emphasized in his report
(S/2018/541), support for the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali must
remain the foremost priority of us all in Mali. Three
years after its signing, it is clear that many of the
commitments made have still not been implemented.
Such delays, which are partly due to the lack ofpolitical
will on the part of the stakeholders, are worrying, first,
because they increasingly call into question the very
relevance of the Agreement and, secondly, because
there can be no lasting stability in Mali, and more
broadly in the Sahel, without the full implementation
of the Agreement. It is therefore urgent that significant
progress be made.

In that context, we noted with satisfaction the
mobilization of the Prime Minister of Mali and the
progress made in recent months. The Secretary-
General's meeting with the parties during his visit to
Mali last month affirmed that positive momentum,
which must now be continued and built on. For us, in
the short term, that means strengthening the mixed
units of the Operational Coordination Mechanism in
northern Mali, ensuring the effective functioning of
the local authorities and initiating the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process. We will follow
those various elements closely over the coming months.

The responsibility of the international community,
in accordance with the actual terms of the peace
Agreement, is to take the necessary measures to
encourage all the parties to meet their commitments. In
that regard, the first report of the independent observer
is a useful contribution. We encourage him to continue
his work by issuing regular reports that identify
the obstacles, define the responsibilities and make
recommendations that will enable us to move forward.
All Malian actors must also be aware that the Security
Council is closely following the implementation of
their commitments. In that regard, France has started
work on identifying those responsible for hindering
the implementation of the Agreement on the ground.
Failure to implement the commitments contained in
the most recent road map would lead us to having to
broaden the scope of individuals that could be subject
to sanctions measures.

France fully shares the concerns expressed over the
situation in central Mali, which calls for a strong response
from the Malian authorities with the full support of
the international community and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). It is crucial that such a response
be based on a balanced approach that combines action
in the area of security and development, governance
and human rights efforts. In that regard, we are deeply
concerned about the allegations of various cases of
human rights violations in the context of counter-
terrorism operations undertaken by the Malian armed
forces. Such allegations must be promptly investigated
and the perpetrators prosecuted if they are proven. The
recommendations made by MINUSMA in the context
of the human rights due diligence policy must also be
fully implemented. The support that MINUSMA can
provide to the Malian armed forces and the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel is, of course, linked
to that.

The upcoming electoral cycles over the next
months, in particular the presidential elections, will
be a significant milestone for Malian democracy. It
is especially important that the presidential election
be conducted in a peaceful, credible and transparent
way. The actions of the Government to enhance the
credibility of the electoral process at the technical
level are in the right direction. Those efforts must be
continued and accompanied by the resumption of a
constructive dialogue between the Government and
the opposition. In that regard, the good offices of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the representative of the African Union on the ground
should be welcomed. Lastly, the right to peaceful protest
and freedom of expression must be respected and all
actors must show the necessary restraint throughout the
electoral cycle.

Given those many challenges, the renewal of the
MINUSMA mandate for another 12 months is absolutely
essential to the stability of Mali and the region. The
recommendations of the strategic review, which are
included in the Secretary-General's report, provide us
with an opportunity to ensure that the resources that
we are collectively harnessing in Mali are used in the
most effective way possible. We want to make the best
use of them.

In that context, France will approach the renewal
of the mandate with several objectives: first, promoting
a clear and realistic mandate with a limited number of
priorities that are adapted to the situation; secondly,
doing the utmost to ensure that the Mission has the
necessary capacities to discharge its mandate and
encourage every effort to reduce its security exposure
through targeted and adapted measures that are
coordinated with all the stakeholders on the ground;
thirdly, encouraging the Mission to better communicate
the specific nature of its mandate and its work to the
local actors, while recognizing that it is part of a
broader security architecture, where each force has its
added value and shares the same goal, namely, support
for the implementation of the peace Agreement;
fourthly, emphasizing the need for a balanced approach,
particularly in response to the increasing threat to the
central part of the country, in support of the Malian
authorities; and lastly, fifthly, recalling the importance
of the good offices role of the Mission for the smooth
running of the upcoming electoral cycles.

Finally, more broadly, France is convinced that
support for the implementation of the peace Agreement
must continue to remain the strategic objective of
the Mission. That strategic objective must be pursued
within the framework of a partnership approach among
Mali, the Council and the United Nations and on the
basis of reciprocal commitments, the implementation
of which will be regularly monitored. Against that
backdrop, we fully support the Secretary-General's
recommendation for a pact for peace, to be concluded
with the Malian authorities following the forthcoming
presidential elections.

Everyone should bear in mind that maintaining a
mission as large and exposed as MINUSMA in its current
configuration is not sustainable without substantial
progress on the peace process track. We must therefore
move forward together, in a responsible manner, in order
to ensure its success. France's unwavering commitment
can be counted on in that regard.

