Ms. Lfij (Denmark): I would like to fully
associate Denmark with the statement to be delivered
later by the representative of Austria on behalf of the
European Union.

The situation in the Middle East, not least the
renewed violence, continues to give rise to serious
concern. We strongly condemn this morning's suicide
attack in Tel Aviv and convey our heartfelt
condolences to the families of the victims. The attack
is an obvious breech of the de facto ceasefire between
the parties and thus represents a very serious setback
that could spur a new cycle of violence. While we
welcome the fact that President Abbas has condemned
the attack, we are outraged by the fact that Hamas has
called the attack on innocent civilians an act of "self-
defence". That seems to confirm that Hamas, contrary
to the principles enunciated by the Quartet, still
considers armed struggle and terror as means to
achieve political aims.

We are also troubled by the recent violent
incidents, including the rocket attacks launched against
Israel from Gaza and the Israeli countermeasures,
which have led to human casualties. We call on all
parties to refrain from violence and to exercise self-
restraint.

It remains our hope that the new Palestinian
Government will in earnest address the Palestinian
people's aspirations for peace and Statehood.
Regrettably, we note with concern that the Palestinian
Government has not yet committed itself to the
principles laid out by the Quartet and most recently
reiterated by the European Union on 10 April. In
accordance with the Quartet's declaration of
30 January,

"all members of [the] Palestinian Government

must be committed to non-violence, recognition

of Israel and acceptance of previous agreements
and obligations, including the road map".

We thus expect the new Palestinian Government
to fulfil the obligations entered into by the Palestinian
Authority. We also expect the new Government to
commit itself publicly to the rule of law and to reform,
as well as to prevent terrorist attacks and dismantle the
infrastructure of terror. Violence and terror are
incompatible with democratic processes.

Denmark and the rest of the European Union
want to preserve the democratic functioning and
development of the institutions of the Palestinian
Authority. In that context, we underline the central role
of President Abbas as the highest representative of the
Palestinian Authority and the Palestine Liberation
Organization.

At the same time, it is clear that under no
circumstances can we risk our funds being directed to
terrorist or illegitimate purposes. Denmark has
suspended direct bilateral assistance to the Palestinian
Authority, particularly in the field of institutional
support for capacity-building efforts. Specific project
activities and support provided through the United
Nations, the World Bank and non-governmental
organizations will continue.

Following the elections at the end of March, a
new Government is expected to be formed in Israel
within the next few weeks. I would like to underline
the importance we attach to a strong commitment by
the new Israeli Government to work towards a
negotiated solution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
based on existing agreements, the relevant resolutions
and the principles laid down in the road map. Both
Israel and the Palestinians should adhere to their
obligations and avoid unilateral actions that prejudice
final-status issues. Israel must refrain from actions -
including settlement activities and the construction of
the separation barrier on Palestinian land - that are
contrary to international law and that threaten the
viability of an agreed two-State solution. Moreover,
Israel must take steps to improve the humanitarian and
economic situation of the Palestinians. The resumption
of transfers of Palestinian tax and customs revenues
would be one such step. In that context, we welcome
Prime Minister Olmert's recently expressed willingness
to seek negotiations with the Palestinians, and
President Abbas's positive response.

This morning's suicide attack in Israel has yet
again demonstrated the need for peace in the Middle
East. However, if we let the renewed violence divert us
from pursuing the political process towards a
negotiated solution, we let the dark forces of terror
win. We sincerely hope that both the Palestinians and
the new Israeli Government will return to the
negotiating table as soon as possible to advance the
only durable solution to the Middle East problem: a
negotiated two-State solution with Israel and Palestine
living side by side in peaceful coexistence.

