Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Madam President, and all
Security Council members for the dedication and for
having chosen to convene this debate on the situation
in Haiti. We also thank Special Representative Sandra
Honore for her detailed briefing to the Security Council
and her tireless commitment, to which many of us have
borne witness in the field itself. We also thank you,
Madam President, for your part in the invitation of
the Secretary-General, who recently visited us in the
region.

Colombia associates itself with the statement made
by the Ambassador of Uruguay on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Haiti.

Security, stability and achieving more dignified
conditions forthe people ofHaiti, as well as strengthening
the institutional capacities of its democracy, must
remain the priorities of the international community's
commitment to Haiti. It is the only country on our
American continent that still has a United Nations
stabilization mission, as its Permanent Representative
Ambassador Regis, whom I welcome, has just recalled.
We therefore share the concern of the Secretary-General
about the impasse in adopting the electoral law in the
Senate and the holding of the long-awaited legislative,
municipal and local elections elections in October, as
was planned.

Colombia joins its voice to the urgent call of all
participants to the Haitian political actors to discharge
their duty towards their citizens, who elect them, and to
ensure stronger democracy in Haiti.

As has been said, it is clear that there has been
progress in areas such as ensuring security, reducing
violence and relocating many displaced persons to
camps. There has also been clear progress in increased
economic growth and a positive gross domestic
product, as well as efforts to attract foreign investment
and to develop agriculture. We have witnessed that in
person on the ground. However, there are still many
challenges. With regard to an accelerated reduction of
MINUSTAH, which could also mean setbacks in the
achievements made, in particular the necessary support
for the holding of elections to reaffirm the democratic
vision of Haiti that we have historically seen in our
region, we are concerned that the decision must not
be made solely on the basis of the conditions on the
ground, but also taking into account budgetary factors.

The upcoming elections on 14 October and the
presidential elections of 2015 represents an enormous
challenge that requires the due support and ongoing
backing of the international community and of
MINUSTAH and its military and police components,
in which Colombia actively participates. We should not
lose sight of the fact that a reduction in MINUSTAH is
not limited solely to troop numbers - for example, to
one or two contingents. On the contrary, it would affect
many more areas of the mission, which undertakes
invaluable efforts in areas such as institution-building,
decentralization, and disaster mitigation and response
in a country that we have seen to be extremely
vulnerable to such disasters, including technical
electoral assistance and stronger support for the Haitian
National Police.

We therefore raise a voice of caution against
possible further reductions in MINUSTAH. Such a
decision should always be linked to strengthening the
conditions to enable the Haitian people to restore full
democratic normality, as well as stronger and improved
economic and social conditions. That is ultimately what
the international community seeks.

