Mr. Cardenas (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): I wish at the outset to express the my
delegation's pleasure at seeing you, Sir, the representative
of France, presiding over the work of the Security
Council for this month. I take this opportunity also to
congratulate Ambassador Kovanda and the other members
of the delegation of the Czech Republic on their
outstanding work last month.

My delegation warmly welcomes the Foreign
Minister of the Republic of Georgia, who is with us this
afternoon.

My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for
having prepared the report on which we have based our
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG). In the course of our
consideration of that report, we have already stated our
concern on two points: the lack of substantive progress
towards settlement of the conflict; and the serious
situation of the human rights of refugees and displaced
persons.

Here, as in other peace-keeping operations mandated
by the Security Council, we are also concerned for full
respect for the freedom of movement of the contingents
sent to carry out these tasks, which is a key factor in
ensuring their safety and security and their very ability to
fulfil their mandate. It is, among other things, the attitude
of the parties towards peace-keeping operations that
reflects the degree of their commitment to settling the
conflict that divides them.

Moreover, we consider that, taken as a whole, the
efforts of the Government of Georgia to define and
implement a federal constitutional solution to the conflict
in the region of Abkhazia deserve sincere
acknowledgement from the Security Council and the
entire international community. In our view, full respect
for the principle of territorial integrity serves not only the
specific interests of one State but also those of the
international community as a whole.

All peace-keeping operations are different, for they
reflect the specific elements of the issues they are
intended to resolve. They all possess their own
idiosyncrasies, and because the conflicts they are designed
to deal with can change in various ways, they must be
able to adapt to these changes. We consider therefore that
Council mandates for peace-keeping operations cannot be
conceived in rigid, static terms. On the contrary, each
case demands the versatility needed to adapt the

 

functioning of the operation to the specific needs of a given
conflict at each phase of its development.

Hence, given that this conflict includes elements
relating to respect for humanitarian law and for human
rights, the Council should in our view begin considering
these elements. We have learned that the presence of
civilian observer missions is often very useful in verifying
the degree of respect for these fundamental rights, as
indicated by recent experience in other regions. It would
therefore be wise to begin now to give specific
consideration to such a possibility should circumstances in
the field demand it.

In conclusion, we hope that our extension of the
mandate of UNOMIG will constitute a genuine contribution
to peace in Georgia, for that is the motivation we all share.

