Mr. Al-Shamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): It is my honour on behalf of the delegation of
the United Arab Emirates to congratulate you, Sir, on
presiding over the Security Council for the current
month. I wish you every success. We also take this
opportunity to express our thanks and appreciation to
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
France, for the good manner in which he conducted the
deliberations of the Council last month.

For the second time in less than a month, the
Security Council is holding an emergency meeting to
discuss a new episode in the ongoing series of heinous
crimes perpetrated by the Israeli occupying
Government against the leaders of the Palestinian
people. The Israeli Government scorns all its legal,
moral and political commitments, in particular those
contained in the instruments of international law. The
Israeli occupation forces' assassination of the leader of
the Islamic resistance movement in the Gaza Strip,
Mr. Abdel Aziz Al-Rantisi, 26 days after the
assassination of the spiritual leader of Hamas, the late
Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, reflects not only the policy of
intransigence, arrogance and State terror pursued by
the Israeli Government against the Palestinian people
but also the dangerous approach and the irresponsible
acts Israel commits in the region with the aim of
obstructing efforts for peace, fomenting sentiments of
anger, revenge and injustice, exacerbating the cycle of
violence and allowing a logic of arrogance to prevail
over the logic of dialogue, peace and law.

The United Arab Emirates, which strongly
condemns Israel's assassination of Mr. Al-Rantisi and
its threat to assassinate additional figures of the
Palestinian leadership, considers this Israeli violation
of the principles and provisions of international law to
be a war crime and an act of State terror. It could have
been prevented had the Security Council shouldered its
responsibility weeks ago and adopted a resolution
condemning Israel's assassination of Sheikh Ahmed
Yassin and calling on Israel to put an end to its policies
of aggression and extrajudicial killings against the
Palestinian people. The Council's failure to take a
decisive stance against the practices of the Israeli
Government sent the wrong message to the Sharon
Government, thus encouraging it to commit further
crimes against the Palestinian people and its leaders.

We once again renew our appeal to all members
of the international community, in particular the
Security Council, to intervene urgently and adopt
decisive, binding measures that provide the necessary
protection to the Palestinian people and their leadership
and which lead the occupying Government seriously to
comply with Council resolutions without delay, as
required for a just and comprehensive settlement as
contained in the Arab peace initiative and the road
map, which is based on the resolutions of international
law. Further, such measures by the Council should
oblige Israel to dismantle the settlements and fully
withdraw from the Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967, enable the establishment of a Palestinian
State, with Jerusalem as its capital, and recognize the
right of return of Palestinian refugees.

In conclusion, we call upon the Security Council
not to be fooled by the Israeli Government's distortions
used to justify its practices under the claim of self-
defence and the fight against terrorism. We stress that
the Palestinian struggle, as represented by the positions
of Mr. Al-Rantisi and other members of the Palestinian
leadership, is a legitimate right, granted under
international law to oppressed people so that they can
liberate their land, attain freedom and independence
and practice their legitimate right to self-determination.

