Mr. Fernandez Amunategui (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to convey my sincere thanks to you, Sir,
and the other members of the Security Council for
having organized this meeting, the purpose of which
is to present to the Council the most recent report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (S/2012/678). I also take
this opportunity to welcome the presence of the Haitian
Ambassador.

Iwould like to begin with a special thanks to all those
countries contributing troops and police to the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and all the Member States that have collaborated in the
process of stabilization and reconstruction and provided
valuable support to peacebuilding in Haiti.

On 8 March, when I had the opportunity to review
the political situation in Haiti, I noted that MINUSTAH
had insisted on a governance pact, which is improving
the situation and facilitating consensus for Haiti's
development. While progress has been slow, we can
confirm that clear steps forward have been taken in the
political stabilization process and progress has been
made with regard to rule of law institutions.

On 19 June, President Martelly issued amendments
to the Political Constitution approved at the end of
President Pre'val's term, providing for, among other
things, the establishment of a Constitutional Council;
a minimum quota of 30 per cent for women in public
institutions, especially public services; streamlining
of the appointment of the Prime Minister; and the
legalization of multiple citizenship as a positive gesture
towards the hundreds of thousands of Haitians currently
living in different parts of the world and contributing to
the present and future of Haiti, in particular through
remittances, which currently total approximately
$2 billion per year.

Moreover, the establishment of the Superior
Council of the Judiciary, approved by law seven years
ago, which oversees the transparency and independence
of the judiciary, is another indication of the progress
currently being made in Haiti in terms of the rule of
law and of the political will of the Haitian authorities to
strengthen democracy and its institutions, given that the
establishment of the Superior Council of the Judiciary
allows for the establishment of the Permanent Electoral
Council, an essential body for the holding of elections
in line with the provisions of the reformed Constitution.

Making the Office of the Ombudsman an official
body and the appointment of a Minister for Human
Rights and the Fight against Extreme Poverty are
further proof of the hard work of the Government in
the areas of the rule of law and the protection of human
rights and the dividends that it is paying.

The confirmation by Parliament in May of
Prime Minster Laurent Lamothe and his programme
focused on the five priorities of President Martelly's
Government - employment, the rule of law,
environment, energy and education - are evidence
of harmony and collaboration between the President
and the Prime Minister, which are crucial for Haiti
and its stability. The appointment of women to seven
ministerial posts in a Cabinet of 22 further reflects
the will of the President to apply the provisions of
the reformed Constitution. Such will has also been
reflected in various statements he has made, intended
to ensure that future elections are carried out as soon
as possible and with the greatest possible transparency.
Furthermore, commendable work has been done by the
Prime Minister to attract investment, fight corruption
and smuggling, and promote industrial job creation
projects, which are essential steps for Haiti's economic
recovery.

An exceptional situation in Haitian political life is
currently being played out in that the Senate, which is
theoretically made up of 30 members, today has only
20 members as a result of the legal provision that terms
automatically expire after six years with or without
elections and that it is renewed by thirds every two years
; yet the quorum for its operation and voting continues
to assume a Senate of 30 members. That continues to
distort political life, with negative consequences for the
democratic stabilization process in Haiti

In addition, there is at present a serious impasse
in the formation of the Permanent Electoral Council.
According to constitutional provisions, this body, which
is responsible for organizing all elections in Haiti,
should be composed of nine persons, three appointed
by each of the powers of the State respectively. The
appointments by the Superior Council of the Judiciary
and the Executive did not comply with article 17.1 of
the Constitution, on positive discrimination in favour
of women, which mandates a representation of women
in all public services of at least 30 per cent, as I already
mentioned. Furthermore, the current situation in the
Senate I have just described makes it almost impossible
for the legislative power to reach agreement on its three
nominees to the Permanent Electoral Council.

The formation of an electoral body ofnine members
in accordance with the stipulations of the Constitution
is an unavoidable prerequisite for any elections; its
establishment will determine how soon the pending
elections can be held to renew a third of the Senate as
well as to elect all municipal mayors and councillors.
That is why MINUSTAH is currently working in
coordination with the international community to
promote dialogue and prepare the way for the soonest
possible establishment of a Permanent Electoral
Council that is legitimate and legal and that enjoys the
broadest possible support.

While we can describe the security situation in
Haiti as stable, it has the fragility inherent to a society
in the process of being stabilized, characterized by
precarious socioeconomic indicators and extreme
poverty affecting a large portion of the country.

In this respect, I would add that the information
I presented in March on issues including poverty,
illiteracy, education and the diaspora have practically
not changed. In practice, political violence has
disappeared. There has also been a considerable drop
in the number of kidnappings. Although murders are
on the rise, Haiti still has one of the lowest per capita
murder rates in the Caribbean and Central America, and
those murders are linked to gang activity and rivalries.
However, it has been very difficult to fight domestic
violence and the abuse of women.

In a positive development during the month of May,
Haitian authorities put an end to the illegal activities
of a group of individuals linked to former members
of the armed forces that were dissolved in 1995. They
had occupied for some weeks public buildings and
headquarters, calling for the re-establishment of the
army and the payment of pensions. The President
condemned the illegal occupations and called for public
order. He also reiterated the fact that his current priority
is to strengthen the Haitian National Police. The police,
with the support of MINUSTAH, was thus able to evict
the illegal occupiers from the 10 sites. Apparently, this
matter is no longer an issue of concern for the public,
and the Government has started, very practically, to
train border police, coast guards and military engineers
to work on infrastructure projects.

From the very beginning, MINUSTAH and the
international community recognized the sovereign
power of Haiti and its right to establish an army or
restore the armed forces dissolved in 1995. However,
with the same clarity, the Government and the public
have been told that any establishment of forces of that
kind should not be to the detriment of the development,
strengthening and professionalization of the police.
It has also been indicated that the international
community sees other important development priorities
for Haiti, which should be a priority over any potential
restoration of the armed forces.

The police force has continued to evolve. On
30 August, Godson Orelus was appointed Director
General ad interim of the police for a three-year period.
In the same fashion, the Superior Council of the Haitian
National Police endorsed a plan for 2012-2016 for the
police, which, among other goals, states that by 2016
there will be a police force made up ofmore than 15,000
police officers. That task will call for the training of
at least 5,000 new officials, or 1,200 a year until the
end of President Martelly's term. That represents an
unprecedented and considerable training effort, and
consequently also a significant and unprecedented
budgetary effort for the Haitian Government.

In terms of the police, the good news is that, after
three months, the decision to dismiss 79 high officers
with a history of crime and corruption from the force
became effective. That serves to improve the credibility
of the main security body in Haiti.

The strengthening of the Haitian National Police
is the highest priority for MINUSTAH, both because
of what it means for consolidating the rule of law
and improving security and because it makes it
possible for a responsible conclusion of the Mission.
In that, in accordance with resolution 2012 (2011),
MINUSTAH has reduced its numbers. As mentioned
by the Secretary-General in paragraph 50 of his report,
given the progress in this area, he recommends that
the Security Council consider a reduction from 7,340
to 6,270 troops and from 3,241 to 2,601 police, with a
consequent drop in civilian personnel, in accordance
with the reduced scope of MINUSTAH's activities.

Given the Secretary-General's proposal, the
Mission, together with the United Nations country
team, has consulted the Government of Haiti on a
consolidation and reconfiguration plan for MINUSTAH
in accordance with the suggested reductions proposed
to the Security Council. The plan, which is in a working
phase at the moment, has as its primary goal making
it possible for the Mission to fully carry out its task,
thereby concluding its activities in Haiti. Among the
main consolidation measures are the reduction of
military personnel in five departments. They will be
replaced by police officers. In those departments, the
civilian representation ofMINUSTAH will be decreased
to an operational minimum. We plan to progressively
apply this model in the coming period to facilitate the
concentration and reduction of MINUSTAH'S activities
in a rational fashion. Barring unforeseen contingencies,
we are heading towards a final state of the Mission at a
foreseeable point in time.

Furthermore, events linked with sporadic and
isolated protests by the sectors of the population that
are most threatened by the fragile socioeconomic
situation in the country highlight the fact that peace
and security will be very fragile without economic and
social development measures, which generate hope for
the future in the population. We are already seeing this
in different areas such as Cap-Haitien and Les Cayes.

On human rights and humanitarian and correctional
affairs, the Government's efforts and international
cooperation have made it possible to reduce the number
of inhabitants of internally displaced person camps to
390,000. That is a remarkable effort, since it has reduced
these numbers by 73 per cent. After the earthquake, the
figure was 1.5 million people. However, the situation
has deteriorated, as work by international organizations
and non-governmental organizations has been curtailed
due to the lack of financing. At the current pace, by
the end of 2012 there will still be over 250,000 people
living in camps for internally displaced persons. We
therefore encourage organizations and Governments
to cooperate in order to enable people to promptly and
satisfactorily return to their places of origin or relocate
to new areas that will welcome them on a permanent
basis.

Tropical storm Isaac, although it struck only in the
south of Haiti, showed the fragile day-to-day reality of
the Haitian people, as the loss of crops in that area and
the paradoxical drought in other regions have caused
a reappearance of hunger. Although hunger had not
completely disappeared from the Haitian landscape,
it had almost completely disappeared as a social and
humanitarian problem. I must note that the response
of the Haitian Government to this national emergency,
together with the United Nations, and its response to
the difficult food situation was appropriate and took the
longer view, as shown in its appropriate coordination
with humanitarian actors and the United Nations
system, which made it possible to mitigate the crisis
and prepare for new emergencies.

Haiti continues to face serious challenges, especially
with regard to the cholera epidemic, which is hanging
over thousands of people every time the weather or
social conditions worsen. Although it is true that there
has not been a severe resurgence of the disease, there
are continuous cases with fatal consequences. Cholera
affects the entire island of Hispaniola, and we are
therefore working on a plan to intensify prevention,
fight the disease better and engage in all possible
efforts to mitigate its effects.

Among the many people living under difficult
conditions in Haiti are those in prolonged detention,
which are really illegal detentions. We have worked
together with the Ministry of Justice, and we will
quickly conduct concerted efforts in order to reduce
and, if possible, put an end to this phenomenon, which
is a serious violation of the human rights of hundreds of
Haitian citizens.

Most youth in Haiti do not have access to
professional training because of economic reasons.
That predisposes them to social exclusion and makes
them a vulnerable population. They do not have the
option of responding tomorrow to a State based on the
rule of law or of fulfilling their social responsibilities,
thereby fulfilling their own economic needs or those
of their families. In order to counteract this vicious
circle, strengthen the rule of law and promote peace and
coexistence, MINUSTAH is supporting and financing
violence reduction programmes in communities. For
example, the Mission has supported 36 high-density
manpower projects, which are focused on working on
watersheds and urban infrastructure and rehabilitating
canals. Those projects have made it possible to offer
temporaryjobs to 51,000 at-risk young people, of whom
30 per cent are women. The implementation of those
projects has also helped to mitigate flood risk, improve
urban sanitation in the wider community and present
the world of work as a valid option.

MINUSTAH has also devoted funding to quick-
impact projects for earthquake-affected communities
and to projects that focus on public lighting, road
rehabilitation, local infrastructure such as multi-purpose
municipal institutions, rule-of-law infrastructure,
including peace courts, as well as education, including
schools and municipal and departmental public
institutions.

Finally, peace missions are the concrete expression
of a moral value, which makes them respectable on
all continents. Participation therein is an honour for
their personnel and for the countries whose nationals
are working to carry out the lofty task of achieving
peace and defending it wherever necessary. The
Secretary-General has recalled that the first priority
is the reputation of the United Nations. It is for that
reason, inter alia, that in Haiti we have intensified our
zero-tolerance measures against abuse of all kinds,
especially the sexual abuse of minors.
After eight years of work, the peacebuilding
achievements registered by MINUSTAH in Haiti are
clear. However, in order to continue to make progress,
we must pursue our efforts to strengthen the rule of
law, which will make it possible to harmonize the peace
dividends achieved to date.

In the quest to devise mechanisms that will
strengthen those efforts, appropriate solutions should
be found to the current challenges facing Haiti. Finding
paths that facilitate dialogue and consensus among
Haitians will be a key factor in building a country that
can stand on its own and is equipped with democratic
institutions that are capable of providing appropriate
responses to the numerous challenges facing it now and
in future.

However, crucial economic and social challenges
remain for Haiti. I wish to reiterate that security, the rule
of law and economic and social development are three
interdependent concepts that are essential to enabling
Haiti to launch a process of renewal and consolidate a
lasting peace in the country. In the absence of tangible
progress that benefits the people in the areas of food,
employment, health, housing and the environment,
it could be difficult to maintain the current level of
security in that Caribbean nation, which is due in great
part to the contributions made by the international
community since 2004.

The time has come for public, private, national and
foreign investment. The time has come for projects to
be carried out that demonstrate that the economy is
moving forward and that Haiti and its people have a
future.

Here I should like to pay tribute to the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, former President
Bill Clinton, for his ongoing efforts and initiatives
aimed at encouraging investment in Haiti. Of course,
these issues go far beyond the tasks and mandate of
MINUSTAH, but I feel I must make mention of the
situation, as this aspect is essential to the fulfilment of
the objectives of the Mission and the completion of the
mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council, so that
there will be no need to return to Haiti once again.

If efforts in the areas of the economy and
employment bear fruit, I anticipate a reconfiguration of
this peace Mission into a political mission of the United
Nations, with emphasis on the rule of law and human
rights as well as an advisory and monitoring component
on police work, by means ofa mission embedded within
the Haitian National Police itself. I believe that this
would be the best possible final stage of the work of
MINUSTAH in Haiti.
