Mr. Prosor (Israel): I want to thank you, Sir, for
presiding over the Security Council today, and the
Togo delegation for organizing this important
discussion.

Seven months ago, the bombing of the United
Nations headquarters in Abuja claimed the lives of
more than 20 people and shocked the world. That was

just one of 115 separate attacks engineered last year by
Boko Haram that killed more than 500 people. The
Secretary-General correctly described the attack on the
United Nations headquarters as an assault on those who
devote themselves to helping others. The explosions in
Abuja illuminated the struggle now taking place for
Africa's future between those who seek stability and
those who seek chaos; between extremism and
progress; between hope and hatred.

The alarming rise in terrorism throughout West
Africa is connected to a global trend. It is made
possible by an increasingly linked network of
smuggling rings, traditional criminals and terrorists.
Terrorists understand that if one can smuggle narcotics
into a European capital, one can easily do the same
with an anti-aircraft missile. They understand that
lawless environments are fertile ground for
radicalization. They recognize that selling drugs can
pay for bombs.

Working together, criminals, gangsters and
terrorists have declared war on stability in West Africa.
They remain a key obstacle to unlocking the region's
vast potential. The criminal terrorist networks in West
Africa are not only a local problem; they are a global
problem. West Africa's battle is our battle. Its enemies
are our enemies, and its future is our future. The State
of Israel understands that our destinies are intertwined
with those of the nations of West Africa and the Sahel.
Today, we stand shoulder to shoulder with these
nations as we pursue common opportunities and face
common threats.

Israel is particularly concerned about Hizbullah's
activity in the region, which has served as a hub for the
terrorist organization's operations for more than two
decades. Hizbullah uses West Africa as a transit point
for funnelling money, arms and drugs to far-flung
corners of the globe. These criminal enterprises
strengthen Hizbullah's ability to create sleeper cells in
the region and to garner support from the local
population.

The world cannot afford to stand by and give
Hizbullah a base for operations in West Africa. These
activities are not only a clear and imminent danger to
the people of Africa. Hizbullah and its Iranian sponsors
pose a threat to innocent people in all corners of the
globe - as we saw last week in New Delhi, Bangkok
and Tbilisi.

The security challenges in West Africa call for a
two-track approach. The international community must
work with African nations to root out terrorism and
crime while we nourish the roots of development and
prosperity. Together, we must strengthen regional
cooperation in counter-terrorism efforts, toughen
border controls and improve intelligence-sharing. We
must ensure that terrorist and criminal groups are
placed on every terrorism and law enforcement watch
list at the national and international levels.

Together, we must make greater efforts to prevent
the transfer of small arms and all other weapons to
criminals and terrorists, including dual-use items.
Israel is prepared to play our part in that effort. Our
export control laws and regulations are rigorous and
extensive. They ensure that all arms exports meet the
standards and criteria set by the Wassenaar
Arrangement and all other supplier regimes.

Israel has long worked hand in hand with African
nations to combat transnational crime and terrorism.
We continue to share our knowledge and experience
with many African States and regional organizations.
These collaborative efforts span a range of issues from
terrorist financing to aviation security and from
money-laundering to border protection. Israel is proud
to be a donor and an active partner in the counter-
terrorism efforts here at the United Nations, working
closely with bodies such as the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, and the international counter-
terrorism committees.

Development must be a part of a long-term
strategy to fight crime and terrorism in West Africa and
the Sahel. A strong foundation of economic security,
good governance and social cohesion denies criminals
and terrorists the environments that they need in order
to operate.

Israel has been deeply engaged in development
cooperation in Africa for more than five decades. In
1958, Golda Meir, then serving as Foreign Minister,
made a historic visit to the newly independent States of
Africa. On her trip, Golda Meir resolved to share
Israel's growing expertise with our African neighbours.
She said,

"Like them, we had shaken off foreign rule; like
them, we had to learn for ourselves how to
reclaim the land, how to increase the yields of our
crops, and how to defend ourselves."
Thousands of Israeli experts set out for the
continent - driven by the spirit of what we call tikkun
01am, the Jewish principle that calls on us to mend the
world and make it a better place.

The connections forged in those years have
blossomed into a programme of extensive cooperation.
Today in Ghana, Israel's network of prenatal clinics
has dramatically reduced child and infant mortality. In
Senegal, our triangular partnership with Italy has
brought innovative Israeli drip irrigation to thousands
of African farmers, helping them to move from poverty
to self-sufficiency. We continue to look for new
opportunities to build institutions and capabilities in
the region.

In many corners of West Africa today, we see
how trouble comes in twos and threes. Criminals and
terrorists continue to exploit instability and lawlessness
and to sow even greater chaos. The international
community must work with African nations to break
this cycle. We must pave the road to development,
while clearing the obstacles of terror and crime from
its path. This is a collective challenge. No nation is
free from responsibility, and no nation can escape the
consequences of inaction.

