Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): The Horn of
Africa faces serious challenges of instability and
volatility, including threats to peace and security in
Africa in general. The instability, coupled with famine,
has resulted in a humanitarian crisis with dire
consequences for the population of the region.

South Africa acknowledges and appreciates the
important and critical role being played by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the African Union are playing in the fight against
armed groups and the spread of terrorism in the region.
We condemn any acts by Eritrea that destabilize the
region. In ensuring peace and stability that lead to the
development of the region, South Africa calls on
Eritrea to fully address the allegations and reports of
possible support for and association with Al-Shabaab.

Two years ago, following the African Union's
request, the Security Council adopted resolution 1907
(2009) in response to reports of Eritrea's role in
destabilizing the region. In the implementation of the
resolution, South Africa is of the view that equal
attention should be given to engagement in a political
process. South Africa hopes that the additional
measures contained in today's resolution will not have
a negative impact on the people of Eritrea or their
livelihoods. We also hope that these measures and
sanctions will not adversely impact the economy of
Eritrea. Our proposed contribution to the resolution
was to ensure that it was balanced with more clarity,
did not impose collective punishment on ordinary
people in Eritrea and did not contain blanket measures
that would have dire consequences.

We call on the Monitoring Group to execute its
responsibilities and mandate emanating from resolution
1907 (2009) and from this resolution with
professionalism, impartiality and objectivity. The
Monitoring Group should never be influenced by
political considerations outside of its mandate. It is
important for the Monitoring Group to closely guard its
independence and professionalism in the work it does
to assist the Security Council with the implementation
of those measures. Equally, we call upon the members
of the Security Council to desist from any temptation
to use the Monitoring Group for political ends.

South Africa calls for the full implementation of
resolution 1907 (2009). We have taken note of the fact
that in the past two years, following years of self-
imposed isolation, Eritrea has started a process of
re-engagement with the international community and
the African Union. We also welcome Eritrea's
expressed desire to rejoin IGAD.

South Africa is of the strong view that sanctions
should not be viewed as an end in themselves, but
should complement a political process. In that regard, a
political process remains critical to ensuring lasting
peace in the Horn of Africa. The African Union heads
of State Summit held in Malabo in July reiterated
concern about the continued impasse in the peace
process in that region. The African Union committed
itself to assisting the countries of the region to
peacefully resolve their disputes and normalize
relations. We therefore continue to emphasize the
importance of the centrality of an African solution to
resolving African problems. In line with paragraph 2 of
resolution 2023 (2011), which we have just adopted,
we call on all the concerned parties in the region to
work with the African Union to peacefully resolve their
long-standing disputes.

South Africa supports the principle that the
Security Council must always afford Member States an
opportunity to be heard when their issues are addressed
by the Council. We therefore appreciate the statements
made this morning by the political leadership of IGAD.
We are disappointed that Eritrea was not afforded an
equal opportunity to address the Council today. The
manner in which the Council dealt with a request by a
State Member of the United Nations - in this case,
Eritrea - leaves much to be desired. It is our strong
view that the Council should be more sensitive and
considerate when dealing with heads of State whose
countries are the subject of its consideration.

We voted in favour of today's resolution in the
hope that it will contribute to addressing the challenges
of instability in the Horn of Africa and support the
11-62209
efforts of IGAD and the African Union in consolidating
peace and security in the region.

