Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom continues to be extremely concerned about
the escalating crisis in Gaza and the toll it is taking on
civilians. We are particularly disturbed about the
consequences of Israeli military action, which
tragically resulted in a large number of civilian
Palestinian deaths in Beit Hanoun on 8 November. As
the British Foreign Secretary said that day, it is hard to
see what that action was meant to achieve and how it
06-61238
can be achieved. Once again, we extend our
condolences to the families of those killed and injured.

We call on Israel to respect its obligation to avoid
harming civilians. We call on Syria to use its influence
constructively on Syrian-based Hamas leaders. And we
call on the Palestinian leadership to bring an end to
violence and to terrorist activities, including the firing
of rockets into Israeli territory.

In this context, we welcome the recent call by
President Abbas for an end to Qassam rocket fire.
Reciprocal violence is in the interest of neither Israelis
nor Palestinians and serves only to undermine the
prospects for peace in the region.

What we have seen over the past few sad days
further underlines the necessity of finding a
comprehensive political solution to the current
situation in Israel and the occupied territories. We
continue to believe that the Road Map offers the best
chance for a lasting peace. That should be one of our
highest priorities.

As I said yesterday, it is absolutely right that the
Security Council should meet on this important issue.
The United Kingdom remains firmly of the view,
however, that any statement from the Council must be
balanced and must serve the interest of both parties,
and that interest is peace.

We regret that negotiations did not lead to a text
that the United Kingdom could support. We greatly
appreciate the efforts of the sponsors to meet some of
our concerns. But, in the end, we were not able to
conclude that the draft resolution was sufficiently
balanced, or that it reflected the complexity of the
current situation. For this reason, the United Kingdom
abstained from voting on the proposed text.

