Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Honore for her briefing. China appreciates the
vigorous efforts of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and, in particular,
those of Ms. Honore herself in maintaining peace and
stability in Haiti.

In the recent period, the political and stabilization
process in Haiti has registered continued progress.
A new electoral law was enacted late last year, and
the national dialogue process was launched earlier
this year. The capacity of the Haitian National Police
force continues to improve, and the security situation
across the country, in particular the situation in the
five departments vacated by the Mission, has remained
stable. At the same time, tensions exist between
the executive and legislative branches, coupled
with sluggish economic growth and a precarious
humanitarian situation. The peaceful reconstruction of
the country remains an uphill battle. The improvement
of the situation in Haiti requires first and foremost
concrete measures on the part of all stakeholders in
Haiti. At the same time, the international community
should actively provide assistance. China is of the view
that, in the way forward, efforts must be made in the
following three areas.

First, we must actively facilitate relevant election
processes. We hope that all parties in Haiti will
resolve their differences through dialogue and reach
a consensus as early as possible on electoral matters,
with a view to ensuring a smooth general election later
this year and further consolidating national stability.

Secondly, the international community should take
concrete steps to honour its pledges to Haiti and actively
participate in the reconstruction process of Haiti. Haiti
has the highest occurrence of cholera in the world, and
the scale of the epidemic is alarming. China welcomes
the efforts of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for the
elimination of cholera and welcomes the appointment
of the Secretary-General's Senior Coordinator for
Cholera Response. China calls on all Member States to
continue to provide financial and technical support to
Haiti's cholera control programme.

Thirdly, we hope that MINUSTAH, in accordance
with the mandate given to the Mission by the Security
Council, continues to assist Haiti in maintaining security
and stability, promoting the political process and
strengthening the rule of law and institutional capacity-
building in order to provide a stable environment for
the economic and social development of Haiti.

China has taken note of the preliminary options
outlined by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon with
regard to the United Nations configuration in Haiti
beyond 2016. We hope that the Secretariat, on the basis
of the Secretary-General's proposals and on the basis
of careful study of the situation on the ground, will
prepare a more detailed plan accordingly.

China stands ready to maintain close contact with
other members of the Council in that regard.

