Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): C6te d'Ivoire thanks Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix; the Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Ms. Ursula Mueller; and Mr. Festus
Mogae, Chairperson of the Joint Monitoring and

Evaluation Commission, for their respective briefings
on the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1011) on
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and the overall situation in the country.

My statement will focus on three main points:
obstacles encounteredby UNMIS S inthe implementation
of its mandate, the humanitarian situation in the country,
and the efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) to revitalize the peace process in
South Sudan.

Turning to my first point, as underscored in the
report of the Secretary-General, UNMISS continues
to face numerous obstacles in discharging its mandate,
despite efforts made to improve security conditions in
South Sudan. My delegation condemns the multiple
obstacles imposed by the Transitional Government
of National Unity to the implementation of the
United Nations status of forces agreement, as well as
the attacks perpetrated by anti-Government forces
targeting UNMISS.

Against this extremely grave backdrop, Cote
d'Ivoire urges all parties to the conflict in South Sudan
to honour their commitments and, in accordance with
the status of forces agreement, guarantee the full
freedom of movement of UNMISS troops and facilitate
administrative procedures required for its operations.
C6te d'Ivoire would also like to encourage UNMISS to
redouble its efforts towards the swift deployment of the
contingents to form the Regional Protection Force. The
operationalization of the Force should enable UNMISS
to better deliver its mandate within an adequately
secure environment.

My delegation also welcomes the commitment
of the troop-contributing countries to the Regional
Protection Force, and invites them, in collaboration
with UNMISS, to accelerate discussions with a view to
effectively deploying various troops to South Sudanese
territory. In the same vein, we call on the Government
of South Sudan to continue discussions with UNMISS
on the use of the Tomping base by the units of the
Regional Protection Force.

Secondly, Cote d'Ivoire is concerned that clashes in
some areas between Government and opposition forces
are displacing thousands of people. With approximately
2 million internally displaced people and more than
2 million refugees, the humanitarian situation in South
Sudan remains more than alarming. Humanitarian
organizations need access to the population more

than ever before. Given the multiple obstacles to such
access, C6te d'Ivoire strongly condemns the violence
and abuse perpetrated against humanitarian personnel.
It urges the parties to avoid any act that may obstruct
the smooth delivery of humanitarian aid in the country,
and above all, to respect and protect humanitarian
personnel in their efforts to alleviate the suffering of
the population.

Thirdly, my delegation welcomes the initiatives
taken by IGAD and encourages it to continue its efforts
in the context of the High-level Revitalization Forum. It
also welcomes the holding ofthe high-level revitalization
forum in South Sudan from 18 to 21 December 2017 in
Addis Ababa, with the aim of laying the groundwork
for a final resolution of the crisis in that sister country.

The Ivorian delegation is also pleased that the
first phase of the Forum has resulted in the signing of
the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities, Protection
of Civilians, and Humanitarian Access by the parties
in conflict. My delegation strongly believes that the
end of the conflict in South Sudan requires that the
recommendations of the High-level Revitalization
Forum be implemented in good faith by all concerned
parties. In that regard, like the entire international
community, it condemns the recent violation of the
cessation of hostilities agreement, which occurred
only days after its signature. C6te d'Ivoire urges the
belligerent parties to exercise restraint and reminds
them of their duty to ensure the protection of civilians,
respect for human rights and humanitarian access.
My delegation calls on all parties to truly commit to
the quest for peace in South Sudan, while expressing
its support for the second phase of the High-level
Revitalization Forum to be held next month.

In conclusion, my delegation hopes that the strategic
review recommendations to be submitted next month
will enable our Council to strengthen the capacity of
UNMISS in the context of its mandate renewal.

