Mr. Yankey (Ghana): We too are pleased to
welcome the Secretary-General and Ambassador Leo
Merores, who is representing the General Assembly.
We thank them for their statements. We further wish to
commend the delegation of the Republic of the Congo
for organizing the debate on conflict prevention and
resolution in Africa, which, in the view of my
delegation, remains a crucial challenge in the agenda
for peace in Africa. We also thank the Congolese
delegation for drawing up a concept paper that is very
forward-looking in terms of its overall posture, not
only towards the question of peace but also by
emphasizing the need to build on existing initiatives
and institutional mechanisms in the furtherance of
peace on our continent.

It is important to stress that African States are
increasingly taking ownership of the process of

addressing the peace and conflict issues that affect
them. Over the past decade, there has been significant
progress in strengthening peace and security in Africa
through peace processes in Mozambique, Sierra Leone,
Mali, Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire, as well as in building
Africa's own capacity to manage conflicts through the
African Union (AU) and the New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD). Through the
framework of the African security architecture, in
particular the Peace and Security Council, the AU has
established an integrated and a comprehensive
mechanism that provides early warning on potentially
explosive situations.

In addition, the Constitutive Act of the African
Union binds its members to a number of democratic
principles, including the rejection of unconstitutional
change of government. The African Peer Review
Mechanism (APRM) is another instrument to address
governance issues identified as being among the major
root causes of most of the conflicts in Africa. These
and other initiatives clearly demonstrate a
determination and commitment of African countries to
resort to intra-African solutions in dealing with crisis
in the region.

These developments are consistent with the
position outlined by the Secretary-General in his report
in document A/60/89l, where it is correctly observed
that the multilayered nature of effective preventive
action and crisis management means no State or
organization can act alone.

Although the African Union is determined to play
a leading role in the maintenance of peace and security
in Africa, it seeks to do so in close partnership with the
United Nations in particular and the world community
generally. This is evident in the numerous initiatives
undertaken by both the African countries themselves
and by non-African organizations, including bilateral
partners, to strengthen cooperation with the AU and
other, subregional, organizations. The most notable
initiative is the adoption in 2005 of the United Nations
Ten-year Capacity-building Programme for the African
Union, followed last year by the Declaration on
Enhancing UN-AU Cooperation. Both the Programme
and Declaration reflect our joint commitment to find
more effective ways to advance peace and security in
Africa. The United Nations is also working with the
AU to develop a standby force capable of rapid
deployment.
Recently, the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union and the United Nations Security
Council, meeting in Addis Ababa, committed
themselves to the development of a stronger and more
structured relationship in the areas of the prevention,
management and resolution of conflict and
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. With this new
framework of cooperation, a new dynamism is
expected in the overall relations between the two
organizations.

The G-S African Action Plan, among other
objectives, also seeks to support efforts by African
countries and the United Nations to better regulate the
activities of arms brokers and traffickers and to
eliminate the flow of illicit weapons to and within
Africa. Bilateral partners like the United Kingdom, the
European Union, the United States and others have all
contributed in diverse ways to support Africa and
enhance its capacities to deal with the complex
conflicts afflicting the continent.

The ultimate objective in all these efforts, I
believe, is to develop a new peace and security
architecture that can contribute to preventing conflict
and maintain durable peace on the continent. But as the
Secretary-General's report acknowledges, an
unacceptable gap still remains between rhetoric and
reality in the area of conflict prevention, and that too
often the international community spends vast sums of
money to fight fires that could have been extinguished
through preventive actions. A fraction of the $18
billion mentioned in the Secretary-General's report
could have been expended on efficient and effective
prevention action.

The observation by the Secretary-General,
coupled with the myriad of conflict-resolution
strategies tried out over the years, should prompt us to
question why our efforts have not had the desired
impact. Part of the answer lies with lack of political
will and part with lack of commitment to address the
root causes of conflicts.

For the Security Council to define its role
properly, as well as to enhance its capacity to
contribute meaningfully towards conflict prevention
and resolution in Africa, it is imperative that we pay
careful attention to the underlying causes of these
conflicts in the first place. Related to this issue is the
question of what problems should be and should not be
discussed by the Council.

It is widely acknowledged that most armed
conflicts in Africa arise out of failures in governance
and chronic economic vulnerability and their
destabilizing impact on the process of democratization,
the rule of law and respect for human rights. Hence,
the issues of sustainable development and transparency
and accountability in public institutions are central not
only to consolidating peace and stability, but also to
preventing tension from turning into violence.

The Security Council, as the organ with the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, must of necessity be
interested in these issues as ones of strategic
importance to its mandate. The time has come,
therefore, for the Council to redefine its relationship
with the other organs of the United Nations bearing
direct responsibility for some of the problems that
account for the proliferation of conflicts in Africa.

On the other hand, my delegation believes that
the Council could exercise the necessary discretion,
albeit prudently, when it becomes necessary to consider
looming threats to peace in exceptional circumstances.
The Council must equally be mindful of emergent
challenges - especially in the area of the
environment - that have far-reaching implications for
international peace and security in the foreseeable
future.

In all these efforts, African Governments owe
their countries and citizens a responsibility to protect
lives and property. They must demonstrate the political
will and, in collaboration with civil society, the private
sector and the international community, fulfil their
share of the responsibilities.

In conclusion, we must accept that we are all in
this together. Instability in Africa has global
implications, as it can create zones of lawlessness,
which can be exploited by criminals and terrorists.
Without increased investment in conflict prevention,
Africa will not achieve the rapid acceleration in
development that its people seek. Investing in
development is itself an investment in peace and
security.

