Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine
and the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with
this statement.

In the interests of time, I will deliver a substantially
shortened version of my statement. The complete text
will be distributed.

The European Union welcomes the successful
outcome of the Cairo Conference on Palestine,
"Reconstructing Gaza". It is now essential that the
Palestinian Authority assume its full Governmental
responsibilities in Gaza and that the Israel lift restrictions
to socioeconomic development, particularly in the
field of movement and access. It is also essential that
the threat to Israel posed by Hamas and other militant
groups in Gaza as demonstrated by rocket attacks and
tunnel construction is brought to an end. All terrorist
groups must disarm and be prevented from rearming.

The 25 September understanding reached by the
Palestinian parties and the 9 October meeting of the
Palestinian Government of national consensus in Gaza
are positive steps in the right direction which should
be pursued further. The European Union welcomes the
temporary monitoring mechanism negotiated by the
United Nations, Israel and the Palestinian Authority,
as a first step towards the necessary opening of all
crossing points, as well as initial measures announced
by Israel on movement and access, which should be
implemented and expanded.

We remain ready to further develop our efforts
to build the capacities of the Palestinian Authority,
particularly with a View to its swift deployment at the
border crossings and to support an effective and secure
lifting of the closure through an EU presence at Gaza
crossing points. Furthermore, we are ready to explore
ways to support the creation of a land link between the
West Bank and Gaza and to analyse the feasibility of a
maritime link between Cyprus and Gaza.

We remain convinced that clear parameters
defining the basis for negotiations are key elements for
a successful outcome. As it is urgent to make tangible
progress towards a two-State solution, the European
Union will continue to actively promote its position
with regard to parameters and is willing to work with
the United States and other partners on an initiative to
relaunch the peace negotiations, based on the following
principles.

There must be an agreement as to the borders of
the two States based on the 4 June 1967 lines, with
equivalent land swaps as may be agreed between the
parties. The European Union will recognize changes
to the pre-1967 borders, including with regard to
Jerusalem, only when agreed by the parties. There must
be security arrangements that, for Palestinians, respect
their sovereignty and show that the occupation is over,
and that, for Israelis, protect their security, prevent
the resurgence of terrorism and deal effectively with
security threats, including with new and vital threats
in the region. There must be a just, fair, agreed and
realistic solution to the refugee question. Both parties'
aspirations for Jerusalem must be fulfilled. A way must
be found through negotiations to resolve the status of
Jerusalem as the future capital of both States.

We urge all parties to refrain from actions that
could undermine a resumption of negotiations and the
prospects for peace. We also reiterate our call on the
Palestinian leadership to use its United Nations status
in a constructive manner.

The developments on the ground make the prospects
for a two-State solution increasingly unattainable, and
a one-State reality would not be compatible with the
aspirations of both parties. In that regard, we strongly
deplore the recent Israeli decisions to approve a plan
for new settlement activity in Givat Hamatos and to
allow for further settlement expansion in Silwan in East
Jerusalem. That represents a further highly detrimental
step that undermines prospects for a two-State solution
and calls into question Israel's commitment to a
peaceful negotiated settlement with the Palestinians.

Settlements are illegal under international law. We
call on the Government of Israel to urgently reverse its
decisions and put an end to its settlement policy in the
West Bank, including in East Jerusalem; to put an end
to settler violence, to the worsening ofliving conditions
for Palestinians in Area C, to demolitions - including
of EU-funded projects - evictions and forced
transfers, including of the Bedouin communities in
Area C, and to increasing tensions and challenges to
the status quo on the Temple Mount/Haram Al-Sharif.
We reiterate our offer to both parties of a package of
European political, economic and security support and
of a special privileged partnership with the European
Union in the event of a final peace settlement.

We are committed to tackling in a comprehensive
and coordinated manner the regional threat posed by
terrorism and violent extremism and addressing the
underlying instability and violence which has given the
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/Daesh and
other terrorist groups a foothold. We support the efforts
made by more than 60 States to tackle this threat. The
European Union calls on all partners to enforce the
relevant Security Council resolutions, including 2170
(2014) and 2178 (2014). Non-inclusive policies in Iraq
and the instability in Syria caused by the Al-Assad
regime's brutal war against its own people, massive
human rights violations and systematic obstruction
against democratic reforms have allowed ISIL to
flourish. As a consequence of its policies and actions,
the Al-Assad regime cannot be a partner in the fight
against ISIL. We reiterate our firm commitment to
counter the serious problem of foreign fighters.

International efforts to achieve a Syrian-led
transition remain a priority. We will continue to
provide political and practical support to the moderate
opposition. The European Union is determined to
support all efforts for a political solution by mutual
consent based on the Geneva communique and in line
with the relevant Security Council resolutions. We call
on all parties to engage constructively in negotiations,
and we express our full support to the United Nations
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura. The active
engagement of regional and international actors will be
required to deliver a viable transition.

The European Union firmly condemns the
indiscriminate killings and human rights abuses,
including systematic sexual and gender-based violence,
perpetrated in Syria and Iraq by ISIL and other terrorist
organizations, in particular against Christian and other
religious and ethnic groups, women and children.

The European Union reiterates also its condemnation
of the gross, widespread and systematic violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law by
the Al-Assad regime. The European Union is seriously
concerned about the human rights abuses and sectarian
violence that are being committed in Iraq.

All responsible for abuses and violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law must be held
accountable, and there can be no impunity for them. We
reiterate our call on the Security Council to refer the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court
and our call on Iraq to accede to the Rome Statute.

We reiterate our firm commitment to Iraq's unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We welcome the
coalition's efforts, including the decision by individual
Member States to provide military material and
expertise to Iraq to reduce ISIL's capacity to attack
civilian populations, which come in response to an
explicit request for support by the Iraqi Government.
Ultimately, however, the solution to the crisis can only
be political. We call on the Iraqi Government, whose
formation we welcomed, to reach out to all components
of Iraqi society and to pursue, without delay, a process
of national reconciliation. We urge all components of
Iraqi society to unite in the fight against ISIL and to
support a process of national reconciliation.

The EU is deeply concerned by the humanitarian
predicament of millions of Syrians and Iraqis. We will
continue to support humanitarian relief efforts and
provide assistance to support the resilience of refugees
and host communities. We condemn the Al-Assad
regime's continued intransigence on humanitarian
access and the use of administrative procedures to
hinder the rapid and sustained delivery of aid. We
reiterate our call on all parties, in particular the
Al-Assad regime, to implement in full the provisions
of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165
(2014). We will continue to implement those resolutions
to deliver cross-border and cross-line assistance. We
are also deeply concerned that ISIL has significantly
affected the presence and operation of humanitarian
agencies and actors in northern Syria. We call on the
Government of Iraq to do more to contribute to the
humanitarian relief efforts across the country.

We are fully aware of the immense challenges that
the current developments in Syria and Iraq pose in
particular to Lebanon and Jordan. We are determined
to seek ways to further enhance our support to both
countries. The European Union looks forward to the
Berlin conference on 28 October.
We understand the extraordinary security,
humanitarian, social, economic and political challenges
that Lebanon is facing. We strongly condemn the
repeated attacks by violent extremist groups on
Lebanon's territory and commend the Lebanese
security agencies for their joint efforts in responding to
the numerous security threats. We stress the importance
of strong institutions in preserving the stability and
internal unity of Lebanon. The European Union
encourages Lebanon's leaders to open the way for the
election of a new President without further delay.

