I am honoured once again to brief the Security Council on behalf of the European Union (EU). I am thankful for the presence of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mankeur Ndiaye, and of the Special Representative of the African Union (AU) for the Central African Republic, Matias Matondo. I would first like to start by expressing the solidarity of the European Union in the fight the Central African authorities and population are conducting against the coronavirus disease pandemic. The Central African Republic was the first country to benefit from the humanitarian air-bridge launched in May by the EU and its member States. We have also reoriented our programmes to better support the authorities. This pandemic hits the Central African Republic in the middle of an electoral process of critical importance. Despite the adverse circumstances, we would like to pay tribute to the authorities, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and the United Nations Development Programme for the important progress made in the preparations and we welcome the commitment by the authorities to adhere to the constitutional time frame. Our significant financial support for the organization of these elections and our decision to deploy a mission of electoral experts and mobilize additional support testify to our trust in, but also to our expectations of, this process. It is essential to reinforce its inclusivity and foster dialogue, and for all political actors to act responsibly, resisting those trying to destabilize the process, including through disinformation campaigns, also targeting international partners. We will remain particularly vigilant. In such a context, it is critical that the implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic remains a priority. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/545) gives a clear picture of the accomplishments in the implementation of the peace process as well as of the remaining challenges. I would, in particular, subscribe to one of the assessments made in the report, indicating that "While advances were made in implementing the agreement, progress was undermined by a resurgence of violence perpetrated by armed groups" (S/2020/545, para. 10). The latest attacks by an armed group in the west of the Central African Republic are unfortunately another illustration of the double game played by some armed groups. I would like to present my sincere condolences to the Central African Republic authorities and to the families affected regarding the death of several soldiers, and we hope for a speedy recovery for those wounded. Dialogue and confidence should certainly be strengthened between the parties; the inclusivity of the process reinforced, in particular with women and youth being given a stronger role; and some key elements of the agreement accelerated - I am thinking, in particular, of the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation, whose independence must be ensured, and of the decentralization process. The stalled disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process must be relaunched, with armed groups abiding by their own commitments to disarm and demobilize. The special mixed security units, whose operationalization benefits from significant EU financial support, represent another opportunity that members of armed groups should seize. But when parties and, in particular, armed groups severely violate the provisions of the agreement, killing civilians, reinforcing their positions and opposing the expansion of State authority, I align myself with the call of the Secretary-General for "stakeholders to take a firm stance regarding the sanctions to be applied" (ibid., para. 47), as foreseen under article 35 of the agreement. A year and half after the signing of the agreement, it is high time for this sanctions regime finally to be defined and applied. These violations are unacceptable and cannot continue without a firm reaction; the credibility of the agreement would otherwise be at stake, with the population losing trust in the process. I welcome in that regard the arrests by MINUSCA together with the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic, upon request of the Special Criminal Court, of several members of armed groups suspected of war crimes and crimes against humanity, and, more recently, the actions conducted against the Retour, reclamation et rehabilitation armed group. I would like to pay tribute, on this occasion, to MINUSCA's work. The fight against impunity and the strengthening of justice are indispensable for lasting peace and reconciliation. In this overall challenging context, I would like to end by reiterating the full commitment of the EU to supporting the Central African Republic in its peace, stabilization, democratization and development process, supporting the strengthening and expansion of State authority, notably as part of the ongoing security sector reform with our military EU Military Training Mission in the Central African Republic, as well as our forthcoming civilian EU Advisory Mission, which will be deployed as soon as COVID-19-related sanitary conditions allow. In these efforts, we are more than ever committed to closely cooperating and coordinating with the United Nations, the African Union and the Economic Community of Central African States, as well as with all partners involved, including in particular the neighbours of the Central African Republic, which have a critical role to play.
