Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the
Under-Secretary-General and the two briefers from
civil society.

We join other speakers in welcoming the fact that
this long-overdue subject is now being debated in the
Security Council. It is worth recalling that the arbitrary
detention of civilians by the Syrian regime is one of
the factors that catalysed protests in 2011. As others
have noted, more than eight years later, that repressive
practice is still ongoing. Tens of thousands of Syrians
have been detained, tortured, subject to sexual violence
and killed in detention centres by the regime since the
start of the conflict. That is not to underplay what Da'esh
has done. We agree that there is a very clear need for
those who have committed appalling crimes for Da'esh
also to be brought tojustice. But today's debate is about
a Government's persecution of its own people.

This year, after waiting for years, thousands of
families were informed that their loved ones had died
in the detention centres with no explanation and no
accountability. Many more are still waiting to find out
if their relatives are alive or dead, which is unbelievably
cruel. Other speakers have made reference to resolution
2474 (2019). In line with that resolution, the families
must be informed of what has happened to their
loved ones.
So I would like to echo the appeal of the United
States representative today in calling for the release of
all those arbitrarily detained. That is quite a dramatic
step. It is important for it to happen soon. It is an
important element of any political process.

I want to pick up on the calls from the civil
society briefers for a step that the Syrian authorities
take straightaway: they could agree to give the United
Nations and the Commission of Inquiry access to
detention facilities and agree to provide a list of names
of all the detainees and their locations. Those are easy
steps. I look to the representative of Syria to undertake to
transmit those requests to his Government, and I would
suggest that he let you, Madam President, on behalf
of the Security Council, obtain an acknowledgement
from his Government this week that those lists will
be provided. I would like to include access to burial
grounds on that list.

The United Kingdom is the penholder for the
Human Rights Council resolution on Syria. We will
continue in the Human Rights Council in Geneva to
call for the release of the detainees and for access by
independent monitors to detention facilities. I would
like to use this occasion to also pay tribute to the work
of the United Nations Commission of Inquiry and the
brave journalists and non-governmental organizations
that continue to document the violations and abuses.

A number of people have mentioned the importance
that the Special Envoy attaches to this issue, and we
too support all his efforts. We welcome the continued
facilitation by Turkey and Russia of prisoner swaps
between regime and opposition armed groups, including
those released ahead ofthe Astana meeting on 1 August.
However, that is by no means the same as the wholesale
release of arbitrarily detained persons that the Council
that has demanded in various resolutions.

I would like to make a broader point, ifI may.
Delivering justice for the families of those detained
is not only the right and moral thing to do, but it is
also a necessary if we are to tackle the drivers and root
causes of Syria's conflict. A credible, substantive and
genuine political settlement will need to address the
issue of political detainees. All Syrian citizens need to
be able to live free from fear of arbitrary arrest, torture
and execution. As we have said several times in the
Security Council, if Syria cannot resolve the issues that
led to the original conflict in 2011, it has no hope of
rehabilitation and reconstruction within the country
and no hope of reintegration into the international
community of nations.
