Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank the Swedish presidency
for having convened this important meeting on the
consideration of the quarterly report on the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia (S/2018/723).
We also congratulate Mr. Jean Arnault, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, on his
outstanding briefing.

On behalf of the Cote d'Ivoire delegation, I wish
a very warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Oscar
Naranjo, Vice-President of the Republic of Colombia,
whose presence here today is an honour for us.

The report, which outlines recent developments in
the peace process in Colombia, comes at a time when
one the main players in that process, President Juan
Manuel Santos Caldero'n, is preparing to hand over
power to his successor, Mr. Ivan Duque. My delegation
commends the various Colombian parties for having
met the challenge of holding legislative and presidential
elections in a peaceful climate with the participation of
all. It also welcomes the resolve of the President-elect
to strive to promote the unity of the country and to end
the polarization of Colombian society.

My delegation also notes with satisfaction the
significant progress made in the legislative sector and
in several cross-cutting sectors. At the legislative level,
my delegation welcomes the adoption by the Parliament
of the rules of procedure on the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace, which has begun its work, as well as the
authorization given for the holding of a referendum on
measures to combat corruption.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the efforts made by the
Colombian Government to implement the necessary
legal guarantees for the reintegration of former Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Eje'rcito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) combatants. It also welcomes the
close cooperation of former FARC-EP leaders with the
Truth Commission, which is charged with investigating
human rights violations committed during the
conflict. The appearance by the head of the People's
Alternative Revolutionary Force (FARC), Mr. Rodrigo
Londofio, before the Truth Commission on 29 June is an
encouraging sign in this respect.

As regards cross-cutting sectors, my delegation is
pleased with all efforts to involve young people and to
integrate the gender dimension into the peace process,
and it welcomes the measures aimed at ensuring the
protection of children.

Despite the progress made, the peace process
in Colombia remains a source of concern, not only
because of the difficulties related to the implementation
of the Peace Agreement signed on 24 November 2016
with the FARC-EP, but also the problems encountered
in reviewing some crucial provisions of the Peace
Agreement. The provisions in question - which
relate to the justice procedure, a key component of
transitional justice, land issues and the substitution
programme - are key areas of the Agreement, whose
implementation is strongly recommended in order to
foster trust between the various parties.

My delegation, furthermore, is concerned that
some of the developments seen in recent months
might undermine the achievements made in the peace
process, for example, the arrest for illegal activities
of the leader of FARC, Mr. Hernandez Solarte, alias
Jesus Santrich; attacks against former combatants
and members of their families as well as human rights
defenders; and uncertainties with respect to the future
of the Agreement following the political handover.

Cote d'Ivoire urges the new Colombian leaders to
pursue the implementation of the Peace Agreement
with FARC and to undertake negotiations with the
National Liberation Army in order to create conditions
conducive to peace and sustainable development in
the country. The new Government should also devise
appropriate responses to economic, social, political
and security concerns and to the issue of the rule of
law in order to give the peace process in Colombia a
real chance.

To that end, my delegation believes that in line with
the conclusions contained in the report, the challenges
that need to be dealt with include the reintegration
of former combatants, security guarantees for
communities, combating violence in former conflict
areas, the proliferation of militias, appropriate measures
in the area of the coca economy, and the frustrations
and fears of former combatants and of communities
that feel excluded from the peace process.

My delegation welcomes the implementation
of a national political pact against violence and for
the peaceful exercise of politics, now that the Pact
of repudiation of violence against social leaders has
been endorsed by State institutions, all major political
expressions and civil society. Along those same lines, my
delegation would encourage the new regime to ensure
the protection of community leaders and human rights
defenders in order to achieve true political, social and
economic inclusion in Colombia. From this standpoint,
my country would urge the international community to
assist the peace efforts of the Colombian parties.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire expresses its full
support for the peace process under way and for the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, and
reiterates its readiness to work with the other members
of the Security Council for the return and consolidation
of peace in Colombia.

