Mr. Feltman: Since the closed-door briefing
to the Security Council on 8 December by Assistant
Secretary-General Miroslav Jenea on the Turkish troop
deployment in northern Iraq, Baghdad and Ankara
have held high-level bilateral discussions on the issue.

On 10 December, the Prime Minister of Iraq,
Mr. Haider Al Abadi, met with a senior Turkish
delegation. Dispatched by the Prime Minister of
Turkey, Mr. Ahmet Davutoglu, the delegation was
headed by the Turkish Under-Secretary of the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs and the Under-Secretary of the
National Intelligence Service. Prime Minister Al Abadi
stated after the meeting that he had reiterated earlier
statements on the matter, and said that "the only way
to resolve the crisis is the full withdrawal of Turkish
troops from Iraqi territory". The delegation had,
according to Mr. Davutoglu, agreed "to rearrange the
military personnel of the Turkish security force".
On 10 December, Turkish President Erdogan stated
at a news conference that "the number of [Turkish]
soldiers might increase or decrease depending on the
number of Peshmerga being trained". The following
day, on 11 December, Prime Minister Al Abadi issued
a statement that he had instructed the Iraqi Ministry
for Foreign Affairs "to submit a formal complaint...
on the Turkish incursion" to the Security Council. On
the same day, the Secretariat received a letter from the
Iraqi Foreign Minister, Mr. Ibrahim Al-Jaafari, dated
11 December 2015, calling on the Security Council

"to order Turkey to withdraw its forces immediately
and to ensure, by all available means, that those
forces retreat immediately and unconditionally to
the internationally recognized border of the two
countries".

Also on 11 December, the Prime Minister of Iraq
issued another statement on the situation and reiterated
the position of his Government. In his statement, the
Prime Minister reaffirmed "that [Iraq's] actions are not
directed against the brotherly and neighbourly Turkish
people".

On 14 December, Turkey publicly announced
that some of its troops that had recently entered
Iraq had begun leaving the Bashiqa area as part of a
rearrangement. According to a 16 December statement
from the Turkish General Staff, two Iraqis were killed
and four Turkish troops were wounded when the
training base in Bashiqa in northern Iraq was targeted
by rocket fire from positions under the control of the
Ilamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

The Secretary-General reiterates his hope that
the Governments of Iraq and Turkey will exercise
restraint, including in their public statements, and
intensify their bilateral discussions to defuse tensions.
He hopes that both sides will work towards reaching a
mutual agreement as soon as possible. In that context,
the Secretary-General's Special Representative for
Iraq, Mr. Jan Kubis, has been actively engaging
the Government of Iraq and Turkish diplomatic
representatives to discuss the situation. The Secretary-
General urges all Member States involved in the fight
against ISIL in Iraq to do so in manner that is consistent
with the Charter of the United Nations and that respects
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq.
