Mr. Cunningham (United States): I want to
thank Mr. Fall for his briefing and say that we welcome
this opportunity to assess the progress that has been
made in following up on the report of the inter-agency
mission to West Africa.

However, first, Mr. President, I wanted to
commend Mali's contribution and determined effort
through the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and here in the Security Council to
promote peace and stability in that region.

The inter-agency mission report presented an
accurate and compelling picture of the political
dynamics in the region and also of the regional actors,
some of whom are manipulating those dynamics. As
the Council reviewed its recommendations, my
authorities were mindful of the need to promote a
regional approach, but I also hope we are all aware that
the primary burden remains with the States of the
region in the pursuit of peace. There are, to be sure,
many problems that still exist - many of my
colleagues have referred to them today - but I think it
is also clear that there are signs of progress, and we can
begin to see results of the combined efforts of the
United Nations, regional groupings and national efforts
to try to bring improved circumstances to this area.

The United States agreed with the report's
emphasis on the need for the United Nations and the
international community to promote a cross-border,
regional approach to helping the States of West Africa
to address social, economic and political problems. We
are especially pleased at the progress in implementing
a key recommendation of the report - naming a
United Nations special representative for West Africa
with an office in the region.

We expect that West Africa will benefit from the
appointment of a United Nations special representative
with a mandate to focus on regional cross-border
issues, such as identifying barriers to trade and
economic growth, building networks among civil
society groups promoting democracy, stopping the
spread of small arms and improving delivery of
assistance to refugees. It is important that the special
representative not duplicate the existing work of the
special representatives responsible for United Nations
peacekeeping efforts or the operation of United Nations
democracy-building offices in the West African region,
and we are reassured by what we have heard today.

It is also important that the regional
representative work with existing regional and
multilateral organizations in addressing the cross-
border issues within his mandate. This will jump-start
the representative's work and help ensure effective use
of resources, and we commend the Secretariat and
ECOWAS for their commitment to work together.

I would like to make some brief points about
American efforts, bilaterally and working with our
colleagues on the Council, to help the States of West
Africa bring peace and stability to their region.

Our policy in West Africa is based on three
principles: support for Governments in the region that
pursue policies of non-aggression externally and good
governance internally; support for action in the
Security Council to deter and contain those regimes in
West Africa which engage in aggression against their
neighbours and oppress their own peoples; and
assistance and support to strengthen regional
organizations, such as ECOWAS, that aim to reduce
trade barriers, combat transnational threats and resolve
conflict.

The end of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process in Sierra Leone is scheduled for
this month; the election registration process in Sierra
Leone will begin in January, with elections in May; and
Security Council decisions on renewing or
strengthening existing sanctions on the regime of
President Taylor of Liberia will be made soon. All of
these are interrelated. Each requires the Council to
make careful evaluations of whether its aims, as set
forth in its resolutions, are being met. American
attitudes will be based on the principles I have just
outlined. In particular, our support for Council action
to deter States engaged in aggression against their
neighbours in the region will continue.

President Taylor of Liberia is violating the
Council's embargo on importation of arms and the ban
on exports of diamonds. He continues to provide
sanctuary to armed rebels of the Revolutionary United
Front (RUF), whose presence in Liberia is a threat to
the peace in Sierra Leone and prospects for elections.
Sanctions against President Taylor's regime are linked
directly to the continuation of peacekeeping operations
in Sierra Leone over the coming months. While tasking
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone to keep the
peace in Sierra Leone and assist with the elections, the
Council must also hold accountable, and sanction, the
individuals most responsible for continuing threats to
the peace and the election process. I think we have
seen over the past months how important this
multifaceted effort is if we are actually to help the
countries of the region achieve the peace and stability
that they want.

We share the concern outlined by Assistant
Secretary-General Fall at the recent deterioration of
security in parts of Lofa County and elsewhere in
Liberia, and we deeply regret the violence and loss of
life. At the same time, I noted his comment about the
relative lessening of tension among Guinea, Sierra
Leone and Liberia, thanks to dialogue and the efforts of
ECOWAS and other outside pressure. We welcome
continuing efforts in this regard and are pleased to note
that there will be an ECOWAS summit in a couple of
days and that there are plans for a summit of the Mano
River Union countries early next year. We hope that the
countries involved and all of us can continue to use
these contacts and this process to promote confidence-
building and real progress on the ground.

I began by commending the authors of the inter-
agency report for promoting a regional approach to
cross-border issues facing West Africa. I would like to
close by stressing that my Government also
understands that the region needs the continued
assistance of the international community, and that the
United States will continue to lend its support to the
region.

