Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): This debate is marked with particular distinction
because it is taking place just a few days after important
political events in Angola. In addition, by a fortunate
combination of circumstances, our deliberations are taking
place under the presidency of the representative of Portugal,
a friendly country whose history is closely linked with that
of Angola and of Guinea-Bissau, my own country. It is
significant and gratifying that this is so.

The Angolan Government and UNITA finally
proceeded to form a Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation on ll April. This is assuredly a great Victory
for the Angolans, a victory whose political scope transcends
the national frontiers of Angola, because it corresponds to
the wish of the entire international community to see this
country emerge from the Vicious cycle of Violence and
devote itself to working for the well-being of all its
citizens without distinction. The Angolans have many
reasons to rejoice and to demonstrate their happiness,
which many of us will be pleased to share.

Yes, the Angolan people believe that a new day has
dawned, that a new point of departure has been reached,
that a new hope has risen. We hope that nothing will
frustrate or destroy this. The Angolan people wish to have
confidence in their leaders and in their capacity to out-do
themselves, to stand up to present challenges by
concerting their efforts and working together, tirelessly,
towards building their future - a future which, even
yesterday, was uncertain and remote because it was
obscured by so many years of confrontation, destruction
and bereavement. The Angolans are convinced that it is
possible that their nation can be reborn from the ashes of
war.

Angolans are a courageous people who do not shrink
from any ordeal, provided that they are assured that the
road before them is the right one to follow, that the
sacrifices of the present are worth making, and that
destiny - their destiny - which they have placed in the
hands of their political leaders, will be protected and
defended with honour. That is why nothing should be
done that would check this new surge of mutual
recognition or stifle this bold spirit of good-
neighbourliness, which will, it seems, from now on dwell
in the hearts of the men and women of that country.

Every necessary step must be taken to respond to the
cries of distress of the thousands of victims of an
atrocious war that has continued for too long. Every
corpse that lines the path of peace should serve as a
beacon that lights the way for erstwhile enemies in their
efforts to move towards national reconciliation. It is
proper, therefore, to remember their sacrifices, heal their
wounds and concern ourselves with their future. If peace
in Angola is to be consolidated and to endure, it will
require the contribution of all the vital forces of the
nation, in a burst of national energy, to bring together in
perfect synergy all the skill at the country's disposal.

A decisive phase has just been completed in Angola.
We share the pride felt by all those who accompanied the
Angolan people in their long quest for peace. I am
thinking in particular of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations who, as soon as he assumed office, took
charge of the issue and succeeded, in particular as a result

 

of his visits to Luanda and Bailundo last March, in
promoting a salutary thaw in the situation, to which end his
Special Representative, Maitre Blondin Beye, worked
tirelessly. We will never be able to express how much we
owe to the civilian and military personnel of the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) for
having so perfectly accomplished their mission. It is fitting
to pay tribute here to the memory of those many among
them who are, unfortunately, no longer with us and to
whom this great Victory should be dedicated. We should
also like to thank the troika countries for their contribution.

The international community committed itself
wholeheartedly to the search for a solution to the Angolan
crisis. The United Nations undertook there the most
important peacekeeping operation that it has carried out to
date. A great deal of financial support was necessary to
ensure that it proceeded smoothly. That demonstrates what
a great responsibility we now bear for ensuring that
everything continues as planned for the full implementation
of the Lusaka Protocol. Much remains to be done,
particular in completing the incorporation of UNITA
soldiers into the Angolan Armed Forces and training the
National Police. It will also be essential to strengthen the
links of solidarity between Angolans by ensuring that,
throughout the national territory, there will be an effective
and equitable State administration that is capable of
imbuing every citizen with a sense of belonging to a single
country.

The international community must help Angolans to
learn to live together again and to trust, understand and
help each other. Many psychological obstacles remain to be
overcome. It should be remembered that we must promote
a culture of peace and forgiveness in that country. How
much destruction has been provoked by all those years of
confrontation and combat? How many widows, orphans and
people mutilated by exploding mines bear witness to the
horrors of which men are capable? Do they not need a hand
to be stretched out to them to help them to regain their
proper place in society?

International assistance will therefore be necessary for
a long time to come. That is why we endorse the analysis
and the recommendations contained in the two most recent
reports of the Secretary-General. He has proposed initiatives
and structures that my delegation believes are
commensurate with the challenges of the present and take
full account of the new realities to which the Angolan
people will have to adapt in the future. We believe that
extending the mandate of UNAVEM. III until 30 June 1997
is essential in order to consolidate what has already been
achieved and to ensure the completion of the objectives
laid down in the Lusaka Protocol. We hope that the
timetable established for the gradual withdrawal of the
military component will be respected, without in any way
damaging the peace process as a whole.

The proposal of the Secretary-General with regard to
the establishment, on 1 July 1997, of a United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola, is worthy of all our
consideration, as it takes into account the need to
maintain the political balance that has already been
established and to create the necessary conditions for the
Angolans themselves to take charge of their future. This
Mission will also help the Angolans to perfect their new
system of government, one of whose major
responsibilities will be to guarantee to all citizens the full
enjoyment of their civil and political rights. In this
respect, therefore, the international community will have
to continue to support the efforts of the United Nations in
both the humanitarian and financial spheres.

We have said how much we welcome the progress
achieved in the peace process in Angola. My country,
Guinea-Bissau, has, at every stage of Angola's long
march towards liberty and peace, continued to display
solidarity with the Angolan people - a brotherly people
to which we are linked by many affinities and historic
ties. We hope that President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi,
in their wisdom and great magnanimity, will respond to
the appeal of their people who, together with the rest of
the international community, are calling upon them to
meet together in a spirit of give and take so that national
reconciliation in Angola can be sealed once and for all.

