Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, for their statements. I also
congratulate Mr. Farid Zarif on his appointment.

The situation in northern Kosovo has been the
subject of numerous Council meetings since the end of
July, and I will therefore skip the origins and evolution
of the incidents, which have been covered in detail in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2011/675). However,
new confrontations have recently occurred that have
resulted in about 25 wounded Kosovo Force (KFOR)
soldiers, among whom two were hit by bullets. Such
violent attacks against the international mission
charged with guaranteeing the safety of the civilian
populations are unacceptable. France condemns those
deliberate attacks against staff of NATO and the
European Union, who are carrying out tasks under a
United Nations mandate.

The responses of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and KF OR in
confronting those acts of violence have been adequate
and proportional. Those interventions in consultation
with the local authorities have led to reduced tensions,
but the roadblocks in northern Kosovo continue to
impede implementation of the international
contingents' mandate and to make civilian life difficult.
We therefore call for the immediate removal of the
roadblocks and for respect for the right of freedom of
movement in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).

A return to calm is above all in the interest of the
inhabitants of northern Kosovo, who are the first to
suffer from the impediments to free movement. Neither
the international community nor neighbouring States
desire to see the inhabitants or their territory isolated
or subject to control by the criminal networks
responsible for violence, which is not motivated by
nationalism, but because border controls make the
trafficking by which they earn their living more
difficult. Our adversary is the organized criminal
networks that manipulate the population, not the
population itself.

The resumption of commercial relations between
Serbia and Kosovo, the EULEX presence at Gates 1
and 31 in conformity with its 2008 United Nations
mandate, and the return to dialogue facilitated by the
European Union between Belgrade and Pristina on
21 November and tomorrow, 30 November, are
positive developments that must be encouraged.

A return to calm is in the interests of Belgrade
and Pristina, which want to move closer to the
European Union. The differences between the parties
must be resolved through dialogue and a spirit of
compromise. We call upon Serbia and Kosovo to
pursue that dialogue responsibly and to focus their
efforts on accession to the European Union, based on
the recommendations contained in the last progress
report of the European Commission and to abstain
from all acts, and statements that could worsen
tensions.

Finally, we welcome Mr. Williamson's
appointment to lead the EULEX Special Investigative
Task Force in charge of investigating the allegations of
illicit trafficking in human organs, as described in the
report of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe, which was published at the end of 2010.

France calls upon all States of the region to
promote cooperation with EULEX and welcomes their
expressed readiness to cooperate with the investigation.
EULEX thus has the resources to undertake a credible
investigation that should be carried out calmly without
any undue influence being brought to bear in the
context of dialogue.

