Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join other Council
members in thanking you, Mr. Minister, for convening
this timely discussion on Afghanistan. Yourparticipation
at this meeting, Sir, underlines New Zealand's deep
and abiding commitment to Afghanistan and its
people. I also wish to congratulate Mr. Yamamoto on
his appointment as the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), as
well as to thank him for his briefing. I would also like
to thank Ambassador Saikal of Afghanistan for his
comprehensive statement.

In the interests oftime, I intend to focus my remarks
on three key areas, namely, political and security issues;
the protection of civilians, particularly children; and
Afghanistan's socioeconomic development.

Special Representative Yamamoto's briefing and
the report (S/2016/768) of the Secretary-General both
clearly depict the persistent challenges in Afghanistan,
especially on the security front. Despite that, we
are encouraged that Afghanistan continues to show
resilience in addressing the challenges and in making
steady progress towards restoring peace and the rule of
law. In that regard, we welcome the progress made by
the Government in filling key executive posts, and the
inclusive manner in which that task was undertaken.

The Government's commitment and ongoing
efforts to hold parliamentary and district-level elections
are also commendable. The various local peace
initiatives, particularly the adoption of resolutions by
representatives of provisional Governments and civil
society on 20 July, committing themselves towards
working towards peace in their districts, are other
encouraging developments. The incremental progress
achieved in implementing the reform agenda thus far
is a step in the right direction and should be further
encouraged and supported by the United Nations and
the international community.

The highly volatile security situation within
Afghanistan, particularly the persistence of high-level
Taliban offensive operations, causing the destabilization
of many district centres, continues to be troubling. The
midyear protection of civilians report submitted by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
which recorded 5,166 civilian casualties between
January and June, clearly underscores the gravity of
the situation. That figure marked the highest number
of civilian casualties recorded by midyear reports since
2009. With respect to that unacceptably high figure,
we are highly concerned at the significant increase in
the casualty figures for children, which recorded 388
killed and more than 1,000 injured, marking an incrase
of 18 per cent from the previous cycle in 2015.

The widespread use of children in combat,
particularly by the Taliban, is abominable and must be
strongly condemned by the Council. We also deplore
and condemn the deliberate targeting of education and
health facilities, resulting in the loss of lives, especially
those of children. The Taliban and other perpetrators
responsible for causing such a massive scale of death
and destruction must be held to account. We reiterate our
call on all parties to undertake the measures necessary
to uphold their obligation to ensure the safety, security
and well-being of all children in the country.

On a related note, Malaysia looks forward to the
finalization of the Government's national policy on
civilian casualty mitigation. Additionally, the issuance
of directives to security forces, prohibiting the use of
schools for military purposes, the opening of six new
child protection units in police recruitment centres,
the release of children from adult detention facilities,
and steps taken to ensure the rights of children held on
national security charges are all positive developments
that will contribute to the country's long-term peace
and stability. It is our hope that the implementation of
those and other related measures will result in tangible
and positive improvements in the security situation in
Afghanistan.

The promotion of social and economic development
is essential to the long-term stability of Afghanistan. In
that context, we commend and welcome Afghanistan's
accession as a full member to the World Trade
Organization (WTO). Alongside ongoing cooperation
with regional partners and the international community,

including through the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process,
we believe that Afghanistan's WTO membership will
open doors and boost prospects for further economic
activities that will further improve the socioeconomic
well-being of its people.
The commitment and efforts of the Afghanistan
Government to improve governance and the economic
reform process, including through the implementation
of the Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework for 2017-2018 and the Afghanistan National
Peace and Development Framework, are important
steps towards ensuring the country's long-term
economic sustainability. This must be supported by
the international community. We look forward to the
upcoming Brussels Conference on Afghanistan, which
will present opportunities for partners to complement
and assist the country's reconstruction and development
efforts.

While we agree that substantial progress has been
made in Afghanistan over the past 15 years, significant
challenges persist and threaten to reverse these hard-
won gains. During this critical period, we call on all
parties to demonstrate a spirit of cooperation towards
achieving national unity and lasting stability. I conclude
by reaffirming our full support for the commitment of
the Government of Afghanistan and for the important
role played by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan and the authorities towards achieving
last peace and stability in Afghanistan.

