Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): We are honoured to
welcome in the Council today the Secretary of State
and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan and
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), His Excellency
Mr. Kanat Saudabayev. I thank him for his
presentation, and I salute Kazakhstan on assuming the
leadership of such an important organization.

As early as last month, in its first presidential
statement of 2010 (S/PRST/20lO/1), the Security
Council reiterated the importance of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations. The collaboration between
the United Nations and the OSCE is a concrete
example of a partnership that has helped to strengthen
international peace and security. We commend the
work carried out by the OSCE, particularly its
activities in promoting political dialogue and in
strengthening national capacities in South-Eastern
Europe, Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and Central
Asia.

We also note the OSCE efforts in enhancing the
capacity of Afghanistan to manage its borders with its
Central Asian neighbours. We appreciate and
encourage the close coordination of the OSCE with the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.

We also acknowledge the role played by the
OSCE Conflict Prevention Centre in early warning,
conflict prevention, crisis management and post-
conflict rehabilitation. It is critical that the cooperation
between the United Nations and organizations such as
the OSCE extend to all phases of a conflict. In this
context, we welcome the priorities outlined by
Kazakhstan for its OSCE chairmanship, and we note in
particular the importance attached to a balanced
approach to all three OSCE baskets - political and
military, economic and environmental, and human -
with a view to addressing not only the symptoms but
also the root causes of security-related problems.

We look forward to the continued cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE in the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
we wish Kazakhstan a very successful chairmanship.

