Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): We are deeply
honoured, Mr. President, by your presiding over the
Council at this debate. Please allow me to join other
delegations in welcoming you to New York. We would
also like express our appreciation for your delegation's
efforts in organizing this debate and during the
negotiation of resolution 1983 (2011). My thanks are
also due to the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and to the Executive Director of the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS), Mr. Michel Sidibe, for their statements.

HIV/AIDS is a scourge of our times. It has
caused untold misery affecting the lives of millions of
people across the globe, though some parts of the
world have been more adversely affected by HIV and
AIDS than others. It is a matter of some satisfaction
that since HIV became known, the efforts of the
international community and national Governments
have begun to show some positive progress in our
ability to tackle HIV and AIDS.

The need of the hour is to accelerate those efforts
and ensure that the international community is intense
in its support of national efforts. The lack of a firm
commitment to provide financial resources so that
developing countries may bolster their prevention and
treatment systems, including through capacity-
building, and the high cost of medicines -
exacerbated by trade and intellectual property right
barriers for generics - require the international
community's serious and immediate attention.

For our part, in India we have striven with all
determination to control and tackle the spread of HIV
and AIDS, with a massive national AIDS control
programme at the centre of our efforts. The targeted
intervention programme is buttressed with more broad-
based awareness and educational programmes. In
addition, the involvement of communities and civil
society at all stages of policy has also provided a
necessary impetus in our success.

The latest statistics show an overall reduction in
adult HIV prevalence and new infections in India.
Adult HIV prevalence declined from 0.41 per cent in
2000 to 0.31 per cent in 2009. Moreover, the estimated
number of new HIV infections fell by more than 50 per
cent over the past decade, from 270,000 in 2000 to
120,000 in 2009. However, our disease burden in
absolute terms is high, at 2.27 million, and it is
estimated that nearly 172,000 people have died of
AIDS and related illnesses in India.

India's contribution to the global fight against
HIV and AIDS has gone well beyond our national
boundaries. Dubbed "the pharmacy of the world", our
pharmaceutical companies have been in the forefront in
ensuring a supply of and access to safe, effective,
affordable and good-quality generic antiretroviral
treatments for HIV and AIDS to other developing
countries in dire need of such medicines.

11-3654]
The immense challenge posed by the spread of
HIV/AIDS has had across-the-board implications for
societies on the economic, social, legal and moral
fronts. It has weakened the ability of affected people
and societies to pursue progress in improving their
well-being.

With the highest prevalence rates and heaviest
disease burdens being in societies that have nothing to
do with conflict, HIV and AIDS have not created
conditions of instability and insecurity,
notwithstanding the apprehensions expressed in
resolution 1308 (2000). We must, however, recognize
the possibility that the epidemic may be fuelled in
situations of armed conflict and in post-conflict
situations, where there is also a lack of information and
credible data on the magnitude of HIV and AIDS. It is
critical that the United Nations response in the field in
such situations is cognizant of this fact. United Nations
mission leaders, be they civilian or military, should be
sensitive to this important global public health
challenge.

We welcome the incorporation of HIV-awareness
activities into the mandated activities of peacekeepers
and outreach projects for vulnerable communities.
Uniformed peacekeeping personnel can also be
effective agents of change in such missions. We also
strongly support the introduction of HIV and AIDS
preventive measures as part of the preparation and
discipline of peacekeeping forces. Well-informed
United Nations mission personnel in the field can make
a significant difference to the success of such
additional tasks assigned to them.

In that context, I would like to mention the
abhorrent and intolerable practice of sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict, which can lead to the
spread of HIV and AIDS. We strongly support
orienting United Nations operational and peacekeeping
activities towards recognizing the plight of women and
children in conflict areas and working proactively
towards preventing violence against them.

The General Assembly is convening a high-level
meeting on HIV and AIDS tomorrow, in the presence
of a large number of heads of State and Government
and ministers. We should not allow the vision of a
world without HIV and AIDS to remain a dream. We
are hopeful that the new declaration, which the
Assembly will adopt on Friday, will demonstrate the
strong commitment of the international community to

11-3654]

face this global challenge in a resolute and determined
manner.

