Mr. Sorcar (Bangladesh): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting.
My delegation commends the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. John Holmes, for his comprehensive briefing this
morning.

Civilians continue to suffer the brunt of Violence
during armed conflicts. Civilians have become the
primary target of attacks that are often motivated by
ethnic or religious hatred, political confrontation or
simply the ruthless desire of the perpetrators to attack a
member of an opposing group. These civilians are
displaced from their homes and are often denied access
to life-saving food, medicine and shelter. It is against
this backdrop that the States Members of the
Organization pledged in the Millennium Declaration
"to expand and strengthen the protection of civilians in
complex emergencies".

The Council has been discussing this important
issue for nearly a decade and has adopted many
resolutions and heard strong and relevant statements by
delegates. However, ironically, a large number of
civilians continue to be exposed to the atrocities of
conflict. My delegation urges all parties to conflicts to
ensure protection of the lives and property of civilians.
The Council should also strengthen its efforts to
prevent, resolve and reduce armed conflicts, pursuant
to its primary responsibility to maintain international
peace and security.

My delegation condemns all violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law and
stresses the need to combat impunity, safeguard access
for humanitarian assistance and protect the safety of
humanitarian aid workers.

We are appalled by the scale and intensity of the
devastation and the deaths of innocent Palestinians,
including women and children, caused by the
indiscriminate and excessive use of force in the Israeli
military operations in the Gaza Strip. It is
disconcerting to see that even humanitarian workers
are being killed by the Israeli attackers. The ongoing
attacks, in continued defiance of the Council's call for
a complete ceasefire, are contributing to continued
civilian casualties.

My delegation wishes to draw the international
community's attention to the fact that Israel, as a
signatory to the relevant provisions of the Fourth
Geneva Convention, which stipulates the responsibilities
of an occupying Power, cannot legally or morally
absolve itself of its responsibilities for guaranteeing the
basic human rights of the people under its occupation.
In this regard, my delegation would like to
re-emphasize the importance of the principle of the
responsibility to protect, as endorsed in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome, in preventing harm to civilians in
armed conflict.

The vulnerable situation of civilians in post-
conflict societies needs special attention. Long after
guns have fallen silent, such people remain traumatized
and permanently scarred by the brutalities of war. For
peace to be sustained, they must be rehabilitated and
reintegrated into their communities more effectively,
and the perpetrators must bear the resultant cost. The
Peacebuilding Commission should also include this
issue in its agenda whenever it takes up a country-
specific configuration.

Finally, we would like to mention what my
delegation considers two overarching themes for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. The first
relates to prevention and the building of a culture of
peace. Prevention is at the heart of protection. The
preventive capacity of the Organization must be
enhanced. At the same time, Member States need to
take steps to inculcate the values of peace, tolerance
and harmony that contribute to long-term prevention.

The second theme is that of coordination among
all stakeholders. We believe that the protection of
civilians Is the primary justification for a United
Nations presence in the field. However, various
political, humanitarian, military and development
components of United Nations missions in the field
lack an integrated focus on the protection of civilians.
Indeed, protection should be one of the main mandates
of any United Nations mission in the field, whether it
be a peacekeeping, political or peacebuilding mission.
Work should begin on crafting clear guidelines for
effective coordination, particularly among the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO), and the Department of Political Affairs (DPA).

In conclusion, my delegation once again
expresses its grave concern over the deteriorating
humanitarian situation caused by the ongoing Israeli
attacks in and around the Gaza Strip. Israel must
comply with resolution 1860 (2009). My delegation
strongly urges the international community,
particularly the Council, to take effective steps to
ensure implementation of that resolution and thereby
bring about a complete ceasefire in the Gaza Strip
forthwith.

