The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Togo.

I would like at the outset to thank most warmly
the Chairs of the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004), the Ambassadors of Australia,
Morocco and the Republic of Korea, for their briefings
on the activities of their Committees and for their
commitment to ensure the effective discharge of the
mandates that the Council has entrusted to those three
subsidiary bodies.

I should like also to express our gratitude to the
Ombudsperson and to the expert panels of the various
Committees for their work.

In my statement, I will address the cooperation
among the three Committees and stress the importance
of assisting and strengthening States' capacities,
particularly in the case of those with the scarcest
resources, where the need is most acute.

Cooperation remains the most appropriate way of
ensuring efficient and effective action against terrorism.
That cooperation, which is being developed among the
various counter-terrorist bodies, among States and
between States and those bodies, must be bolstered
as concerns the discharge by the subsidiary bodies
of the Security Council of their respective mandates.
That cooperation is even more important inasmuch
as it makes it possible to rationalize the efforts of the
various stakeholders and to avoid any duplication of
effort or wasting of energy.

In that regard, Togo wishes to welcome the
multifaceted cooperation that has been institutionalized
among the Committees, particularly as concerns
outreach and country visits and cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations.
Those mechanisms provide opportunities for the three
Committees to remind all parties concerned of their
obligations under the various relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.

It goes without saying that the convening of
meetings and information exchange make it possible
to achieve the goal of zero tolerance for terrorism,
preventing it and combating it in all its forms and
manifestations by means, inter alia, of the creation of
formal networks of counter-terrorism professionals.

Technical assistance and capacity-building
are another key element of the mechanisms for the
combating of terrorism. Recent developments in the
activities of terrorist groups, particularly in the Sahel
region and in Mali, have shown that the capacities and
the military and security abilities of States may on
occasion be outdistanced by the ability of terrorists
to adapt and to mobilize considerable military and
financial resources.

Against that backdrop, States must express their
needs in the areas associated with the fight against
terrorism. The shortcomings and difficulties faced by
States in implementing their obligations, which are
often identified in the reports that they submit pursuant
to the implementation of resolutions 1267 (1999), 1540
(2004) and 1373 (2001), could be used to determine
their requirements in terms of capacity-building and
support. In cases where reports are not submitted,
the States concerned should be induced to produce
them by making available to them the expertise of the
Committees and their panels.

Hence my country deems necessary the repeated
requests to States to appoint national focal points to
the various Committees. It also supports the carrying
out of country visits by the Committees, and the
maintenance of ongoing relations with the Permanent
Missions in New York and Geneva so as to ensure a
liaison with capitals. That could contribute to giving
new impetus to cooperation among the Committees on
the one hand and among the Committees, States and
regional cooperation on the other.

The combat against terrorism must be based on,
inter alia, the collection and exploitation of information
in order to detect and identify actors that pose a threat,
identify their facilities and understand their strategies.
Such work requires many skills and considerable
resources and cannot be carried out in isolation. There
must therefore be participation by all States. National
action must therefore be supported by that of other
countries and take place within the framework of
bilateral, regional and international cooperation, which
must be based on the exchange of experiences and
expertise.

Moreover, we believe that the improvement of
documents, the preliminary implementation assessment
and the detailed implementation survey reflect the
commitment of the 1373 Committee to learn more
about the challenges facing States and their needs in
order to respond appropriately thereto.

In that respect, we congratulate the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate on all of
the activities undertaken to that end, in particular the
workshops and meetings it has convened with a view to
helping certain States with respect to specific issues in
order to help them better understand the phenomenon
of terrorism and the means available to them to combat
it.

In that connection, the workshop held in December
2012 for the countries of the West African Economic
and Monetary Union, which Togo is currently chairing,
deserves special praise. The various workshops,
which were announced by the three Chairs, represent
ways of building the capacities of States and regional
organizations.

In conclusion, I would like to note that the tenth
anniversary of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) will soon be upon us. With only a few months
left until that event, which will permit us to take stock
of the road travelled, it is relevant to note that the spike
in terrorist activities and the proliferation of criminal
groups highlight the need to give new momentum to
United Nations action. That is how the international
community will be able to avert the danger posed by
terrorist and criminal groups, as well as non-State
actors, which adapt easily to all measures to counter
them and which have at their disposal considerable
technological capacity and are able to acquire
weapons of mass destruction and precursors for their
manufacture.
Togo is especially pleased that this meeting is taking
place on the eve of the Council's high-level debate on
Monday on the issue of terrorism in Africa, over which
Togo's President will have the honour to preside.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Israel.

