Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Japan welcomes the
recent positive developments towards the resolution of
the conflicts in Sierra Leone, Liberia, Cote d'Ivoire and
Guinea-Bissau. Those developments owe much to the
efforts of the international community and the
concerned parties in those countries. I should also like
to point out that, in West Africa, conflicts in one
country are often affected by conflicts in another
country. Because of that situation, it is very important
that the countries in the region act in solidarity to try to
solve conflicts with a sense of common regional
ownership, so to speak.

In that connection, Japan highly appreciates the
contributions made by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and believes that the
international community should encourage such
regional initiatives and support ECOWAS in order to
enhance its capability to conduct peace activities. Japan
provided assistance to the ECOWAS round-table
meeting held in Accra in June 2003, and we should like
to continue to support the efforts made by ECOWAS.
At the same time, I am informed that nearly 20,000
troops are currently deployed in the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) and in the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) and that a United
Nations Office is operating in Guinea-Bissau.
Furthermore, the Secretary-General just released a
report recommending the establishment of a
peacekeeping operation in C6te d'lvoire.

It goes without saying that the international
community should support the efforts to resolve those
conflicts. But, frankly speaking, it is necessary to
recognize that there is a limit to resources that the
United Nations can deploy for these purposes. Having
said that, the Organization's resources for these
purposes come not only from Council members, but
also from non-members of the Council, and thus we,
the Member States, must always give consideration to
how we can underwrite operations.

Japan is automatically required to share almost 20
per cent of the budget of each peacekeeping operation
established by the Security Council, without substantial
participation in Council debates. We are naturally much
interested in the magnitude of the financial
requirements of each peacekeeping operation and wish
to request the Council to seriously discuss how to
achieve the objectives of maintaining peace and
security in the most effective and efficient way. We
also wish to emphasize how important it is for the
Council to discuss a definitive exit strategy when it
decides to establish any peacekeeping operation.

The situation in C6te d'Ivoire is at a very critical
stage, and it is important for the Security Council to
make efforts to maintain the momentum it has
generated in implementing the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement of July 2003. I understand that the members
of the Council are currently discussing the possible
establishment of a peacekeeping operation in C6te
d'lvoire, following the recommendation of the
Secretary-General in his report of 6 January 2004
(S/2004/3). Japan considers it important that the
concrete conditions mentioned in the report for the
establishment of such an operation should be met.
Furthermore, we are of the view that before the
Council makes a decision, the Secretariat should
explain, to non-members of the Council as well, why it
considers appropriate the number of troops that has
been proposed to fulfil the mandate of possible
operations. I would also like to make the same request
with respect to the number of civilian police personnel,
which will be suggested later.

As for Liberia, Japan welcomes the ongoing
effort to prepare for the international reconstruction
conference on Liberia, in February 2004. Japan also
welcomes the progress of the peace process, including
the beginning of disarmament and demobilization, and
the effort to constitute the national transitional
Government of Liberia. We hope that Liberia will
become a good example in West Africa of how to
restore human security in a post-conflict area. On the
other hand, Japan is concerned about the violent
incidents that took place last December in the process
of implementing the disarmament programme. To
prevent the recurrence of such incidents, it is important
that the soldiers to be disarmed understand the content
and the procedure of the programme, through enhanced
public information activities.

Japan believes, as mentioned earlier, that all
peacekeeping operations should have clear exit
strategies at their launching. In this connection, it is
important that the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL), be completed by the end of 2004,
as planned in the related report of the Secretary-
General. Japan, accordingly, has much interest in the
recommendations of the Secretary-General, which may
be submitted by March 2004, on the basis of the
findings of an assessment mission concerning the
withdrawal of UNAMSIL. There are ongoing efforts to
strengthen the Sierra Leone army and the police and to
establish the effective authority of the Government of
Sierra Leone, for example in the area where diamond-
mining activities are underway. Japan believes that
these efforts will help achieve the consolidation of
peace in Sierra Leone. The international community and
the Government of Sierra Leone need to promote such
efforts further, in order to create the conditions in which
UNAMSIL would be able to complete its mandate.

As mentioned at the outset, a conflict in a West
African country often has regional dimensions.
Therefore it is very important to deal with such issues
as border controls, mercenaries, small arms and light
weapons and refugees from a regional perspective. We
hope that the recommendations of the Secretary-
General on cross-border issues in West Africa will be
submitted soon. I am sure that they will be quite useful
in enabling the Council and the countries concerned, as
well as regional organizations in West Africa, to
address these issues more effectively.

