Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): We
have taken careful note of the report (S/2012/50) of the
Secretary-General on the establishment of specialized
anti-piracy courts in Somalia and other States in the
region. We are grateful for the important remarks made
by Ms. Patricia O'Brien, Under-Secretary-General for
Legal Affairs, as well as by Mr. Yuri Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC).

In spite of the reduction in the number of attacks
along Somali coasts in the past year, the total number
of pirate attacks continues to be high. The broadening
geographic scope and increasing sophistication of
pirate operations are a source of concern, as are the
high number of hostages still being held and incidents
of violence against crews, including their use as human
shields.

Piracy is yet another consequence of the
institutional fragility and precarious economic
conditions in Somalia. Although international
cooperation in providing security for navigation,
prevent attacks and capture pirates has yielded some
positive results, we believe that security along
Somalia's coasts will be built on land. As both the main
source and victim of that crime, Somalia must
therefore participate comprehensively in resolving this
problem.

In order to respond effectively and sustainably to
the problem of piracy, it is necessary to restore peace
in Somalia and to foment its social and economic
development. To that end, it is necessary to strengthen
institutions in a manner that the economic, security,
judicial and penal and components can be acted on
simultaneously. Such an approach must in turn be
focused on preventing and punishing acts of piracy, so
as to continue to strengthen every link in the chain of
measures against that crime. In that regard, it is
crucially important that the Somali people see piracy as
an activity that diminishes their development options,
and that there is therefore reason to oppose it.

Similarly, we Somalia's sovereignty over its land
and maritime resources should be restored. To that end,
it is essential to resolve the legal issue of the
delimitation of the marine space, so as to bring it into
line with international law and thereby clearly establish
the marine territory, the exclusive economic zone and
the maritime borders with Kenya, Djibouti and Yemen.

With a view to improving security, the
international community should continue to support the
forces of the Transitional Federal Government to
enable them to carry out their activities on both land
and in its coastal waters. To that end, there is a need to
improve monitoring and identification with regard to
the arms embargo, as well as to consider the possibility
of imposing sanctions.

Somalia should assume responsibility for legal
proceedings to suppress acts of piracy and put an end
to the impunity enjoyed by pirates. There is also a need
to make progress in establishing Somali legal
instruments that make it possible to try suspected
pirates, strengthen Somalia's legal capacity and
provide penal facilities where those found guilty can
serve their sentences in Somalia.

Without ignoring the importance of an ongoing
commitment by the international community to provide
assistance and capacity-building in strengthening the
legislative, judicial and penal system, the primary
responsibility in combating piracy and armed robbery
along Somalia's coasts falls on the Transitional Federal
Government. Before the transition period comes to an
end, it is essential that the legal, penal and procedural
framework be reformed in order to adopt appropriate
laws on piracy in conformity with the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea.

With regard to the jurisdiction of specialized
tribunals in Somalia and other States of the region, the
goal should be to have courts that have broad
jurisdiction that can exercise that jurisdiction both in
cases involving common pirates and those having to do
with the financing, planning and organizing acts of
piracy. While courts to deal with the latter are more
complicated and require greater specialization and
more time to become fully operational, they can have a
greater impact on preventing and eradicating this
crime.

My delegation believes that the establishing a
specialized extraterritorial Somali court should include
the agreement of the Transitional Federal Government
and be considered as an interim step whose ultimate
goal is to try those suspected of committing acts of
piracy within Somalia.

We appreciate the efforts made by Seychelles to
set up a regional anti-piracy prosecution intelligence
and information coordination centre that would act as a
forum for coordinating regional and international
support for prosecuting suspected pirates. Such a
centre could serve as a logistical facility for the
transfer of suspected pirates by naval forces, and could
also help to strengthen the rule of law in Somalia.

The agreements reached in the context of the
second Constitutional Conference, held in Garowe, to
bring the transition period to an end and move ahead
with the establishment of a new federal Government in
Somalia serve as an important basis for launching a
strategy to combat piracy in which each of the regions
sees itself as a part of the same country and
understands the need to increase cooperation among
themselves in order to ensure the success of the
initiatives.

We believe that a lasting and stable solution to
the problem should be part of the efforts carried out to
resolve the Somali crisis and strengthen the rule of law
in the country. Any viable option will require adopting
a comprehensive approach that includes an institutional
structure that ensures governance and makes it possible
to pursue Somalia's economic and social development.

Prosecutions may prove pointless if they are not
accompanied by the establishment of alternatives to
piracy for the Somali people based on investments in
communities that produce domestic revenues that
contribute to the development of a formal economy.

