Mr. Bishnoi (India): We thank you, Madam
President, for organizing today's debate on regional
organizations and contemporary challenges of global
security. We also thank your delegation for the useful
concept note (S/2015/599, annex) it has prepared. We
also take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-
General for the comprehensive briefing he provided.

India supports the role of regional organizations
in the maintenance of international peace and security
in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations. The role discharged
by such organizations should, however, be consistent
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
The principles of national sovereignty and the political
independence, unity and territorial integrity of States
must be fully respected. It is also our belief that the
peaceful resolution of conflicts should be the first
priority - both of the Security Council and of regional
organizations. The recent report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446)
highlights the fact that peacekeeping cannot substitute
for political solutions. No purpose would be served
by having regional organizations struggle to manage
conflict with military tools while political processes
are either not under way or have not been concluded.

Chapter VIII of the Charter refers to regional
arrangements and agencies. There is therefore a clear
requirement for vicinity - or geographical contiguity.
It is important to note that Chapter VIII does not
envisage any role for organizations formed on any
other basis, whether of language, religion or historical
coincidence. Any overly liberal interpretation of
terminology would violate the Charter and would also
be counterproductive.

We would also like to caution that, while regional
organizations can at times play a useful role in assisting
the United Nations, the primacy of the United Nations
itself cannot be denied. Speaking of Africa, the
United Nations cannot disengage with that continent
by subcontracting peacekeeping under regional
arrangements. We would need to start worrying if the
impartiality of peacekeepers were called into question.
That, however, is a possibility that cannot be ruled
out with the regionalization and subregionalization of
peacekeeping. In cases where the United Nations does
depend upon regional organizations for peacekeeping,
it is important that there should be full consultations
before arrangements are put into place. That would
mean that troop-contributing countries should be
invited to participate in the decisions of the Council in
accordance with Article 44 of the Charter of the United
Nations. This is necessary for mandates to be realistic,
and also for obtaining the full cooperation of those who
will actually be carrying out implementation on the
ground.

We would like to take this opportunity to
call attention to the fact that the Charter has clear
provisions for the Council to be kept fully informed
of actions undertaken under regional arrangements for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
However, such information is not shared with the
wider membership of the United Nations. We would
like to request that consideration be given to including
that information in the annual reports of the Security
Council.
In conclusion, we would also like to draw attention
to the fact that at least two thirds of the work of the
Security Council relates to Africa. There is, however,
no representation of that continent in the permanent
membership ofthe Council. That shortcoming seriously
undermines the legitimacy of the Council's decisions.
Until such time as that historical injustice is addressed,
the decisions of the Council will lack full force. The
seventieth anniversary of the Organization, in our
View, provides a most opportune moment to rectify that
grave lacuna.

