Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): Viet Nam aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

My delegation commends the initiative by the
Venezuelan presidency to hold this open debate on the
crucial topic of respect for the principles and purposes
of the United Nations Charter. This is highly relevant
given the growing challenges to global security and
the crucial role of the United Nations in tackling these
challenges.

Since its founding seven decades ago, the United
Nations has successfully proved its relevance and
value as the most inclusive multilateral body in
safeguarding the global collective security architecture.
The Organization has helped avert wars, promote
decolonization, protect human rights and advance
economic and social development.

These successes are all founded upon the United
Nations Charter, with the purposes and principles
at its core. As a matter of fact, these fundamental
principles - respect for the independence, sovereign
equality and territorial integrity of Member States;
non-interference in their internal affairs; commitment
to the peaceful settlement of disputes; and refraining
from the threat or use of force - have become the
linchpin of the Organization, the core values of the
international community, the protection upon which
the weak can rely, and safeguards against the abuse of
power.

We have to acknowledge, however, that significant
threats to international peace and security continue
to exist, be they the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, terrorism and violent extremism,
prolonged sovereignty and territorial disputes, or
escalating intra-State and regional conflicts. Millions
of people around the world are living in destitution,
fleeing wars and conflicts or suffering from various
forms of deprivation.

The severity and complexity of the present
challenges require a determined approach on the part
of the United Nations, particularly its main organs,
including the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council, in upholding
the purposes and principles of the Charter. Special
attention must be paid to respect for the unique nature
of each nation in terms of history, culture, politics and
economics.

The peaceful settlement of disputes and the
prevention of conflicts must remain key aspects in the
work of the Organization in order to strengthen regional
and international peace and security. The United
Nations must further promote and assist Member States
in utilizing the applicable means specified in Article 33
of the Charter in the settlement of disputes.

We also believe that the Security Council, as the
body with primary responsibility for the maintenance of
peace and security, should prioritize the peaceful means
stipulated in Article 33 and deepen its relationship with
regional and subregional organizations, which play
a significant role in settling these disputes, fostering
conflict prevention and mediation partnerships, in
addition to providing rapid responses to regional
crises. It is also essential to mobilize resources and
develop capabilities for United Nations peacekeeping
operations so as to ensure its readiness, efficiency and
effectiveness.

Viet Nam, as a member of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), has worked
tirelessly with our fellow ASEAN members in building
a regional architecture conducive to stability and
prosperity, as well as addressing regional security
challenges through political and security advancements
in the ASEAN community. We are also working with
partners to develop tools for conflict prevention and the
peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with the
purpose and principles of the United Nations Charter.

These efforts by ASEAN and its partners are
vital, as the region is faced with increasingly complex
developments in the East Sea, also known as the South
China Sea, especially the ongoing illegal large-scale
land-reclamation and construction activities that have
changed the status of some of its features. These
unilateral activities damage the environment and have
serious implications for peace, stability and security in
the region, raising concerns among ASEAN countries
and others within and outside the region. It is therefore
vital to put an immediate end to all actions that change
the status quo or militarize or further complicate the
situation in the East Sea. We call upon all concerned
parties to settle disputes through peaceful means in
conformity with the United Nations Charter and the
fundamental principles of international law, including
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
respect freedom of navigation and aviation in the
region, and remain committed to the full and strict
implementation of the Declaration on the Conduct of
Parties in the South China Sea and the early conclusion
of a code of conduct.

History has proved the significance of the United
Nations Charter as a key element in the maintenance of
international peace and stability. We remain committed
and stand ready to work closely with the United Nations
and other partners in our joint efforts to collectively
address the international peace and security challenges
we face now and will face in the coming years.

