The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

We thank the Special CoordinatorNikolay Mladenov
and Under-Secretary-General for Humantarian Affairs
Stephen O'Brien for their detailed briefings.

The pause in the political process between the
Palestinians and the Israelis has lasted too long. The
sides need to return to the negotiating table and resume
a substantive dialogue on the issue of the final status.
Given the deep-rooted antagonism between Ramallah
and Tel Aviv, the task will be extremely difficult. We
continue to work actively in the framework of the
Quartet of international mediators. The publication of
its 1 July report (S/2016/595, annex) can, in our opinion,
rightly be regarded as a significant event in the context
of international efforts on the Middle East peace track.
It is important that this document not only reflect the
real situation in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, but
also offer concrete recommendations to preserve the
prospects for a two-State solution.

It should be frankly acknowledged that at this
time the provisions of the document are not being
implemented. While not as intense as it was in 2015,
violence on the ground continues. The likelihood of a
recurrence of last year's confrontation is high, as its
root causes have not yet been eliminated. Israel has
begun building new housing for settlers in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem. The de facto legalization of
so-called illegal settlement outposts is occuring even
as the Israeli authorities are destroying the homes that
Palestinians have built for themselves. The pace at
which Israelis are seizing Palestinian land indicates that
the point of no return will be reached in the foreseeable
future. After that, the only remaining option will be the
one-State solution.

It is unlikely that such an outcome would serve
Israel, as its leadership has acknowledged, but in its
actions Tel Aviv is nonetheless heading down that
path. In response, Palestinians are making their cause
internationally. They are calling for international
pressure to persuade Israel to ensure that peace
agreements and the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State in the framework of agreed parameters
are time-bound objectives. Over all, this is a matter of
raising the stakes for both sides.

Against that backdrop, unorthodox steps may be
needed to launch a direct political dialogue between
the parties. In response to appeals from both the
Palestinians and the Israelis, we reiterated our
readiness to arrange a meeting between Mr. Mahmoud
Abbas and Mr. Benjamin Netanyahu in Moscow, under
the auspices of the Russian President. If successful,
the meeting could at some point help us to convene an
international conference on the Middle East at a certain
stage in Moscow. 1 would like to point out that, at the
time it was proposed, that initiative was supported by
the Security Council. We believe that Russia's efforts
as a country that supports genuine dialogue with all
the interested parties can help us make progress with a
Palestinian-Israeli settlement.

However, there will be no real prospects for any
efforts to resolve the situation in the Middle East
unless Palestinian national unity is restored. We
consider that issue to be a priority for achieving and
implementing a final agreement. We are encouraging
the intra-Palestinian opposition parties to work
together on the basis of the political platform of the
Palestine Liberation Organization and the Arab Peace
Initiative. We support the Palestinian leadership's
intention to form a national unity Government and hold
presidential and parliamentary elections. Overcoming
the split between Palestinians by unifying both parts of
the Palestinian territories politically under the umbrella
of the central Palestinian authorities in Ramallah
would help to stabilize the situation in the Gaza Strip,
including resolving the enclave's humanitarian issues,
lifting the embargo and restoring the infrastructure that
was destroyed in the summer of 2014.

The entire world is watching the conflict in Syria
with mounting anxiety - a conflict whose flames
have been artificially fanned from outside the country
since its beginning. The answer to the question being
asked today about who is responsible is clear to the
whole world - it is the United States of America
and the United Kingdom, who invaded Iraq and have
wreaked havoc, along with other activist countries,
through an adventurist campaign for regime change in
Syria, in which they have not shrunk from supporting
openly terrorist groups. The sentimental statement
by the United States representative would have more
effect if it were not for Washington's actual record
and the methods that the United States uses to attain
its geopolitical aims - economic suffocation and the
indiscriminate use of massive force.

Significant forces of the armed resistance to the
current Government, coordinated by the terrorists
of Jabhat Al-Nusra, are concentrated in the eastern
districts of Aleppo. Those groups have lately been
working to nullify international efforts to improve
the humanitarian situation and relieve the civilian
population. Thousands of people in the eastern part of
the city have become hostages to the insurgents, and
thousands in the western part are their targets. The
representative of the United States virtually asserted
that Russia is preventing humanitarian assistance from
having access to eastern Aleppo. That is not true. It was
the groups holding people hostage in eastern Aleppo
who refused assistance from the United Nations in the
western part of the city. It was they who would not
allow the Castello road to be used for humanitarian
aid access. If the United States is so worried about the
situation of the residents of eastern Aleppo, why have
the American military refused to stand together with
Russian forces on the Castello road in order to ensure
that that vital artery can function without interruption?
Is it out of cowardice, or a desire to foment tensions
over Aleppo at any price?

I am also compelled to comment on another
unscrupulous move that the representative of the
United States made in his statement by attempting to
predetermine in advance the conclusions of the work of
the Joint Investigative Mechanism regarding chemical
weapons in Syria. The United States is systematically
attempting to shield the terrorists by assigning a priori
blame to Damascus.

Gettingbackto Aleppo, inthe currentcircumstances,
Russia is working intensively to try to halt those
negative trends. During months of consultations with
the United States, our co-Chair in the International
Syria Support Group (ISSG), we worked out a concrete
plan for a ceasefire and for improving humanitarian
access. Unfortunately, thanks to blatant sabotage, the
implementation of the joint agreement of 9 September
was suspended. Following a meeting in Lausanne on
15 October of the core ofISSG, an attempt was made to
re-start the process with the help of outside actors with
direct influence on the armed groups. Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
put forward an interesting proposal for Aleppo. With
the aim of successfully implementing the previously
announced humanitarian pause planned for 20 October,
the Russian and Syrian forces yesterday halted air
strikes in the Aleppo area.

The immediate priority is to separate the moderate
opposition from the terrorists as soon as possible.
That cannot be dragged out any longer. Enough with
the ambiguous attitude to terrorists. Those who are
prepared to break with Al-Nusra can officially declare
their commitment to the cessation of hostilities. In the
circumstances, we urge everyone to reject provocative
acts and initiatives and incendiary rhetoric. We must put
an end to Aleppo's years of tragedy as soon as possible
and revive the intra-Syrian political process under the
auspices ofthe United Nations. Boris Johnson, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Great Britain, estimates that there
are between 10,000 and 11,000 fighters in Aleppo, but
according to United Nations figures, only 900 of them
are Al-Nusra terrorists. So if those 10,000 fighters are
really trying to defend their city, why have they not
driven the Al-Qaida people out? Why would those who
are supporting them not urge them to do that?

An enormous amount of attention is now being
focused on the campaign that has just begun to liberate
Mosul from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
We hope that the Iraqi Government succeeds. We
presume that the coalition led by the United States has
sufficient strength and means to prevent a spillover of
terrorists from Iraq into Syria and thence to Europe and
the whole world.

We support the resumption of intra-Yemeni talks
mediated by Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special
Envoy for Yemen. We welcome his announcement on
17 October of the decision of the parties to the conflict
to restore the comprehensive ceasefire regime. In that
context, we can only express our profound indignation
at and condemnation of the coalition strike that hit a
funeral procession in Sana'a, killing about 200 people
and injuring more than 500. It is only the cruellest in a
series of such attacks. The coalition, which is supported
by the United States and Great Britain, must make
radical changes to their methods.

We are not encouraged by the situation in Libya,
which has resulted from the invasion in 2011 by the
countries I cited earlier in a gross violation of Security
Council resolutions. It is having an adverse effect on the
stability of Libya's neighbours, in fact on virtually the
entire African continent. Yet another intra-Libyan clash
occurred in Tripoli in just the past few days. Counter-
terrorism efforts are fragmented, since the key task of
restoring Libya's national armed forces under a single
command structure is a long way from happening,
and the steps being taken by some of Libya's outside
partners in terms of military assistance do not always
correspond to that goal. We affirm our position of
supporting taking the interests of a broad spectrum of
Libyan forces into consideration in the ongoing political
process brokered by the United Nations.

Lastly, we hope for a speedy end to the power crisis
in Lebanon, which will have a positive impact on the
stability of that friendly country.

With that I conclude my statement in my capacity
as representative of the Russian Federation, and
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

We will now give the floor to non-members of
the Security Council. I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber. I would also like to appeal to speakers to
deliver their statements at a reasonable speed so that
interpretation can be provided accurately. I wish to
inform all concerned that we will be carrying on this
open debate through the lunch hour, as we have a large
number of speakers.

Inow give the floor to the representative of Lebanon.

