Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I wish to join
colleagues in thanking the Under-Secretary-General for
his presentation on the Secretary-General's report
(S/2008/266). I should like to ask him to pass on our
thanks to the United Nations and all the team working
on Iraq. They do very good work, and I would like to
see that acknowledged today. I also thank Ambassador
Khalilzad for his presentation on behalf of the
multinational force in Iraq. It is also very good to see
the Iraqi Ambassador here too, as many colleagues
have noted today.

I think it is clear that Iraq continues to face some
very big challenges. But it was also welcome to see
today that most speakers acknowledged that since our
last discussion there have been significant and positive
developments in terms of both politics and security. I
welcome what the Libyan representative said about
that and also about reconciliation, which I thought was
a very good point.

Permit me to begin by highlighting three points.
On the political front, the executive and the legislature
have made concerted efforts to adopt laws aimed at
uniting Iraq. This year, the Council of Representatives
has passed laws on amnesty, provincial powers,
accountability in justice and pensions, and it has
agreed on a new national flag and on the largest-ever
Iraqi budget. In passing those laws, Iraqi politicians
have been engaged in rigorous discussions, arguing in
their corners, but, crucially, reaching compromises. We
urge that this spirit of cooperation continue with a view
to delivering crucial legislation, including allowing
Iraq to manage and maximize the benefits of its natural
resources.

My second point concerns elections, which
provide the opportunity for under-represented groups
to have a say in their future and in the future of Iraq.
We therefore echo the call of the Secretary-General for
political decisions to be taken to ensure that Iraqi
institutions are able to complete the necessary
preparations. In addition, the passage of the Provincial
Powers Law, which includes a commitment to hold
provincial elections later this year, is very welcome. It
also includes an agreement that all parties must reject
violence and engage in the political process.

My third point relates to security. As the
Secretary-General acknowledges in his report, and as
Ambassador Khalilzad set out today, there have been
important recent improvements in the security
situation, and these build on the progress made during
the latter part of 2007. The Government of Iraq's
actions in Basra, Sadr City and Mosul over the past
month send a clear signal about its intention to uphold
the rule of law and to clamp down on terrorist, criminal
and illegal armed groups regardless of their ethnic or
religious affiliation.

The response of the Iraqi political parties has
been equally clear, with cross-party support in
Baghdad. The Political Council for National Security
has given its firm support to the Government's and the
Iraqi security forces' stance against militias. That has
kept the door open for those willing to reject violence
and to engage in the political process, and it has urged
those parties that have withdrawn from the National
Unity Government to return.

The United Kingdom remains committed to
supporting and promoting this emerging convergence
of Iraqi public opinion, and we do this through our
public support to the Government, in our contacts with
Iraqi parties and by our actions on the ground in
cooperation with Iraq's authorities. But it is not only
the broader international community as a whole that
must support Iraq. As we have heard today from a
number of speakers, efforts by Iraq's neighbours and
States in the region will have the greatest effect on the
ground. Along with the other representatives, I would
like welcome the communique of the latest expanded
neighbours ministerial conference held last week in
Kuwait, which reaffirms the region's support for Iraq.

I would like to reiterate our view that any
external links to armed groups in Iraq outside the
political process, either through the supply of weapons,
training or funding, are unacceptable. These weapons
have been used to attack the security forces of the
democratically elected and sovereign Government of
Iraq, as well as the multinational forces. We look to
those who have influence on such parties to bring that
influence to bear.
I would like to say a word, if I may, about my
own Government's contribution. We are pleased to
make a full contribution to the reconstruction and

08-3196]
development of Iraq in the political, economic and
security fields. We recognize the continuing need to
help alleviate the humanitarian situation caused by the
violence that I mentioned a few moments ago. The
United Kingdom welcomes the 2008 consolidated
appeal for Iraq, and I would like to encourage Member
States to make further contributions in support of the
United Nations and its implementing partners. My
Government has committed $34 million in response to
the appeal.

On the economy, in parallel, we continue to work
with regional and Iraqi partners to promote economic
development in the south of Iraq. In March, the Invest
Basra 2008 conference was held in Kuwait with 70
representatives of international investors and Iraqis
from the Basra Development Commission, the
provincial government and Basra business interests.
The United Kingdom will be following up with a
further event in London today with senior Iraqis and
business leaders to highlight the opportunities for
private investment in the south of Iraq.

We are also continuing to provide mentoring and
training to the Iraqi army and police, with the aim of
developing their capacity and confidence. They will
ultimately be able to ensure security without the need
for our assistance. At the same time, I would like to say
that during the Iraqi security forces' operation in Basra
recently my Government provided logistical support
and conducted specific strike operations to help protect
the Iraqi security forces.

Finally, the United Kingdom welcomes the
support provided by the United Nations and the
Secretary-General's Special Representative to Iraq
through their work in-country and through the Iraq
neighbours process. Security Council resolution 1770
(2007) set out an ambitious but essential role for the
United Nations. I would like to encourage Member
States to do our utmost to support the United Nations,
including through answering the call of the Secretary-
General for military advisers and for further
contributions to the trust fund that provides for middle-
ring security to protect UNAMI's facilities and
personnel.

