Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by thanking the delegations of
France and the United Kingdom for their joint initiative
to convene a briefing on the topic of strategic force
generation in peacekeeping operations. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and the
Permanent Representatives of Bangladesh and Canada
for their briefings.

Uruguay believes that strengthening strategic force
generation is an essential component in increasing the
efficiency and effectiveness ofpeacekeeping operations.
The timely availability of uniformed and civilian
personnel who are sufficiently trained and equipped
is key to the success of peacekeeping operations.
Likewise, we cannot conceivably implement mission
mandates fully if they do not have the capabilities
commensurate to the challenges they must face.

It is important to acknowledge that in the reform
process - based on the recommendations of the report
of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(S/2015/446) - encouraging progress has been made
on the part of the Secretariat, mainly in its Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and Department of Field
Support, and Members States on the whole. By way
of example, the establishment of the Strategic Force
Generation and Capability Planning Cell, together with
the Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System, has
significantly contributed to guaranteeing the increased
availability and timely deployment of peacekeeping
capabilities. In that regard, we encourage the Secretariat
to pursue its efforts in close coordination with troop-
and police-contributing countries.

The Security Council, as the organ that authorizes
mandates, has the direct responsibility to ensure
that peacekeeping deployed personnel have optimal
conditions in which to fulfil their duties. Today's
concept aptly takes up the issue of the efforts the
Security Council could make in terms of strategic force
generation to contribute to the success of peacekeeping
operations. In the view of my delegation, the Council
could significantly contribute in the following ways.

First, with regard to the design and planning stages,
and even the reconfiguration phase, of a peacekeeping
operation, we believe that it is key for the Security
Council to attach greater importance to identifying
the needs and capabilities required to fulfil a mandate.
Planning should be based on clear, achievable and
prioritized objectives with benchmark criteria and an
exit strategy that permits a reduction of the mission and
an adequate transition to a successor entity when said
criteria is met. Trilateral cooperation among the Council,
the Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing
countries (TCCs/PCCs) is fundamental in that regard.

The Secretariat, in particular the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the Department
of Field Support (DFS), plays a determining role in
terms of providing advisory support in decision-making
processes, including, inter alia, on specific equipment
and personnel needs. With regard to equipment, allow
me to add that obtaining it cannot depend upon the
financial capacity ofa single country. New technologies
are expensive, and therefore it is essential to work on
alternatives to obtain it - for example, through the
development of greater cooperation TCCs and PCCs,
the Secretariat and donor countries.

Moreover, when it comes to decision-making, the
Security Council must fully take into account the views
of TCCs, as they are the ones serving on the ground.
That could greatly facilitate the planning of operations,
thereby ensuring that personnel have the capacity to
respond to new demands. Specifically, it is a matter of
working to minimize the gaps between those who draw
up, plan, administer and implement operations, as well
as to underscore the enormous benefits of a productive
relationship among them.

Secondly, it is highly important that deployed
personnel be adequately trained, with a particular
emphasis on predeployment training. It is essential
that peacekeeping personnel are educated and trained
for the tasks to be conducted in the area of operations.
That requires ajoint effort by TCCs to promote greater
training standards for their personnel, as well as the
Secretariat in carrying out the relevant evaluation and
monitoring programmes. We acknowledge the excellent
work of DPKO and DFS together in the development,
implementation and validation of regulations and
advice in peacekeeping training, especially in the areas
of human rights and the protection of civilians and
against sexual abuse and exploitation.

Thirdly, and finally, we should not focus solely
on force generation but also on the full functionality
of peacekeeping forces once deployed. That has been
a topic to which my delegation has constantly and
specifically referred throughout its nearly two years as
a member of the Security Council. Unfortunately, as a
frequent issue within several peacekeeping operations,
this a matter on which the Council should assume
greater responsibility. We are talking about obstacles
on the ground that also have a negative impact on the
effectiveness and efficiency ofpeacekeeping operations.
On the one hand, particular attention should be given
to national restrictions - so-called caveats - whether
they are declared or, even worse, non-declared, given
that they can undermine the fulfilment of mandates. On
the other hand, the Council should demand full respect,
and compliance by host countries, with the terms agreed
in status of forces agreements, which constitute the
guarantees that protect the personnel whom a country
voluntarily contributes to peacekeeping operations.

We are also concerned to have witnessed an
increase in the frequency of deliberate attacks against
United Nations personnel and facilities, which have led
to significant loss of human life and equipment. On this
issue we believe that we should, inter alia, provide our
troops with a greater number of tools to confront the
new realities - for example, passive defence measures
and strengthening the rules of engagement - as well
as exhausting all possible avenues to ensure that those
responsible for such crimes are held accountable.

In conclusion, politically as well as on the ground,
my country reiterates its commitment to strengthening
capacity in force generation in peacekeeping operations.
On the political level, Uruguay is honoured to co-host
the Vancouver Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial
Meeting in November. Among other things, the goal of
the meeting is to continue efforts in force generation
and follow-up on the promises and pledges made by
various Member States at various multilateral meetings
held between 2015 and 2017. On the ground, Uruguay
continues to contribute peacekeeping personnel
to various missions, having recently concluded its
contribution to the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti following its successful closure. We
reiterate our constant and long-standing commitment
to peacekeeping operations, while we also continue
evaluating the possibility of further pledges in line with
our capabilities.

