Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I
congratulate you, Sir, on taking over the gavel as
President of the Security Council. I apologize for being
late, but I had the chance to have a good exchange of
views with Sergio Vieira de Mello earlier this morning.
In fact, I was delayed because I was trying to gain some
additional American support for his mission and engaging
in conversations in the Secretariat with the Secretary-
General and his colleagues. So I apologize.

I want to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President,
for beginning this month by focusing on this issue. It
demands our attention. This is a historically important
transitional month in East Timor, and I want to commend
our friend and colleague, Sergio Vieira de Mello, for his
unceasing efforts, made under very difficult conditions in
East Timor. I Visited him myself in November and could
see the difficult conditions he was operating under. I had
only one question in my mind, which was how he
managed to look as if his suit had just been dry cleaned
and pressed, while everyone else in East Timor looked as
though they had not cleaned their clothes in a month. This
was a mystery which I cannot explain.

He is taking very, very dramatic actions, and I
believe that the first few months of the United Nations
effort in East Timor give us hope that history will record
this as another United Nations success. Of course, the
final results are far from being in our hands. There are
issues that we are concerned about, such as the growing
unrest and crime in Dili. But I know that Sergio is
working on these very aggressively.

In his remarks, he stressed the importance of the
World Bank, and we share that View. We urge the World

 

Bank to begin to have its trust funds flow immediately, and
we also urge everyone to step up to the plate and make as
much effort as possible to help the United Nations on the
civilian police and in creating a local East Timorese police
force.

I think that the consultative arrangements that the
Special Representative has created with the East Timorese
are excellent, and a model for people in other parts of the
world. I also think that his recent trip to Jakarta and his
frank and productive discussions with the Indonesian
Foreign Minister and other officials have also been very
productive. We are delighted that the Secretary-General will
be going to Indonesia and East Timor and that President
Wahid is also going to plan a visit to East Timor.

I know, however, that reconciliation between Indonesia
and East Timor is going to be undermined as long as the
refugees in the camps remain in their current mode. We are
deeply concerned that the number still appears to be over
100,000, despite the fact that there has been some
movement out of the camps. We are deeply disturbed that
the movement out of the camps has slowed to a trickle, and
I remain extremely puzzled by the inability of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and other agencies to do more in this regard. I
am told repeatedly that UNHCR is doing everything it can,
but I find that hard to believe given the objective situation
on the ground. But the real problem is not with UNHCR;
it is with the Indonesian military, some elements of which
continue to support the militia, even as they try to fight
against the internal Commission of Inquiry report and the
International Commission of Inquiry.

I want to take this opportunity to express our strong
support for the Secretary-General's call to encourage the
Indonesians to conduct a more thorough investigation and
to take action on their own.

We support Attorney-General Marzuki and the other
brave members of the Indonesian Government and the
Commission of Inquiry with whom I met in Jakarta in
November in their efforts for full accountability on an
internal basis. The Indonesian Commission did impressive
work, but if they cannot deal with their problem internally
they must recognize that international pressure on them will
mount, and the pressure for the recommendations as called
for by the International Commission of Inquiry on East
Timor for an international tribunal will also increase.

I hope that people in Indonesia understand that the
world is listening. The best way to avoid what they do not
wish - which is an international tribunal - is to have a
credible internal effort. That is strongly our View.
Therefore, we applaud the international report, and we
await the Indonesians' full response to it.

In conclusion, I want to simply stress again how
strongly we wish to support the efforts of the United
Nations in East Timor, and this will include additional
actions that we are working on now with Mr. Vieira de
Mello and with the Secretariat. Mr. Vieira de Mello, I am
just delighted to see you back in New York, and I wish
you all the best as you return this weekend to continue
your mission of such great importance. We look forward
to the day that you will come here and report to us a date
on which East Timor will become, I believe, the first new
nation of the new millennium.

