Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for convening
this important open debate on the promotion and
strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security and for submitting a
concept note on the topic (S/2014/75, annex).

In recent years, international attention to the
importance of the rule of law has increased significantly.
The practice of the Security Council has greatly
contributed to that end. In its presidential statement of
19 January 2012 (S/PRST/2012/1), the Council, inter
alia, emphasizes the importance of the rule of law as
a key element of conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding.

Azerbaijan's consistent position with regard to the
issue under consideration is well known and stems from
its keen interest in contributing to the achievement
of sustainable peace and development in our region
and worldwide and from our practical experience in
addressing the consequences of aggression, violent
separatism, foreign military occupation and ethnic
cleansing.

At the end of 1987, neighbouring Armenia openly
laid claim to the territory of the Nagorno-Karabakh
region of Azerbaijan. That claim culminated in the
occupation of the territories ofmy country, the killing of
thousands of Azerbaijani civilians and in the expulsion
of about 1 million Azerbaijanis from their homes in
both Armenia and the occupied territories. Those
who perpetrated the crimes committed during the
conflict, among whom are those holding high political
and military posts in Armenia, still enjoy impunity.
That continues to impede progress in achieving long-
awaited peace and reconciliation between the two
countries. Moreover, the glorification of terrorists
and war criminals in Armenia, including raising
them to the status of national heroes and bestowing
State decorations on them, demonstrates how far the
leadership of that Member State is from adhering to the
rule of law and universal values of civilized relations.

In that context, greater efforts are needed to ensure
a unified approach to the rule of law and to address
the major threats and Challenges that continue to
affect basic elements of the international legal order,
to undermine the national unity, territorial integrity
and stability of States, and to regenerate disregard and
contempt for human rights.

More resolute and targeted measures are required
to end impunity for serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. Unfortunately,
as I have just noted, not all such violations in some
situations of armed conflict, including those of a
protracted nature, have received due attention and a
response at the international and regional levels. As a
result, past wrongs left unpunished and unrecognized
continue to impede progress in achieving long-awaited
peace in some parts of the world.

Combating impunity is therefore important not
only for the purpose ofprosecuting crimes and bringing
those responsible to justice - the achievement of
which is undoubtedly imperative per se - but also
to ensure sustainable peace, truth and reconciliation.
Such an approach to ending impunity falls in the
context of the settlement of conflicts and provides that
no peace settlement can be reached that is inconsistent
with international law. It is clear that, in situations
of protracted armed conflict, a lack of agreement on
political issues cannot be used as a pretext for not
establishing the truth concerning gross violations of
human rights and of international humanitarian law.

It is essential that peace efforts and peace
agreements never encourage, accept or tolerate
situations achieved by the unlawful use of force and
other egregious violations of international law, such
as war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and
ethnic cleansing. Such efforts should never promise
amnesties or encourage any other form of immunity for
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community. In any event, the conflict-resolution
initiatives considered by the Security Council and
regional arrangements must ensure that peace and
justice work together effectively.

In conclusion, I would like to again commend the
initiative of Lithuania to convene this open debate.
We believe it is important that the Security Council
consistently keep its focus on specific developments
in the rule of law, in particular on the issue of
accountability.

