Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to start by thanking Special Representative Jan
Kubis for his briefing and comprehensive report on
the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and for his analysis of
the current situation in that country. I also thank
Ambassador Tanin for his informative statement to the
Security Council. I also express my appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2013/535).

I would like to focus my comments today on some
key areas related to the current situation in Afghanistan,
namely, regional cooperation and other issues related to
neighbouring countries, including Iran's relations with
Afghanistan.

Turning first to regional cooperation, we believe
that it is critical for achieving long-term stability and
economic development in Afghanistan. The Islamic
Republic of Iran is engaged in a number of important
regional initiatives on Afghanistan that aim at greater
regional connectivity to promote economic and
commercial cooperation, as well as to root out the
scourges of illicit narcotics, terrorism and extremism.
We also welcome in particular regional initiatives such
as the Heart of Asia process and the adoption of plans
on confidence-building measures between Afghanistan
and its neighbouring countries, which surely could
serve as a good basis for further cooperation at the
regional level. The Islamic Republic of Iran is an active
participant in the Heart of Asia process and Istanbul
Process. In the economic field, international and
regional partners should concentrate their efforts at
laying the foundations for sustainable economic growth
and better conditions for livelihoods in Afghanistan. For
that purpose, there is a need for accelerated progress on
economic cooperation with regional and international
partners in accordance with the national objectives set
forth by Afghan Government.

The newly elected Government in the Islamic
Republic of Iran is determined to consolidate and expand
its relations with its neighbours, including Afghanistan,
with which we share religious, linguistic and cultural
commonalities. That provides an opportunity for
Afghanistan to count on Iran and other neighbouring
countries in dealing with challenges such as insecurity,
the lack of infrastructure, narcotic drugs and issues
related to refugees, which remain to be resolved.

We have continued our dialogue with the Afghan
authorities on bilateral cooperation, particularly in
relation to increasing cooperation on security matters
and counter-narcotics efforts. During President
Karzai's attendance at the inauguration of President
Rouhani on 4 August, a memorandum of understanding
on strategic cooperation between Iran's Supreme
National Security Council and the National Security
Council of Afghanistan was signed. The memorandum
covers issues of mutual interest, including
intelligence-sharing, in combating security threats
such as terrorism, narcotics and organized crime. We
welcome the Triangular Initiative on cooperation on
countering narcotics. The initiative provides the basis
for better coordination of j oint operations among border
liaison offices, communications and the exchange of
information in combating narcotic drugs.

The World Drug Report 2013, released on 26 June,
highlights the rise in poppy cultivation by 15 per cent
in 2012 at the global level, an important part of which
is produced in Afghanistan. This makes it clear that
the narcotic drugs problem remains one of the serious
challenges that Afghanistan is facing. This menace
has hindered the advancement of the country towards
development and has placed the security of Afghanistan
and the region in danger.

As is rightly underlined in the report of the
Secretary-General, there is an interconnection
among the challenges regarding a successful transfer
of political authority through elections and peace
and reconciliation efforts, on the one hand, and the
impact of the increasing mobility of extremist groups,
the readiness of national security forces, and rising
narcotics production and trafficking, on the other.
Moreover, narcotic drugs trafficking, as the financial
source of terrorism, has provided a breeding ground for
terrorists, extremists and illegal groups that attempt to
destabilize the Afghan Government.

Undoubtedly, the increase in poppy cultivation
in Afghanistan in the past and this year plays an
important role in spreading terrorism and insecurity
in Afghanistan. The continued increase in poppy
cultivation and drug trafficking in Afghanistan
indicates that preventive measures have not yielded the
expected results and that the international community
has unfortunately failed to curb this menace so far. We
strongly believe that those who bear the responsibility
to combat narcotic drugs on behalf of the international
community should consider more robust projects
regarding the elimination of poppy cultivation and
preventing narcotic traffic and the proceeds emanating
therefrom.

In that regard, my country hosted the seventh
regional Financial Intelligence Unit meeting on
July 2013 to enhance regional cooperation in
tackling money-laundering and suspicious financial
transactions. The aim of the meeting was to develop a
common instrument to improve information exchange
on suspicious transactions, and to address the problem
of profits of drug trafficking. A regional training
session on anti-money-laundering, illegal financial
flows and suspect cash transactions was also held in
Tehran from 30 June to 3 July, with the participation of
experts form the countries of the region. We hope that
such initiatives will bear fruitful results.

As our officials reiterated during their bilateral
meetings with Mr. Kubis during his recent visit
to Tehran, there is a strong desire for constructive
engagement with the international community on issues
of mutual interest, including Afghanistan. The central
role of the United Nations in coordinating international
and regional efforts to improve the situation in
Afghanistan, especially in the post-2014 era, was once
more reiterated.

In conclusion, we support UNAMA in fulfilling
its mission to provide assistance in promoting peace
and the reconstruction of the country within its
mandate and through the robust regional engagement
of neighbouring countries on issues such as border
security, immigration, refugees and drug control. The
role of UNAMA should evolve on the basis of the
situation on the ground, emerging realities and, above
all, the aspirations of the people of Afghanistan. We
wish every success towards an independent, stable,
peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan free from
terrorism, extremism.

