Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): We are very
grateful to Sir Kieran for the updated information that
he gave us this morning. We would also like to
welcome here Ms. Ogata for her action in favour of
humanitarian issues.

We all agree that the current meeting of the
Security Council is taking place at a crucial time in the
evolution of the political process that has emerged
from the Bonn Agreement. The main task before us at
this pivotal period is to consolidate the gains through
lucid consideration of the problems that remain in
order to find appropriate solutions to them.

The progress achieved since the establishment of
the Interim Authority is the result of the combined
efforts of the international community and of the
Afghan people themselves. This progress deserves to
be welcomed and encouraged in so far as the success of
the programme for reconciliation, rebuilding and
development of Afghanistan will undoubtedly be
another sign of the willingness of the United Nations,
and of the Security Council in particular, to fulfil their
basic responsibilities for maintaining peace and
security in the world.

The challenges to be met are still numerous and
particularly involve security, the humanitarian situation
and development. It should be noted that the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) has
done a remarkable job under the command of the
United Kingdom, thanks to the combined will of the
countries that take part in it, whose contribution we
welcome.

We welcome in advance the extension of the
International Force's mandate for another six months.
We express our gratitude to Turkey for having accepted
the command of this Force. Indeed, the return of peace
to Afghanistan is possible only if the last hotbeds of
destabilization are eliminated by ending the struggles
between rival armed factions and eradicating the last
Al-Qaeda and Taliban strongholds. We must point out
the need to accelerate the training and equipping of the
Afghan security forces, which in the short term could
play this essential role.

The effective implementation of the arrangements
in the Bonn Agreement depends largely on how this
action will be carried out. My delegation would like to
welcome the commitment of all the countries that will
provide training to the Afghan armed forces and police.

In the humanitarian sphere, my delegation notes
that the situation remains troubling. The massive return
of refugees exerts increasing pressure on the existing
weak infrastructures and accentuates the enormous
needs of the population. We urge the community of
donors to step up their efforts to increase the necessary
financial flows to meet these needs if we want to avoid
a catastrophe, which would worsen the already
precarious situation in Afghanistan. This assistance,
once made available, would enable the Afghan people
to devote their attention to rebuilding their country.

The international conference on reconstruction
assistance to Afghanistan, which was held with
enthusiasm last January in Tokyo, raised much hope,
given the generous and considerable pledges of support
that were made there. Nevertheless, the international
community must bridge the large gap between
intentions and deeds. At stake is the very survival of
the Afghan people and, beyond that, the success of
institutions patiently set up with the assistance of all.

My delegation believes that if we do not create
the proper conditions to lay the groundwork for the
true social and economic development of the country,
the entire structure built in Bonn could collapse. That
is why we appeal for the pledges made in Tokyo to be
followed up by concrete action, which could be a great
source of motivation and hope.

To conclude, my delegation would like to renew
its support for the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, whose programme of action should be
pursued in its entirety. We encourage the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts for peace, stability and development in
Afghanistan, a country that has long been a victim of
the tribulations of history.

