Mr. Briz Gutierrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We are gratified to be able to attend the
second open debate convened during your presidency
this month, Madam, to follow up on the topic of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, and in
particular the implementation of resolution 1674
(2006), adopted only two months ago today.

We are grateful for the information provided and
the reference document prepared for this discussion, as
well as the relevant information provided by Mr. Jan
Egeland on the current situation and specific
recommendations to ensure the appropriate
implementation of resolution 1674 (2006).

For Guatemala, today's debate represents
progress in implementation in that it affords us a good
opportunity to focus attention in our work on the
challenges of implementation on the ground and to
review lessons learned and progress achieved. In our
View, holding semi-annual debates to promote
intergovernmental dialogue on the issue is an
extremely useful practice.

I will try briefly to share some ideas that my
delegation wishes to highlight. Of course, we must
keep in mind that there are no preconceived formulae
and that every case deserves to be considered
according to its circumstances and particular features.

First of all, it seems to us that particular attention
needs to be given to the active role that could be
played by the civilian population affected themselves.
That is especially crucial in the phases immediately
after the crisis when communities become the primary
actors in their own recovery and development in the
long term. Their participation is essential in helping to
salvage what remains of the community, in promoting
reconstruction of the social fabric and in supporting
reintegration of permanently displaced persons in host
communities.

In this regard, and secondly, it seems to us
therefore that if we are to set realistic objectives with
which all actors participating in the efforts to protect
civilians in armed conflict can identify, we must
promote dialogue among all interested parties and
establish institutions which will enable them to
interact, thus securing better participation for all in
keeping with the principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence.

That brings me to the third point that my
delegation wishes to stress and which has to do with
improved coordination and cooperation among all
actors. On this point, Security Council resolution 1674
(2006) reaffirms the importance of continuing the
practice of including in all peacekeeping missions
mandates concerning the protection of civilians, giving
them priority and ensuring their implementation. The
resolution offers the opportunity to continue to
improve the design of the assistance provided by the
United Nations. My delegation believes that such
design should ensure incorporation of mandates that
tackle the specific needs of protection and the post-
conflict environment in which proper value and
consideration should be given to the work of the
programmes carried out by the United Nations funds,
agencies and programmes. The establishment of a
multisectoral mechanism with the capacity to
systematically compile data and information on the
protection of civilians, we agree, is an extremely useful
tool.

As a fourth point, my delegation would like to
highlight the importance of recognizing the powerful
contribution and leadership role of women as well as
boy and girl children, not only in reconstruction, but in
the processes of mediation and reconciliation. It is
unfortunate that sexual violence, trafficking and
maiming often inflicted on them do not allow us to see
them other than as victims. However, women are
agents of change who, in cases such as that of
Guatemala, have been able to shape opportunities for
the prevention and resolution of conflict, as well as to
contribute to peacebuilding processes. For their part,
children and young people are the future of a society
and the building of stable societies based in a culture
of peace will depend on them.

Not far from this Chamber the United Nations is
hosting the conference to review progress made in the
implementation of the programme of action to prevent,
combat and eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons in all its aspects. For this reason, as my
fifth and last point, my delegation wishes to highlight
the need to take measures to strengthen controls over
the acquisition and possession by civilians of small
arms and light weapons, with a View, among other
things, to preventing the diversion of legally acquired
weapons to the illicit market. It is plain that these
weapons not only cause damage to civilians but also
present a danger for humanitarian workers. It seems to
us that that is a topic that the Security Council, given
its mandate, should act on in a resolute way. It is our
responsibility, our shared responsibility, to protect.

