Mrs. Rodriguez Gomez (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
convey warm greetings to you, Sir, as President of
the Security Council, as we know how committed the
People's Republic of China is to peace, justice and
development for humankind. I also convey to you and
the Secretary-General, on behalf of the President of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Mr. Nicolas Maduro
Moros, our commitment to continue to move ahead,
historically and constitutionally, towards social justice,
the maintenance of international peace and cooperation
through solidarity and respect for peoples' self-
determination and the sovereign equality and territorial
integrity of States.

The matter that brings us here today is more
relevant than ever in a world that presents challenges
that call into question peace and security. We would
like to recall that, on the occasion of the twentieth
anniversary of the United Nations, a declaration was
adopted that prohibits intervention in the internal affairs
of States and declares respect for the sovereignty and
independence of States. Furthermore, on the occasion
of the Organization's twenty-fifth anniversary, a
declaration was adopted that proclaimed that the only
manner in which we can achieve the purposes of the
United Nations is if States can actualize themselves in
full sovereign equality.

Iwouldliketopause here,because we do know-and
the international community can bear witness to this
fact - that unilateral actions, which are manifested
through ongoing warfare, including economic, media
and financial warfare, seek to subject peoples, with
the sole objective of seizing natural resources and thus
satisfying the hegemonic desires of foreign Powers. It
is with much amazement and concern that we recently
heard statements by warmongers and those who would
twist our arms that confirmed - and we would like to
condemn this here today - the fact that violations of
international law and the purposes and principles that
inspire the Organization and its founding Charter.

The so-called fight against terrorism has resulted
in more terrorism.

Terrorist acts have also undermined the human
rights of millions of citizens. We call for a peaceful
settlement of conflicts, in keeping with the spirit of
the United Nations and as set out in its Charter. The
citizens on the streets of our countries and in some
regions often do not know whether they will be the
victims of a terrorist attack or fall victim to supposed
violent acts against those terrorist organizations.

I should like to draw attention to statistics from
the Stockholm International Institute on global
military expenditure, which in 2013 alone reached
the astronomical figure of $1.747 trillion. Even more
shocking, 37 per cent of the funds allocated to military
expenditure are concentrated in just one country. We
wish to draw attention to the relationship between
that military expenditure and the true achievement of
international peace and security.

We can say that, fortunately, Venezuela is a part of a
region that is considered a zone free ofviolence, where,
furthermore, we have innovative mechanisms for
integration and interrelation that are based on respect
among States and for the sovereignty of States, respect
for the self-determination of peoples and respect for
the territorial integrity of nations. We would recall that
we are the region that has the lowest level of military
expenditure in the world. We support disarmament
in all its expressions and have been declared the first
region free of nuclear weapons.

Today we call once again for a multilateralism
that is based on public international law and on the
purposes and principles of the United Nations. We also
reaffirm the legitimate right of the State of Palestine to
be a full-fledged member of the Organization, on the
basis also of the purposes and principles of the United
Nations and international law. We therefore condemn
the fact that in the twenty-first century there still exist
antiquated or new forms of colonialism, or any form of
discrimination. Even among these foreign Powers, we
can today see serious cases of racial discrimination.

For that reason, we embrace once again the spirit of
the late Hugo Chavez Frias, our former President, who
proposed that the United Nations be reformed so as to
be more democratic, so that all developing countries can
discuss sensitive matters such as international peace
and security democratically within the Organization.

I would recall further what President Nicolas
Maduro said when he spoke during the most recent
general debate ofthe General Assembly (see A/69/PV.8).
He called on the United Nations to adapt its institutions
in such a manner as to promote the sovereignty of
peoples, if we wish to truly achieve much-wished-for
peace and a world that is safe and free of violence.

I should like to reiterate the words of the late
President Chavez, speaking here at the United Nations:

"Well, we shall fight for Venezuela, for Latin
American integration and for the world. Here in
this room, we declare our infinite faith in man, who
longs for peace and justice in order to survive as a
species. Simon Bolivar, our liberator and the guide
of our revolution, swore that he would not rest until
he saw America free. Let us not rest in body or in
soul until we have saved humanity." (A/60/PV6, 
p. 20)

I would also paraphrase Gandhi, who said that there
is no road to peace; peace is the only possible road.

