Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset allow me, Sir, to express our sincere thanks to
you for presiding over this important debate. I also
commend the role of the Mission of the United States
of America for taking the initiative to introduce
presidential statement PRST/2015/11, which we have
just adopted. We welcome that document.

Jordan is deeply concerned by the threat posed
by the increasing number of foreign terrorist fighters.
According to the report of the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team (S/2015/358), there
are some 25,000 foreign terrorist fighters from 100
countries, which is more than half the number of
States Members of the United Nations. This diversity
amplifies the impact of terrorism on those nations.
Resolution 2178 (2014) established the main pillars for
combating the phenomenon and charted a road map for
addressing the challenge.

Unfortunately, however, we are seeing increased
numbers of fighters. Despite the best efforts of nations
and international organizations, that requires us all
to take a firm stance and to reevaluate our gaps and
weaknesses. In that regard, we wish to stress the
importance of national legislative frameworks that
define the legal aspects of addressing the phenomenon.
Here let me note that Jordan has adopted a package
of national laws that will decisively confront this
phenomenon. It criminalizes the recruitment of or
attempts to recruit persons to join, or attempt to join,
any armed group or terrorist organization inside or
outside the Kingdom, in keeping with the terrorism-
prevention law.

Jordan reiterates that combating this phenomenon
at the national level alone is not enough. A deepening
and strengthening of regional cooperation will be
required. It is also very important that intelligence
services in the nations most affected share information
so as to foster sustained cooperation. Here Jordan
commends the efforts of INTERPOL, particularly
regarding the development of a database that includes
information on foreign terrorist fighters. We emphasize
the importance of expanding the cooperation between
States and INTERPOL through the provision by States
to INTERPOL of the information that they have
available on such fighters.

Despite the importance of undertaking measures to
address this phenomenon, it is also wise and prudent
to tackle the root causes that drive fighters to join
conflicts. Preventive measures are the cornerstone
of our efforts to address this phenomenon. On that
basis, Jordan emphasizes the importance of carefully
studying the reasons for which terrorist organizations
attract fighters in conflict zones. The most important
of those reasons are violent extremist ideologies,
foreign occupation, lack of awareness and education;
and economic, social and political conditions, as well as
the exploitation of information technology such as the
Internet in the systematic recruitment and propagation
of extremist ideologies through social networks.

Young people remain the segment most targeted for

recruitment by and the victims of terrorist organizations.
According to the Monitoring Team's report, most
fighters are between the ages of 15 and 35. It is for that
reason that Jordan, as part of its international efforts to
combat this phenomenon, organized a meeting of the
Security Council presided over by his Royal Highness
Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah II (see S/PV.7432).
ordan emphasizes that facing the problem of youth
extremism will be facilitated through collective efforts
and a systematic and competent vision that includes
military and security aspects in the short term, as
well as the long-term aspects of renewing religious
discourse and rectifying misconceptions, particularly
among young people, spreading awareness among
them, educating them and addressing the reasons for
which they fall victim to such organizations.

His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein
emphasized,duringthesummitmeetingheldlastSeptember
over which United States President Obama presided (see S/PV.7272), the importance of transparency in our efforts
to fight this phenomenon. These organizations rely for
their survival on deals, agreements and international
support. Accordingly, we must apply a policy of
zero tolerance towards any country or organization
or individual who facilitates, supports or finances
terrorist organizations, supplies them with arms or
promotes them, whether through the media, through
the exploitation of religious figures for incitement,
or by assisting in the recruitment of fighters for such
organizations. We must have complete compliance and
cannot allow a situation in which a country complies in
one aspect while wreaking havoc in another.

Facing this phenomenon requires a unified effort
with significant resources. Many of the States that want
to face this phenomenon still lack the capacity to do so.
Here we emphasize the importance of giving greater
attention to the issues of facilitating assistance, closing
gaps and building the capacities of States. We greatly
appreciate the assistance provided by donor nations
and organizations to other countries, and we urge them
to continue these efforts to achieve common benefits,
whose fruits would benefit both the recipients and
donors. It may be correct to call this mutual assistance,
considering the scope of the danger and the collective
threat that it represents.

In the same context, I should like to stress the
important role of United Nations entities, which have
made great efforts so far but need to do more in order
to achieve synchronicity among them. Also important
is the launching of projects and programmes aimed
at capacity-building with tangible impacts on the
ground, and that we move from awareness to supplying
equipment and capacities.

In addition to the role of these fighters in fuelling
conflict wherever they go and the danger that their
countries of origin face once they return, we must
highlight the threat that nations neighbouring conflict
zones face. This was made clear in the report of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
which clearly stated that countries neighbouring
conflict zones, which include my own country, Jordan,
suffer security burdens, and that this requires us to
allocate greater resources to help them face the negative
impact of the presence of such terrorist fighters in
neighbouring countries.

Here we emphasize that Jordan is one of the
States most affected by this phenomenon because
of our geographical proximity. We are also at
the forefront of confronting this phenomenon by
all means - ideological, military and security-
related - which has led to attempts by some of these
fighters to infiltrate Jordanian territory so as to carry
out terrorist attacks with sophisticated technologies,
particularly given that they have acquired paramilitary
skills.

In closing, Jordan stresses the importance of
giving due attention to border control. This will be key
to halting the flow of fighters. Here Jordan is making
tremendous efforts in terms of border control. This
is an extra burden for Jordan because of the presence
of terrorist organizations and extremist organizations
in neighbouring countries. Jordan reiterates its call
on international partners to provide the assistance
necessary to support Jordan in facing this danger and
shouldering the border-control burden, which has cost
us immensely to date. We hope that there will be an
international call to support countries such as Jordan
that are on the front lines ofthe fight against terrorism.

