Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The resolution just adopted reflects the view
of the Security Council regarding the need for Iran to
establish full, transparent cooperation with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) so as to
clarify outstanding questions regarding its nuclear
activities and restore confidence in its nuclear
programme. The main goal of the resolution is to
support the efforts of the IAEA to resolve Iran's
nuclear problems. The Agency possesses all the
necessary capacity to that end and should continue to
play a central role in resolving non-proliferation issues
in the context of Iran's nuclear programme. We hope
that, with the support of the Security Council in the
form of today's resolution, it will be easier for the
IAEA to do that job.

By acting under Article 40 of the Charter, the
resolution makes mandatory the demand of the IAEA
regarding Tehran's suspension of all uranium
enrichment and reprocessing activities. If Iran does not
comply with the provisions of the resolution, members
of the Security Council have expressed the intention to
take appropriate action under Article 41 of Chapter VII
Charter. It is crucial that, as follows unambiguously
from the resolution, any additional measures that could
be required in the future in order to implement the
resolution rule out the use of military force. The
suspension by Iran of all enrichment and reprocessing
activities, which is called for in the resolution, is not a
goal in itself. It should help to clarify outstanding
issues with regard to the nuclear activities of Iran and
to restore trust in its nuclear programme. Thus, this
measure, in accordance with Article 40 of the Charter,
should be viewed as an interim measure during the
period necessary for resolving the issue. If Iran, as we
hope, complies with the Security Council resolution
and the demands of the IAEA and enters into
negotiations, members of the Security Council would
be prepared to refrain from any further action in this
context. We believe that, if negotiations yield a
positive - solution to the problem in terms of the
implementation of the demands of the IAEA, then no
additional action against Iran would be taken in the
Security Council.

It is important that the resolution has a provision
that opens the door for Tehran's establishment of broad
international cooperation to meet Iran's energy
requirements on the basis of the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy. We reaffirm the proposals that were

transmitted to Iran by the six countries on 6 June 2006.
We hope that Tehran will properly and seriously view
the contents of this resolution and will take the
necessary steps to redress the situation regarding Iran's
nuclear programme. We call upon Teheran to respond
positively to the proposals of the six countries.

