Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg thanks the Republic of Korea for having
organized during its presidency this open debate on a
topic that is very dear to all of us, the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for
their very informative presentations. One conclusion is
clear: despite all efforts by the international community,
notably the Security Council, the situation remains
alarming. We must and can do better.

I welcome therefore the draft presidential statement
prepared for this debate under the leadership of the
delegation of the United Kingdom. It confirms the
Council's commitment to protect civilians in armed
conflict and strengthens the normative framework.

Luxembourg fully endorses the statement that will
be made on behalf of the European Union.

At the most recent open debate of the Council on the
protection of civilians, in June 2012 (see S/PV.6790), I
focused on the tragic situation in Syria. Since then, the
conflict in that country has become even more serious,
with the Syrian civilian population as its first victim. The
High Commissioner has recalled the staggering number
of victims. When civilian populations are slaughtered
on such a scale, when international humanitarian law

and international human rights law are violated on such
a scale, the principle of accountability must be upheld.

It is for that reason that Luxembourg has supported
the Human Rights Council's establishment of the
independent international commission of inquiry on the
human rights situation in Syria. It is also for that reason
that we support, together with many other States, the
initiative of Switzerland requesting the referral of the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court
(ICC).

In general terms, setting up international
commissions of inquiry or fact-finding missions or
referrals to the ICC have a preventative and dissuasive
effect. The appropriate use of those measures by the
Council can strengthen the protection of civilians.
When a situation is referred to the ICC, the Council
must, however, ensure effective follow-up, as well as
give the Court the necessary resources for it to be able
to do its work.

Today, 12 February, we observe the international
day against the use of child soldiers. In 1996, in her
landmark report (see A/51/306), Graca Machel made a
powerful call to action, which I would like to echo here:

"It is unconscionable that we so clearly and
consistently see children's rights attacked and
that we fail to defend them. It is unforgivable that
children are assaulted, violated, murdered and yet
our conscience is not revolted nor our sense of
dignity challenged. This represents a fundamental
crisis of our civilization. The impact of armed
conflict on children must be everyone's concern
and is everyone's responsibility; Governments,
international organizations and every element
of civil society. Each one of us, each individual,
each institution, each country, must initiate and
support global action to protect children. Local
and national strategies must strengthen and be
strengthened through international mobilization"
(A/51/306, para. 317).

Today our conscience is revolted, but children
continue to be recruited to go to war and they are the
first victims of war, in Syria, but also in northern
Mali, in Darfur, in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in the Central African Republic
and in other crisis situations. As Chair of the Council's
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
Luxembourg commits, with the other members of the
Council, to do everything it takes to fight this scourge.

Effectively protecting civilians in armed
conflict is not possible without improving access to
humanitarian assistance. It is necessary to ensure full,
free and unimpeded humanitarian access to affected
populations. We appreciate the efforts made to that end
by the United Nations, first and foremost by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and by
other humanitarian actors, such as the ICRC.

However, all too often, unfortunately, parties
to conflict restrict humanitarian access. We see it in
Syria today, but also in the Sudanese states of Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile, where aerial bombardments
coupled with the prohibition of cross-border
humanitarian operations are trapping the civilian
population.

The recommendations made by the Secretary-
General in his 2012 report (S/2012/376) to improve the
protection of civilians in armed conflict remain entirely
relevant. Apart from the principle of accountability
and from humanitarian access, which I have already
referred to, it is necessary to address three core
challenges, namely, enhancing compliance by parties to
conflict with international law, enhancing compliance
by non-State armed groups and strengthening the
mandate for the protection of civilians of United
Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions.

As far as respect for laws and norms is concerned,
we must respond to the challenge posed by the rising
number of attacks and other acts of interference targeting
specifically health-care personnel and infrastructure, a
trend which has been well documented, notably by the
ICRC. We are also deeply concerned by attacks against
teachers and education infrastructure and the use of
schools for military purposes and the recruitment of
child soldiers.

Finally, we would like to take this opportunity to
condemn the use of explosive weapons, including cluster
munitions, in densely populated areas. According to
data collected by non-governmental organizations in
2012, at least 25,000 civilians died or were injured by
the use of explosive weapons in such areas, with 42 per
cent of civilian victims of explosive weapons being
children.

To conclude, I would like to pay tribute to the
personnel serving in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, who are working every day to protect
civilians against all forms of violence, including sexual
and gender-based violence. In order for United Nations

operations to fulfil their mandates effectively, we have
the responsibility to provide them with the resources
that they need. For its part, Luxembourg emphasizes on
the necessity to deploy in the field, in every situation
where it is necessary and in sufficient numbers, women
protection advisers and child protection advisers. Their
contribution is indispensable for the work of the United
Nations. Luxembourg fully supports them in their
difficult task.

