Mr. Burian (Slovakia): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Holmes for his briefing on
the humanitarian situation in Somalia and northern
Uganda. We commend his efforts and courage in
undertaking the mission to Somalia to assess the
humanitarian situation on the ground. We share his
concerns about the severity and magnitude of the
humanitarian crisis in Somalia. We believe that the
international community must strengthen its efforts to
help the Transitional Federal Institutions stabilize the
situation on the ground and to provide humanitarian
relief to hundreds of thousands of people in dire need
of assistance and protection.

In this regard, we call on all Somali parties to
stop the bloodshed and engage in a genuine political
dialogue. We call on the Transitional Federal
Institutions to reach out to all parties and groups of
Somali society to start an inclusive national
reconciliation process that will lead to a lasting and
sustainable solution to the conflict in Somalia.

We strongly condemn the recent attacks and acts
of piracy threatening relief deliveries to the country
and the ability to feed one million Somalis. We believe
that all necessary steps and actions should be
undertaken by the international community to stop
these attacks, protect humanitarian aid ships and
establish safe corridors to allow full and unhindered
humanitarian access. We must make sure that the
perpetrators of these criminal activities are brought to
justice.

At the same time, we agree with Mr. Holmes that
the Transitional Federal Government must assume its
responsibility to look after civilians and provide a more
enabling operating environment for aid workers. We
therefore urge the authorities in Somalia to extend their
full cooperation to humanitarian agencies and to
facilitate the free movement of relief workers into and
throughout the country.

We also share the concerns of Mr. Holmes about
grave violations of international humanitarian law,
including the violation of rights of women and children
in Somalia, as reported by the Secretary-General in his
latest report on children in armed conflict in Somalia
(S/2007/259). The report highlights the fact that the
children continue to be a highly vulnerable group in
Somalia. We note several especially disturbing
developments in this regard, such as an increase in the
targeted recruitment of children, the abduction of
children, and sexual violence against women and girls
within the context of internally displaced persons. We
fully support the recommendations contained in the
report of the Secretary-General.

We call on all international partners to intensify
their mediating and peacemaking efforts in Somalia to
ensure the full implementation of Security Council
resolution 1744 (2007). We agree with Mr. Holmes that
those efforts need to be redoubled if there is to be any
hope for lasting peace.

We pay tribute to the four Ugandan peacekeepers
who made the ultimate sacrifice. In that respect, we
wish to underline the urgent need for full deployment
of the African Union Mission in Somalia to that
country. In our view, this is crucial for stabilizing the
situation on the ground and for creating conditions in
which the peace process can unfold. The international
community must provide its full assistance and support
to the African Union mission to enable it to carry out
its mandate.

We welcome the fact that Mr. Holmes also had
the chance to visit Uganda and meet with political
representatives, as well as with local authorities and
aid workers. Slovakia is pleased to note the improved
security situation in the region and the gradual return
of numbers of internally displaced persons closer to
their homes. However, there is still concern about the
humanitarian crisis that is affecting 1.6 million people
in northern Uganda. We are encouraged by the recent
resumption of the peace talks between the Government
of Uganda and the Lord's Resistance Army in Juba,
and we would like to emphasize the need to use the
current window of opportunity to bring this long-
lasting conflict to a final and comprehensive resolution
without compromising principles of international
justice.

We fully share the view of Mr. Holmes that the
international community should continue to support the
recovery process and assist people in returning to their
homes. We hope that the current efforts aimed at
improving assistance and implementing the recovery
plans will continue.

With respect to children affected by the armed
conflict in Uganda, we are concerned about the
findings in the most recent report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict in Uganda
(S/2007/260), especially that a number of children are
still being held within the ranks of the Lord's
Resistance Army. Despite the encouraging cooperation
of the Ugandan authorities with the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, in our View the
investigation carried out by UNICEF and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
of crimes perpetrated by members of the Uganda
People's Defence Force is still unsatisfactory. We fully
support the recommendations contained in the report
and, in particular, the Secretary-General's call for
immediate steps to be taken to end child recruitment
and the use of child soldiers and to release children.

Finally, we would like to pay tribute to all
humanitarian organizations working in northern
Uganda and in Somalia for their relentless efforts to
ease the humanitarian suffering of thousands of people
in both Somalia and Uganda.

