Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the leadership of the Tribunals and
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals for their information on the progress of
legal proceedings, the pace of their completion and the
transfer of the Tribunals's functions to the Mechanism.
We take this opportunity to congratulate Judge Agius on
his election to the post of President of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).

In resolutions 2193 (2014) and 2194 (2014),
the Security Council agreed to the request of both
Tribunals for another extension of the terms of their
Judges. However, given the delays in the work of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the
Council emphatically urged that body to redouble
its efforts to reduce the time period for the proposed
completion of cases.

We take note of the information contained in the
progress report (see S/2015/585) of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia on the steps taken
to that end. However, to date, those steps have not
produced results. We note the deferral of decisions that
had already been postponed on several occasions. We
cannot pretend that this does alleviates our concerns.
On the contrary, it creates an unfavourable backdrop
for the consideration of the extension of the terms of the
Judges and the Prosecutor ofthe Tribunal. The staffing
issues to which the report of the Tribunal refers can
hardly be a valid excuse for the situation.

Furthermore, one has the impression that staffing
shortages are not a reason but rather a result of the slow
pace of trials, which cannot be linked to the normal
transfer of staff to other jobs. Attention should also be
paid to the situation of defendants with serious health
problems. We believe that the Trial Chambers and the
Office of the Prosecutor of the ICTY should determine
how best to conduct the relevant ongoing investigations,
taking into account, inter alia, all of the humanitarian
considerations.

One trial is unprecedented in its length, namely,
that of Vojislav Seselj, who spent 11 years in pre-trial
detention. We were disappointed to learn from the
report that the judgement, which was expected at the
end of the year, is still not ready and that its rendering
has been postponed once again. That is an outrageous
situation in a case whose hearing was completed in
2012. We hope that the ICTY leadership can decrease
the time needed to conclude trials and ensure the swift
completion of the work of the Tribunal in line with the
requirements and stipulations of the Security Council.
We urge that all the necessary measures be taken to
that end.

We welcome the final report (see S/2015/577) of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. The report
confirms that the ICTR will complete its work and
will be considered officially closed by 31 December.
Unfortunately, that is one year after the deadline set
by the Council. Nonetheless, we would like to thank
all those who contributed to achieving the aims of the
Tribunal and strove for its proceedings to be completed.
The ICTR has had to deal with the most serious crimes,
and now we can say that, in general, it rose to the
challenge, although admittedly not without difficulties
and mistakes. However, only time will tell what the
contributions of the ICTR have been to the cause of
international justice.

With regard to the Residual Mechanism, we see
that the institution has found its feet and has become
operational. We trust that the Mechanism will be as
effective as possible in its work, given the temporary
nature of its mandate, which was established in
resolution 1966 (2010). We welcome the start of the
review process of the Residual Mechanism for its
initial four-year period, in line with the parameters
stipulated in presidential statement S/PRST/2015/21,
of 16 November. We hope that that will provide the
Mechanism with further impetus to improve the
effectiveness of its work.

