Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I should like to thank
you, Mr. President, for having organized this important
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
important statement and the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
Antonio Maria Costa, for his focused and helpful
briefing.

The holding of this debate soon after that of
December 2009 focused on Africa (see S/PV.6233)
attests to the commitment of the Council to addressing
this issue in a comprehensive way. Drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime, especially the
crimes of terrorism, illicit trafficking of small arms and
money laundering, pose a growing threat to
international peace and security. The challenge of
combating these crimes has become even more
formidable because the networks are increasingly using
advanced information technology methods, such as
satellite phones and cybertransactions.

There is a worrisome trend of linkages between
drug trafficking, organized crime and the financing of
terrorism. Many countries in various regions of the
world are becoming vulnerable. It is therefore critical
to strengthen collective efforts to combat these crimes
by enhancing cooperation and coordination at the
national, subregional, regional and international levels.
We commend the role played by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the International
Narcotics Control Board in strengthening the capacity
of States to respond more effectively to drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime. In
particular, we welcome the continued UNODC support
for regional initiatives in various regions, including
West Africa and, more recently, East Africa.

Uganda continues to take the necessary measures,
both at the national level and within the framework of
the East African Community, the African Union and
international instruments, to combat drug trafficking
and organized crime. We have stringent antinarcotics
and antiterrorism legislation and measures that
continue to be reviewed to take into account emerging
challenges.

The relevant international conventions, including
the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs and the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its protocols, provide a firm legal
framework for international action against organized
crime. What is needed is the intensification of efforts
towards implementation of the provisions of these
Conventions by Member States. The international
community's collective response to organized crime
can be more effective through universal participation in
these instruments.

The transnational crime networks are, in many
cases, well organized. It is therefore critical that the
actions and responses of national, subregional and
regional bodies, the United Nations system and the
wider international community to counter their threats
be comprehensive and well coordinated.

In conclusion, the countries most vulnerable to
drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
networks are those with weak control measures,
especially those in conflict and post-conflict situations.
These countries deserve the support of the UNODC
and the international community in dealing with these
challenges.

The proliferation of organized crime is a deterrent
to investment and has a negative impact on the
economies of afflicted countries. The social fabric and
health of sections of the population are also negatively
affected. It is therefore important to take these threats
into account while developing conflict-prevention and
peacebuilding strategies.

Uganda supports the draft presidential statement.

