Mr. Petritsch: I speak to the Council at a testing
time for the hard-won peace in the Balkans. The smoke
over mountain villages and the angry crackle of gunfire
have come back to haunt us in Macedonia and in
Serbia, and the calls for ethnically based division are
being sounded once more in mainly Croat parts of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

But this time we cannot claim ignorance of the
challenges we face in consolidating the peace in
southeastern Europe. We see them for what they are;
leaders of the past who fear the positive and very real
changes of the present will see themselves disinherited,
both politically and financially.

This report is the eighteenth by a High
Representative, and this is the fourth time that I have
had the honour of addressing the Security Council. I
want to use this opportunity to show how my Office,
and other international organizations that I coordinate
in Bosnia, like the United Nations, are working
successfully against the dangerous voices of division in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I want to show how the rule
of law and market economic reforms are turning the
country around and setting it on the path towards
integration with Europe and how all this can serve as a
model for the rest of the region.

What we must not do is cower at the appearance
of a few gunmen or noisy threats and give up on all our
hard work and the billions of dollars that have gone
into building the foundations for a stable and
prosperous Balkans.

Our continued engagement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina can be read in two ways: as a moral
imperative or, simply, as self-interested common sense.
Either way, the international community would come
out the loser if we were to give up with the job half
done. I should like to explain why.

Given the revolutionary changes last year in both
Croatia and Yugoslavia, last November's general
election results in Bosnia and Herzegovina were seen
as a disappointment. But given Bosnia's character as a
truly multi-ethnic country, where up to a quarter of a
million people lost their lives in the 1992-1995 war, the
shift to more moderate parties is both real and
encouraging. Old nationalist parties, none of them with
particularly strong democratic credentials, have seen
their share of seats in the House of Representatives at
the State level decline from 36 of 42 seats in 1996 to
just 19 in the most recent election. The multi-ethnic
Social Democratic Party (SDP) has the strongest
representation, with nine seats.

This change has led, nearly 10 years after the
outbreak of war in Bosnia, to the formation of the
country's first non-nationalist Government at State
level as well as in the mainly Bosniac-Croat
Federation. In the predominantly Serb entity,
Republika Srpska, a moderate technocrat heads the
Government. The country's new State-level Prime
Minister, Bozidar Matic has announced plans to
implement market reforms, create jobs and get the
hundreds of thousands of Bosnian citizens who remain
refugees or displaced persons back to their homes. I
regard this as an important indicator that my concept of
local ownership of the problems is finally taking root.
Do we want to abandon Mr. Matic now, just as Bosnia
and Herzegovina is turning the corner?

A respected United States columnist, writing
under the headline "Ethnic nationalism is still
prevailing", thinks that we probably should. He wrote,

"the future will probably see non-Muslim Bosnia
and Herzegovina partitioned between Croatia and
Serbia. Today's Bosnia and Herzegovina, forced
into birth by Richard Holbrooke during the
Dayton negotiations of 1995, is probably too
much of an artifice to survive."

Worryingly, this idea appears to be gaining
currency in the halls of academe and elsewhere on both
sides of the Atlantic. The only recently discredited idea
of "ancient ethnic hatreds" - an excuse that the
international community used in order to do nothing in
the early 1990s - is gaining ground just as its
nationalist proponents in Croatia, Yugoslavia and
Bosnia itself are, in fact, losing ground.

One of those losing ground is Mr. Ante Jelavic.
After many provocative acts on his part, I removed him
this month as a member of Bosnia's Joint Presidency. I
further banned his involvement with any political party,
including the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ),

which he led up until two weeks ago. Three of his
hard-line deputies are under the same ban.
Mr. Jelavic worked to tear up the Dayton Peace
Accords, threatening the constitutional order in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the country's peace. His party has
boycotted official institutions for months, leaving those
who voted for it unrepresented. His party held a
political rally disguised as a referendum on election
day last November, despite specific warnings not to do
so. He actively participated in a rally in support of two
men convicted by the war crimes Tribunal in The
Hague last month for crimes against humanity. Shortly
afterwards, his party, claiming to speak for the Bosnian
and Herzegovinian Croats, announced a plan for self-
rule. I was forced to act decisively.

Our columnist would probably say, "Well, I told
you so." But what is this really about? For many years,
nationalists of Mr. Jelavic's stripe got rich by
exploiting fear and suspicion among a population that
is still trying to get over the terror of the war. The
HDZ, in an inflammatory election advertisement that
was subsequently banned by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for
breaching election rules, portrayed the Bosnian Croats'
Muslim neighbours as bloodthirsty Saracens who put
innocent children to the sword. It does not take much
to convince people with limited access to balanced
information that their livelihoods are in danger. For
years, their play on fear guaranteed a good turnout at
elections.

But parties like the HDZ are in trouble. Overall,
the HDZ's votes for the State Parliament have dipped,
from 340,000 in the first post-war election of 1996, to
just 160,000 last year. It is true that the Serbian
Democratic Party (SDS), founded by indicted war
criminal Radovan Karadzie, did well in the Republika
Srpska. But that party had to accept the moderate
Government that I mentioned earlier.

Overall, the sources of fear, and the cash it raised
to fill nationalist party coffers, are starting to fade. A
record number of refugees and displaced persons last
year decided it was safe enough to go home. There
were still criminal incidents aimed at scaring them
away -house burnings in the eastern town of
Srebrenica, demonstrations and daily intimidation of
housing officials charged with implementing tough new
property laws.

But there were more than 67,000 registered
returns in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 2000. These are
people returning to areas where they constitute a
minority; that figure is almost double the rate in 1999.

The United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees has reported that there were no tent cities this
winter and that returns have got off to a good start this
year thanks to mild weather. There were more than
4,000 minority returns throughout Bosnia and
Herzegovina alone in January of this year, against the
barely 1,700 registered in January last year.

When a Bosniac refugee has the confidence to
return to a place like Srebrenica, the site of Europe's
worst massacre since the Second World War, it is a
fairly safe bet that the nationalist message is losing
ground. I will continue to act decisively to remove any
officials who obstruct the rule of law in the vital area
of returns. The nationalists do not like how the rule of
law and market reforms have started to chip away at
their once-powerful economic fiefdoms and at the
institutionalised banditry they once took for granted.

In early January of this year, the payments
bureaux-the old communist monopoly on financial
transactions, which were under the thumbs of the three
main nationalist parties during the war - were finally
closed down. Commercial banks, including several
Western banks, have taken their place and are
providing better services and real competition. The cost
of borrowing has fallen from around 30 per cent to just
10 per cent.

But Bosnia and Herzegovina remains far too
reliant on international aid flows, which make up an
estimated 60 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP).
But real GDP growth in 2000 was a respectable 10 per
cent, and inflation increased in the Federation half by
just 3 per cent. Inflation slowed considerably in the
Republika Srpska, to 8 per cent in 2000. Pensioners
remain very vulnerable, but a controversial law to end
a damaging cycle of payment arrears is working. Their
angry protests of last year have stopped.

Too many of these positive advances have had to
be imposed by my me. Bosnia's outgoing
Administration refused to adopt the pension reform
law, risking tens of millions of dollars in badly needed
aid from the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank. I had to impose it. But I believe that with
Bosnia and Herzegovina's new Administrations in
place, the country's citizens have, for the first time,
leaders who want to own this process and get on with
the business of government themselves.

Both the new State and entity Governments have
ambitious plans to further the reforms - cutting tax
rates and widening the tax base, improving collection
of customs and excise payments and pushing forward
with privatization - to attract both domestic and
foreign investors and to balance official budgets. The
new Governments are very interested in putting an end
to the smuggling of cigarettes and alcohol, which costs
them an estimated quarter billion dollars in lost
revenues each year. Part of the greater confidence is
greater transparency and rule of law, something which
is, again, not to the taste of the nationalists.

Last month I removed Edhem Bicakcic - until
recently the Federation's Prime Minister and a senior
member of the Bosniac Party of Democratic Action
(SDA) - from his new post as director of the power
utility Elektroprivreda. Mr. Bicakcic is under four
separate criminal investigations for fraud and abuse of
public office. I did not want him around as we set
about this year to overhaul public utilities such as
power generation and telecoms, where efficiency and
price will determine distribution, not the supposed
ethnicity of their subscribers. This has sent a clear
signal to officials to clean up their acts and, along with
the creation of a State-level court to arbitrate
international trade disputes, has done much to bolster
investor confidence. It has done little for the
confidence of the nationalists.

Since I last addressed the Security Council, I
have also taken an important decision to set up
constitutional commissions in both entities. These
commissions will ensure that the historical
Constitutional Court ruling on the so-called constituent
peoples' case is put in place on an interim basis until
its full implementation this summer. This legal
mouthful means, in essence, that any constituent people
in Bosnia - whether Serb, Croat, Bosniac or so-called
other - have their rights as citizens fully protected in
law even before the full implementation of the Court
ruling. It will have a huge and positive impact in many
areas of daily life, from the classroom to the
workplace. The nationalists do not like this either.

Furthermore, I established the Independent
Judicial Commission last December to shake up reform
in the courts and prosecutors' offices across the
country. This should help buttress the rule of law.
Positive reforms and democratic Governments
that eye membership in the European Union are also
now the daily fare of life in neighbouring Croatia and
Yugoslavia. Bosnia has just named its first Ambassador
to Belgrade.

How does the many-voiced international
community ensure that the Balkans integrate with
Europe as a peaceful and prosperous region? For all the
complexities, I believe the answer is relatively
straightforward. First, we must continue to ensure our
full support for the United Nations International
Criminal Tribunal in The Hague. This is an institution
which is getting results. A landmark conviction in the
Kunarac trial last month saw mass rape, as a crime in
itself, punished for the first time as a crime against
humanity, with huge consequences for women's rights
worldwide.

Many indicted war crimes suspects also see the
writing on the wall. In January, Biljana Plavsic, a
former President of the Republika Srpska charged with
crimes against humanity, handed herself over to the
Court. This month, Blagoje Simic, who was indicted
for crimes against humanity committed when he was a
top civilian official in the Bosnian town of Samac
during the war, travelled to The Hague to hand himself
over for trial. He is the first Yugoslav citizen to do so
voluntarily.

We must not let up the pressure. The United
States Government has made it clear to the new
authorities in Belgrade that they must cooperate with
the Tribunal or face having international aid cut off.
This must not be an empty threat. We must see to it that
Slobodan Milosevic', Radovan Karadzie and Ratko
Mladic' face trial for their part in one of the last, grim
acts of a dark century. As the writer Michael Ignatieff
has said of leaving war crimes unpunished,

"the cycle of impunity remains unbroken,
societies remain free to indulge their fantasies of
denial".

Secondly, we must stop paying exclusive
attention to men with guns like those on the
Macedonian border and in the Presevo Valley in
southern Serbia. We fail when we are not clear; but we
succeed in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in Croatia and in
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia whenever the
international community speaks with one voice.

The redrawing of borders in the Balkans in an
attempt to meet the impossible demands of exclusivist
nationalists pursuing a mono-ethnic ideal that can be
realized only on a remote island leads only to more
killing and to prolonged international engagement.
Chaos benefits only the mini profiteri, the war
profiteers.

What the implementation of the Dayton Accords
shows is the importance of citizenship based on the
rule of law, which has formed the foundations of a
prosperous United States and a united Europe. This
empowers people with the right to travel, trade and talk
without fear, whatever their nationality, language or
religion.

We have a very powerful means of persuasion.
The peoples of South-Eastern Europe might not agree
on much right now, but they do agree on this: all want
to be members of a prosperous European Union. The
journey will be a long one for them, but it must be
more than a vague hope. We must continue to present
this in very concrete terms, as we are doing through the
Stability Pact and elsewhere. The future of the Balkan
region is already being shaped in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The elections showed that its citizens are
beginning to see how nationalism makes them poor and
isolated. We must build on our success. We must not
back away from a job half done.

