Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council is meeting today to conduct its periodic review
of the progress made towards achieving peace in the
Middle East, and to ensure that Israel, the occupying
Power, is respecting its commitments according to
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and the decisions of the Security
Council pertaining to the peaceful resolution of the
Palestinian question.

Notwithstanding the report's details about
continuing Israeli violations of the resolution's
provisions, a close follow-up of developments since
the last periodic review (see S/PV.8517) demonstrate a
growing tendency on the part of Israel to try and cover
up its violations. It does so by seeking to depict this
political and regional conflict, which was triggered by
the illegal Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory, as
a religious conflict. Israel exploits the Security Council
as a forum for its hate speech and misinformation,
contradicting the actual reporting on what is
happening, particularly with regard to the sacred sites
of East Jerusalem.
Israel and the United States of America have failed
in their bold attempt to change the historic status of
Jerusalem. It was an underhanded attempt to try and
garner international recognition ofIsraeli claims to the
holy city. These attempts by Israel and the United States
run counter to concerted international opposition, at
the forefront of which are the General Assembly and
the Security Council. Israel, however, is undaunted
and continues to speak in incendiary and provocative
terms, including here in the Security Council. Israel
tries to stoke religious tensions and to debate this as
a religious conflict. That demonstrates a flagrant lack
of respect for the international community and an
attempt to continue its violations of the rights of the
Palestinian people.

Israel seeks to entrench its illegal occupation
of Palestinian territory. All of that should spur the
Security Council to be more objective and to take steps
to guarantee respect for the religious texts of the three
great monotheistic religions. The Council should also
take steps to prevent Israel from interpreting these
religious texts in a perverse manner in an effort to
justify its political stance as an occupying Power. Steps
should be taken to prevent Israel from failing to live up
to its obligations under international law.

Israel occupied East Jerusalem in 1967 and is now
trying to claim that Jerusalem, as an undivided city, is
its capital. It is trying to impose Israeli sovereignty on
a de facto basis, moving forward with the claim that
this was the case under the British mandate before
1948. That is a refusal to recognize Security Council
resolutions, which make the status of the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem and
Gaza Strip, very clear.

The League of Arab States reaffirms that Israel
has no sovereignty claim over East Jerusalem or over
any part of the city. That remains a core issue that
must be resolved as part of the final resolution, which
needs to be the fruit of direct negotiations between the
two parties 4 Israelis and Palestinians. There should
be no interference in these direct negotiations and
no thumbing the nose at international law. Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolution 2334 (2016)
must be upheld. Also to be upheld are the General
Assembly's own decisions and resolutions, particularly
those adopted at its resumed emergency and regular
sessions, notably resolution 73/22, of 30 November
2018, on Jerusalem.

The League of Arab States calls on the Security
Council to reiterate its full support for the status of
Jerusalem, in line with existing resolutions, in order
to define it as a holy city for the faithful of the three
main monotheistic religions: Judaism, Islam and
Christianity. The Security Council also needs to call
for full respect for the holy sites in the city, including
those that are under the historic guardianship of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, thanks to the support
of the Al-Quds Committee, which is affiliated with the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

Israeli attempts to confer a religious nature upon
the Arab-Israeli conflict are underhanded. They go
hand in hand with acts of provocation and incitement,
including attacks and assaults by the occupying forces
and Israeli settlers on Palestinian civilians, holy sites
and places of worship in occupied East Jerusalem, as
well as Israel's attempt to alter the historic status of
Al-Quds Al-Sharif and other holy sites. In response, the
League of Arab States calls on the Security Council to
ensure that Israel, the occupying Power, puts an end
to its warmongering activities, in particular the forced
expulsion of the Palestinian people; the demolition of
their houses and the confiscation of their land, property
and belongings; settlement activities and the annexation
of Palestinian land, all of which are illegal practices
that flout Security Council resolutions.

They also flout the 2004 advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice concerning the legality of
the construction of the separation wall in the occupied
Palestinian territories and the Israeli demolition of
dozens of Palestinian homes in Sur Baher and Wadi
Al-Hummus, to the south of Jerusalem, following the
expulsion of its residents under the pretext that their
houses were too close to the separation wall. All of
that is intended to forge a connection between the
Israeli settlements and Al-Quds, which is in violation
of the agreed terms of reference. It is critical that the
perpetrators of those violations be held accountable for
their actions.

We must once again discuss the issue of report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/2018/462), which addresses the
plight of the Palestinian people under occupation and
was discussed at the resumption of the tenth emergency
special session ofthe General Assembly, on 13 June 2018
(see A/ES-lO/PV.38). It is especially meaningful as,
this year, we are celebrating the seventieth anniversary
of the Geneva Conventions, which provide a clear
legal framework for the protection of the Palestinian
people under occupation, while enabling them to enjoy
their inalienable rights, including the establishment of
an independent Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital and within the June 4, 1967 borders, through
transparent negotiations focused on the five questions
concerning the final status of Jerusalem and refugees.

The League ofArab States believes that this - and
not the prioritizing of the economic sphere as a means
to satisfy Palestinian aspirations to the detriment
of finding a political solution, while ignoring their
fundamental rights and freedoms - is in contravention
of international law, and the Security Council remains
responsible for the violations committed by Israel
at the holy sites, including excavation activities,
such as the digging of a tunnel under Silwan in East
Jerusalem - foreshadowing a tragic fate for the
Al-Aqsa Mosque. It is necessary to end Israeli practices
aimed at illegitimately and forcibly altering the historic
and demographic character of Jerusalem.

We support the decisions adopted by the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation. Against that backdrop, the
League of Arab States once again supports the political
declaration issued by the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries in July. We reject any recognition of
Israeli sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan,
in accordance with resolution 497 (1981). We believe
that it is necessary to respect the relevant terms of
reference and not allow anyone to change the reality
on the ground either through the use of military force
or through illegitimate political support. It is necessary
to preserve Syrian sovereignty over those territories
and the territorial unity of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Syrian territories remain Arab land in accordance with
the decisions of the League of Arab States, despite the
suspension of Syria's membership in the League of
Arab States.

We call on the Security Council and the Secretary-
General to implement the decisions adopted at the three
Arab summits convened in Mecca on 30 May 2019, as
well as the Arab Summit held in Tunisia, concerning
Iranian interference in the internal affairs of Arab States
in the Arabian Gulf and the Iranian threat to peace and
security in the Arab world. Iran supports extremist
organizations so as to destabilize the region by fanning
the flames of violence and sectarian, racial and ethnic

conflicts. We are convinced that the Security Council
can realize those goals by immediately taking action.

