Mr. Abdelmannan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on
3
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month. I also welcome the interest that
your presidency has focused on the affairs of our
African continent, most recently with respect to
support for the African Union's peacekeeping
capacities. This demonstrates the wisdom of your
brotherly country, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, as it
assumes the presidency of the African Union, the
United Nations principal partner in Darfur.

My delegation has closely followed the
circumstances that have prompted the convening of
today's meeting of the Security Council at a time when
the Council's programme includes consultations on
Darfur, scheduled for 26 March, at which the Joint
African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator for
Darfur, Mr. Djibril Bassole, will give a comprehensive
briefing on the political process and other relevant
actions concerning the settlement of the Darfur
problem.

It seems to me that the political track is not a
priority for some people who are seeking to fan the
flames and invent crises in an open attempt to divert
the international community's attention from the broad
international and regional rejection of the legally and
politically flawed approach adopted by the so-called
International Criminal Court (ICC) against the
Sudanese State, Government and people. These people
have sought to fabricate and inflate a problem with
respect to the decision of the Government of the Sudan
to expel a number of non-governmental organizations
that have crossed every red line and dared to prejudice
the sovereignty of the country and take advantage of
the kindness of the Sudanese people.

As we have heard, these organizations are the
guests of the Sudan - a fact that my country has taken
fully into account. However, guests are bound by the
rules of hospitality to remain in the places specifically
assigned to them and not to enter the private rooms of
their host.

The decision of the Government of the Sudan is a
legitimate sovereign decision that we will never
reverse. It is not up for discussion, especially since the
Government of the Sudan has not expelled every
organization working in my country. The organizations
that have been expelled number 13 out of a total of
some 118 and represent a mere 7 per cent of those
working in the Sudan. Thus, it is false to depict the
situation as if the Sudan had expelled all organizations.
The decision made by the President of the Sudan
to "Sudanize" volunteer work in the country should be
supported, rather than denigrated, by the United
Nations and the Security Council. The decision is
based on the premise that the State should assume its
full responsibility in this matter.

I must stress here in this Chamber that the
Government of the Sudan reiterates its full respect for
all the agreements and treaties it has signed with the
United Nations to facilitate humanitarian work in
Darfur, including with respect to the fast-track
provision of emergency relief to those in need.
However, we call on the Security Council to address
the situation in Darfur in a more comprehensive
manner that takes into consideration the fact that the
political approach represents the optimal way to
resolve the problem. All other aspects - humanitarian,
security and even justice - are merely being exploited
by some as pretexts for the current action of the ICC.
That action now represents the main threat to any
political settlement. We are all aware of the statements
issued by the various rebel groups following the ICC's
decision and the ensuing lack of security and
abductions of humanitarian workers providing essential
assistance.

The ICC's decision came at a time when the
political process was on the verge of bearing fruit. We
reiterate our call on the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities to work towards the establishment of
peace and security in the Sudan, rather than raise new
issues and fabricate and inflate new crises in my
country. We hope that the Council will act
appropriately. We seek its support and assistance, and
not further problems or violations in this matter.

