Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this debate.

Australia, like all of us, shares the world's
frustration with the lack of progress in the Middle East
peace process. Oslo was in 1993, and the historic Arab
Peace Initiative in 2002, 10 years ago. Like many, we
welcomed the Quartet statement of 23 September 2011,
but progress is stagnant. We applaud the efforts of
King Abdullah and Foreign Minister Judeh of Jordan to
kick-start direct dialogue, and we encourage them to
continue despite the obstacles.

We also welcome the meeting last week in
Jerusalem between the senior Palestinian delegation,
led by chief negotiator Erekat and Prime Minister
Netanyahu, and Mr. Netanyahu's commitment to
responding within two weeks to the letter delivered to
him from President Abbas. We share the hope
expressed by Under-Secretary-General Pascoe this
morning that this exchange of letters will provide an
opening for peace, but we have to recognize that the
window is closing very quickly - closing on the
Palestinian inalienable right to self-determination and
on the best prospect for Israel's long-term security.

As the Quartet noted in its statement of 11 April
(SG/2182), the situation on the ground is increasingly
fragile. The Quartet has repeatedly called on the parties
to refrain from unilateral or provocative actions that
prejudge the outcome of negotiations, but Israeli
settlement activity remains a very serious concern. My
own country has consistently called for this activity to
cease. Our Foreign Minister did so again on 10 April.

Settlements are directly corroding the viability of
a two-State solution. The most recent decisions are
contrary to commitments made by the Israeli
Government itself. It is also imperative that violence of
any kind targeting civilians, including rocket attacks on
Israel from Gaza, must stop. But, while we recognize
Israel's legitimate security concerns, more must be
done, and quickly, to ease the humanitarian situation in
Gaza.

Australia is greatly concerned that, if direct
negotiations do not commence soon, the prospects for
peace and a two-State solution will simply disappear.
An early resumption of direct talks, on the basis of the
1967 boundaries and with agreed land swaps, is needed
urgently and we encourage both sides to resume talks
on that basis. We also call on international and regional
donors to continue to assist the Palestinian Authority to
ensure its financial viability, even during times of tight
global financial circumstances. It is essential that the
decisive gains made in building Palestinian institutions
not be reversed, if we are genuine about a Palestinian
State.

We admire the efforts of the Palestinian
leadership to create a strong base for statehood, and my
own country will continue supporting the Palestinians
in those efforts, including through our multi-year
partnership agreement. We will also soon sign a new
multi-year partnership with the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East with increased funding.

The stagnation in the Middle East peace process
between Israel and Palestine is, as we know, just not
sustainable. We must prevent a two-State solution from
slipping away. There must be an immediate end to
settlement expansion and an early resumption of direct
talks.

Turning very briefly to the situation in Syria, we
welcome the Council's unanimous support, through
resolution 2043 (2012), to deploy a United Nations
observer mission to monitor a ceasefire and to support
the full implementation of Special Envoy Annan's
six-point plan. It is essential that we continue to speak
with one voice against the serious atrocities that we
have been witnessing.
But we have to be hard-headed about that. The
Syrian Government has yet to implement its
obligations regarding the actions of its troops and the
removal of heavy weapons. Violence continues, and
very little progress has been made on the ground.
Denial of humanitarian access is just unacceptable. We
urge Syria, in the strongest terms, to ensure the
effective operation of the mission, and we urge all
parties to honour the ceasefire.

We must also be concerned about the
approximately 40,000 Syrians who have fled to
neighbouring countries. My own country will continue
to play a practical role in helping to meet the immediate
needs of the Syrian people and those who have had to
flee, including to Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey.

To conclude, the situation in Syria is plainly
dangerous and that is obvious to all of us. The atrocities
committed within the country are unacceptable. The
regional implications are growing. The Council has
unanimously recognized the need for it to monitor very
closely how its own resolutions are being implemented
or how they will not be implemented or are not being
implemented. That need is as compelling as it is
obvious.

