Mr. Carmon (Israel): What brings us here today
is the escalation of the situation in Gaza, following the
ongoing terrorist attacks against Israel and my
country's response in self-defence. In the course of the
operation, a tragic event occurred, the accidental
killing of civilians in Beit Hanoun. Despite the doubts
we have heard just minutes ago from the PLO Observer
on our public reaction to the event, I would like to
assure you, Sir, and the members of the Council of the
Israeli Government's and people's deep sorrow and
regret over the deaths of innocent civilians. We are
deeply saddened by that heartbreaking occurrence.
Urgent humanitarian assistance and immediate medical
care for the wounded has been offered to the
Palestinian Authority, and an immediate investigation
and halt of the artillery fire has also been ordered. Let
me assure the Council that Israel is doing its utmost to
make sure that such tragedies do not happen again.

Although the Palestinian civilians killed in this
incident may have been killed by Israeli fire, they are
in fact the victims of Hamas terrorism. In the course of
06-60930
war - and let there be no mistake, the difficult times
we are living in indeed constitute a time of war, a war
against terror - there are regrettable incidents. But if
Palestinian terror did not continue to assault Israelis, if
Qassam rockets and mortar shells stopped sailing out
of Gaza into Israel, the incident in Beit Hanoun would
never have happened. A single decision is needed: the
Palestinian Authority Government must decide to stop
using terrorism as a means to achieve its goals.

When Israel left Gaza more than one year ago,
we, together with the international community, waited
to see how the Palestinians would take advantage of
that historic occasion. Would they take charge of their
destiny and seize the moment to improve their lives?
Would they march towards the creation of an
independent Palestinian State, living side by side, in
peace and security, with Israel as their neighbour?

Unfortunately, reality has proved to be tragically
different: Gaza has become a command centre for
terror organizations; Gaza has become a launching pad
for terrorist attacks; Gaza has become a cog in the
terror machine of its puppeteering masters.

Since Israel left Gaza, more than 1,000 Qassam
rockets and mortar shells have been fired at Israeli
communities in the south - this, I repeat, since Israel
left Gaza. The smuggling of weapons through tunnels
dug deep in the ground also continues. Corporal Gilad
Shalit remains abducted and in the hands of terrorists.

The Hamas Government is refusing to embrace
the three principles outlined by the Quartet and
adopted by the international community: to recognize
Israel, to renounce violence and to abide by previous
agreements.

But Hamas' insolence is worse than its disregard
of obligations. Listen carefully to the words of the
Palestinian Prime Minister, Ismail Haniyeh, who said:

"The language of blood is my language, and there
is nothing but blood. I have shut my mouth to the
art of speech, and let the machine gun do the
talking."

Or what about the Hamas Foreign Minister, Mahmoud
Zahar, who said:

"Neither the liberation of the Gaza Strip nor the
liberation of the West Bank or even Jerusalem
will suffice us. Hamas will pursue the armed
struggle until the liberation of all our lands. We
06-60930
don't recognize the State of Israel and its right to
hold on to one inch of Palestine."

Israel, too, has protested to the Security Council
and its members for weeks now, alerting and warning
them about the rising dangers in Gaza and the
escalation in terrorist activity - all in vain.

Israel has been asked repeatedly to show
restraint. We were told that we must give the moderates
within the Palestinian leadership time and space to
enable them to contain Hamas and other terrorist
organizations. But let me ask the Council: what is
enough time? When is it okay to say "No more"? After
1,000 rockets? After 2,000 rockets? When is enough
enough?

If we have learned one thing since we disengaged
from Gaza, it is that lengthy deliberations, public
statements to the press and even resolutions cannot
change the reality in Gaza today; only actions can.
That begins, first and foremost, with renouncing terror
and ending the violence against Israel.

The Palestinian leadership cannot demand
national rights while refusing to fulfil its national
responsibility. They cannot base their policy on hatred,
and they cannot endorse terrorism. The Palestinian
Authority must be held accountable for what happens
in its territory and among its population.

Once again, it must be made clear to all: Israel
does not target civilians. Israel's enemy is not the
Palestinian people. Our enemy is the terrorists who
attack our citizens. The equation is simple: if the
terrorist attacks from Gaza stop, Israel will have no
need for self-defence.

Hope, promise and an urgently needed change in
reality can come only from those who understand the
cost of terror and value the rewards of peace. It starts
with a renewal of commitments to the two-State
solution and an acceptance of the basic principle that
each people's rights are to be realized in their own
homeland.

The international community must reject the
terrorist elements within the Palestinian Authority and
the Palestinian leadership. At the same time, it cannot
allow the moderates to hide behind the terrorists. It
should call upon the moderate leadership to exercise its
mandate and take control. It may be unpleasant, and
even somewhat dangerous, to dismantle and outlaw
terrorist groups. But that is what national leadership

means, and that is what national leaders do. If you
want national rights, you must take responsibility:
recognize Israel, renounce violence and abide by
previous agreements.

Permitting the status quo to continue and
allowing terrorism to go savagely unchecked are not
merely acts of neglect; they constitute reckless
endangerment of the prospects for peace, our regional
future and the very foundations of human dignity and
right to life.

In Lebanon, there is ample cause to be optimistic.
Now, nearly three months after resolution 1701 (2006)
was adopted by the Council, we have seen positive
developments in southern Lebanon. Resolution 1701
(2006) sent a clear and unambiguous message that the
international community will not tolerate a State within
a State, be it Hizbollah or any other terrorist
organization. The strength of that conviction and that
resolution are a test for the Council. Trilateral meetings
and basic coordination are beginning to get off the
ground. We have witnessed the historic occurrence of
the Lebanese army's deployment over all of its
territory. Today, there is one, unequivocal address in
Lebanon, and it is the Government of Lebanon.

Success, however, cannot be prematurely
declared. Success will be determined only to the extent
to which resolution 1701 (2006) is fully implemented.
First and foremost is the immediate and unconditional
release of our kidnapped soldiers, Udi Goldwasser and
Eldad Regev. We have with us this morning, here in the
Council Chamber, Mrs. Karnit Goldwasser, wife of Udi
Goldwasser. She is here to remind Council members
that, in voting for resolution 1701 (2006), they pledged
to do their utmost to see our kidnapped soldiers
released. This is a humanitarian crisis of the greatest
urgency, and we ask the Council to make good on those
pledges and to ensure their freedom.

Secondly, we must ensure the strength and
effectiveness of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon and see to it that the Lebanese army continues
and remains deployed throughout its territory.

Thirdly, there is reason to be concerned about the
smuggling of arms across the border between Lebanon
and Syria. Hizbollah's rearming not only violates the
essence and strength of resolution 1701 (2006); it
places the entire region in immediate peril. There can
be no ambiguity in policy here. The embargo must be
enforced, and its violators must be held accountable.

Those are matters of concern that we hope the
Council will continue to monitor.

