Mr. Blanchard (Canada): Allow me to join
Canada's voice to others in expressing our condolences
to Egypt and Sweden.

Let me begin by highlighting the immense task
that has been accomplished by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) since 2004
with regard to stability and security in Haiti. In that
regard, I would like to pay tribute to that mission's staff

for their commitment and dedication demonstrated over
the past 13 years, including during the terrible events of
January 2010 and October 2016.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
sincerely thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for her presentation today and her
tireless efforts towards Haiti's development.

(spoke in French)

My country is particularly pleased with the
restoration of constitutional order in Haiti. The recent
conclusion of the electoral cycle must now pave the way
for a lasting socioeconomic recovery that will benefit
all and facilitate the transition to a successor United
Nations mission with a new name in accordance with
the recommendations made by the Secretary-General
in his report (S/2017/223).

More compact and focused, that new peace
operation will play a key role, notably through the
continued strengthening of the capacities of the Haitian
National Police and the necessary consolidation of the
rule of law. It is necessary that democracy, as well as
peace and security, take root as the foundation and the
necessary ingredients for greater prosperity for the
entire Haitian population, with particular attention
accorded to women, children and the most vulnerable.

Thanks to the efforts that have been made by the
Haitian people, we now can see the light at the end of
the tunnel and the next major stage a the economic
development of Haiti. But there will be no economic
development without growth supported by private
investment in Haiti. It is therefore urgent to consolidate
the rule of law and maintain peace and security so as to
develop an environment conducive to investment and
development. Only that kind of economic development
can ensure true improvement in the quality of life of the
Haitian people.

Although the progress made to date is undeniable,
the situation nevertheless remains fragile and
incomplete. As such, the progress achieved must be
preserved and consolidated through an effective and
responsible transition by duly taking into account the
situation on the ground, in particular the capacity of
the Haitian police to assume its entire mandate on its
own. The coming months will be decisive with regard
to the preparation and consequently to the success of
that transition.

As we turn a new page so that Haiti and the
international community can embark upon a decisive
turning point for the country's future, Canada will
stand by the Haitian people in the name of our common
values and the strong bonds of friendship and solidarity
that unite us.
