Mr. Qazi: The report of the Secretary-General
before the Council details the work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) from 8
December 2005 to 7 March 2006. I welcome the
opportunity to brief the Council today on the work of
UNAMI and its ongoing efforts to assist the people of
Iraq in implementing its mandate under resolution
1546 (2004).

As the report notes, despite the notable
achievement of all the political transition benchmarks
in 2005 that were envisaged in resolution 1546 (2004),
Iraq continues to face enormous security, political and
reconstruction challenges. Given these grave
challenges, Iraq's progress in meeting its transitional
benchmarks is all the more remarkable. UNAMI is
proud to have been associated with the achievements
principally of the people of Iraq, the Transitional
National Assembly, the Transitional Government and
the political leadership of the country in meeting the
timetable. The Independent Electoral Commission of
Iraq and the Constitutional Drafting Committee of the
Transitional National Assembly deserve particular
mention for bringing about these accomplishments.

These achievements should have provided a basis
for the next phase of the political process in Iraq, one
characterized by a fully sovereign and democratically
elected Government. However, the bombing of the Shia
shrine in Samarra on 22 February 2006 and its Violent
aftermath have demonstrated that Iraq's political
transition is increasingly threatened by intersectarian
violence, exacerbated by the continuing insurgency and
counter-insurgency, acts of terror and a deteriorating
human rights situation.

While sectarian fissures have always been an
integral part of Iraq's political history, today they have
come to dominate and almost define Iraqi politics and
its future prospects. As the Secretary-General has
emphasized in his report, sectarian violence has
emerged as a main threat to the security and stability of
Iraq. It is fed by growing mistrust between
communities despite the fact that, in their daily lives
and in their individual attitudes towards each other,
most Iraqis emphatically reject and transcend this
divide. Overcoming the sectarian divide is, above all,
the responsibility of Iraq's political leadership. If that
responsibility is not taken up with the urgent priority it
requires, the divide will severely undermine efforts to
promote security and strengthen national cohesion. The
Secretary-General has therefore emphasized that
promoting mutual trust and national reconciliation
must remain the top priority, and that the need for
sustained intercommunal dialogue and confidence-
building measures to promote national reconciliation is
all the more urgent now.

The calls by a large spectrum of Iraq's political
and religious leaders for restraint and peaceful
dialogue and the quick, concrete action taken by the
Government of Iraq to bring the situation under control
are promising signs that the potential for peaceful
political solutions exists. For my part, I have stepped
up my engagement with Iraq's political, religious and
civic leaders with a View to encouraging greater
intercommunal understanding, including through the
Political Consultative Committee convened by Prime
Minister al-Jaafari, which was formed in response to
the Samara attack and its aftermath.

UNAMI is also urging the Government, Iraq's
political and religious leaders and civil society to
demonstrate that they will not be divided and defeated
by the nefarious aims of those seeking to undermine
Iraq's political process and instead take measures
aimed at promoting the rule of law and human rights.
Together with UNESCO and with the support of the
United Nations Development Programme, UNAMI has
also launched an initiative to assist the Government of
Iraq in restoring the Samarra shrine and other religious
sites that were damaged during the recent violence.
The international response has so far been very
encouraging. Taken together, these measures will,
hopefully, contribute to the process of building mutual
trust and national accord.

Despite some grounds for hope, the overall
situation in Iraq remains tense and volatile. Recent
developments have made negotiations on government
formation more difficult. This has created a dangerous
and prolonged political vacuum. To prevent the
situation from deteriorating further and to foster an
environment in which all Iraqis can discuss the future
of their country free of intimidation and fear, all efforts
must now be directed at strengthening the momentum
of the political process, with a view to developing an
agreed national compact that is responsive to the
aspirations of all Iraq's communities. Continued
support from the Security Council and its members will
be essential in this endeavour.

With the expected convening of the Council of
Representatives on 16 March - that is, tomorrow - it
is now incumbent on all concerned to move swiftly to
form a fully inclusive Government, whose credibility
and effectiveness will depend on whether it will be
able to inspire the confidence and trust of all Iraqis and
establish professional, transparent and non-sectarian
institutions that will practice good governance based
on the rule of law and human rights.

A number of competing proposals about the
composition and agenda of the new Government are
currently under consideration. Everything must now be
done to help the negotiating parties reach a sustainable
compromise as quickly as possible. Another important
step will be the constitutional review. I hope that the
new parliament will use this process to reach a national
consensus on a strong framework for the Iraqi State.
That is an essential prerequisite for the country's long-
term stability. As part of its core political mandate
under paragraph 7 (a) of Security Council resolution
1546 (2004), UNAMI stands ready to provide any
assistance that might be necessary for the formation of
an inclusive Government and is fully engaged with
Iraqi leaders to support the constitutional review and
the effective implementation of the constitution.

Iraq's stability is intrinsically linked to the
stability in the region, and vice versa. UNAMI
therefore remains engaged with regional countries and
intends to step up efforts in the coming period. Over
the past 18 months, my deputies and I visited Syria,
Turkey, Iran, Jordan and Kuwait. On 28 March, I
intend to meet Arab leaders at the eighteenth Arab
Summit in Khartoum to discuss the regional situation
as it relates to Iraq. As a concrete step to increase
regional engagement, I have proposed the
establishment of a regional contact group that would
bring together Iraq's regional neighbours to discuss
how to improve stability in Iraq. I intend to continue
discussions on this proposal in Khartoum. I will also
continue to support the initiative of the League of Arab
States to hold a conference on Iraqi national accord in
Baghdad in June and will continue to support the
dialogue started last November in Cairo among
political, religious and community leaders across Iraq.

In addition to UNAMI's political activities under
paragraph 7 (a) of its mandate - which will remain a
priority in 2006 - UNAMI is also seeking to
strengthen its activities in the other key areas of its
mandate under paragraph 7 (b) of resolution 1546
(2004) - namely, reconstruction and development,
humanitarian assistance and human rights. To this end,
UNAMI is developing a phased approach that would
integrate all UNAMI activities into its overall political
strategy to promote national dialogue and
reconciliation. Concrete priorities will be established in
close consultation with the new Government and
international partners.

The urgency of activities under this part of
UNAMI's mandate is demonstrated by the deteriorating
human rights situation. While the Government has
taken initial steps, more determined measures are
necessary, particularly with regard to de facto arbitrary
detentions, torture and extrajudicial killings. The
Multinational Force and the Iraqi security forces have a
particular responsibility in this regard. In the absence
of such measures, efforts to strengthen national
cohesion, mutual trust and national reconciliation
might prove elusive. In fulfilling its mandate, UNAMI
will continue to monitor the human rights situation
closely and will provide further comments and
recommendations in its next bimonthly human rights
report, to be released shortly.

It is clear that the current situation in Iraq
constitutes a serious obstacle to the effective
implementation of infrastructural and income-
generating projects designed to address unemployment
and the provision of basic services. If not effectively
addressed, ongoing violence will prevent donor
programmes from having their desired impact.
Nevertheless, UNAMI intends to remain actively
engaged, through its United Nations country team, to
maintain its important role in donor coordination and
to support humanitarian, reconstruction and
development activities, circumstances permitting.
UNAMI is also fully engaged in preparations for the
next donor conference of the International
Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq, which is now
planned for July.

As the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the designated official for security, I am
accountable to the Secretary-General for the safety and
security of all United Nations personnel in Iraq. In the
current political and security environment in Iraq,
United Nations staff members remain at risk of
becoming targets of violence. Staff security, therefore,
remains the Mission's overarching guiding principle.
UNAMI's activities will continue to be demand-driven
and focused on added value in areas of comparative
advantage. An expanded role for UNAMI need not
necessarily translate into an increase of the current size
of the Mission. The emphasis will remain on the
quality of UNAMI's assistance rather than the size of
the Mission, which will be conditioned by a continuous
evaluation of the security environment and the
availability of security and essential life support
systems.
If a more robust role is expected of the United
Nations in the next phase of Iraq's political transition,
there will be a concomitant need to enhance the
necessary capacities within UNAMI. One requirement
will be for dedicated air assets to ensure our greater
operational mobility and flexibility. Despite many
requests to Member States, UNAMI has not been able
to secure the required dedicated air assets. That is
regrettable, and a solution should be found as a matter
of urgency.

With the Multinational Force moving into
strategic overwatch and the Iraqi security forces not yet
fully formed, trained and tested, safety and security for
UNAMI staff and premises will require additional
support. I thank the Governments of Fiji, Georgia,
Romania and the Republic of Korea for supporting our
security arrangements, and I thank the donors for their
support. I am also grateful for the efforts of the
Multinational Force to facilitate the movements of
UNAMI staff. The continued support of the members
of this Council will remain essential with regard to
both UNAMI's immediate security needs and the wider
issue of enhancing the capacities of Iraq's own security
services.

In addition, I am grateful for the hospitality,
support and facilities provided by the Governments of
Jordan and Kuwait to enable UNAMI to continue to
discharge its mandate under resolution 1546 (2004).
Above all, I am grateful to the Government of Iraq for
its continuous cooperation.

It has become apparent that the next six months
in Iraq will be critical. The cloud of pessimism that has
further darkened as a result of recent developments has
to be lifted. While the Government of Iraq and the
political leadership must discharge the primary
national responsibility that devolves upon them, it is
equally incumbent upon the neighbours of Iraq and the
international community to enable them to do so.
UNAMI is privileged to share in that responsibility by
facilitating the processes of dialogue, compromise and
national reconciliation, by providing humanitarian,
reconstruction and development assistance and by
promoting good governance, human rights and the rule
of law, as well as the establishment of democratic
institutions.

Setting Iraq on an irreversible path towards a
peaceful and democratic future will be a long journey.
What is needed first and foremost is the commitment
of the new Government of Iraq, the Security Council,
regional countries and, most of all, the Iraqi people to
turn the page and move forward towards a stable,
peaceful and prosperous Iraq. In that endeavour,
UNAMI will continue to stand by the Iraqi people.

