Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. David Shearer, and Ms. Betty Sunday for their briefings. I also thank the personnel of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) for their tremendous work in South Sudan. Estonia welcomes the encouraging developments in South Sudan's peace process, including the ongoing talks to form a revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity. We are hopeful that the parties will come to an agreement. The leaders must understand that it is not a zero-sum game. Estonia welcomes the signing of the comprehensive action plan to end and prevent all grave violations against children. We would like to thank UNMISS and UNICEF for supporting the process. However, according to the February report of the Commission on Human Rights (A/HRC/43/56), there are approximately 19,000 children in the ranks of the South Sudan People's Defence Forces and armed opposition groups. We call upon all signatories to ensure a swift and full implementation of the action plan. It is up to them to make ita success. The South Sudanese people deserve it. We understand that moving towards a unity Government is only a first step. Much remains to be done. Continued political will is required to move forward with peacebuilding and reconciliation among the parties, especially considering the unification of forces. Cooperation is the only way forward. We are very disturbed by the dire humanitarian situation in the country. An estimated 7.5 million South Sudanese will remain in need of humanitarian assistance this year. More than 3.5 million persons remain forcibly displaced as security concerns and multiple other reasons continue to prevent them from returning to their homes. Combating sexual and gender-based violence has to remain a priority. It is very important to tackle the culture of impunity. We welcome the headway that has been made with the mobile courts and encourage UNMISS to continue those efforts. We also support placing perpetrators of human rights violations under sanctions and encourage the work of the Panel of Experts in that regard. We would like to stress the importance of the full, effective and meaningful participation of women in all spheres and levels of political leadership, the peace process and the pretransitional and Transitional Government. Estonia is concerned by the _ continuing intercommunal violence, which has had a devastating impact on the civilian population. The primary responsibility of a State is to protect its citizens. In the past three months, UNMISS has been unable to respond to the violence on at least 46 occasions because of the movement restrictions imposed by the previous Government. We call on the leaders ofSouth Sudan to deal with the violations of the status- of-forces agreement. I wish that the current leaders would find more common ground and turn the lives of the South Sudanese people around in the most positive way possible.
