Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank our briefers
from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), the African
Union and the European Union (EU). I think that the
briefings by all these representatives together are a
perfect illustration of the partnership approach taken
so far and which we need to continue.

The United Kingdom fully supports the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. Its growing
transborder capability, coupled with its regional
expertise and knowledge, are crucial to tackling the
cross-border threat posed by terrorist organizations and
instability in the Sahel.

Since we visited as a Council last year, a lot has
been done to build on the existing work that we saw
on that trip. However, those efforts must be redoubled
if full operationalization across all sectors is to be
achieved in the coming months and the cross-border
threat addressed. As set out in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2018/432), mobilizing funding is a key
issue affecting the Joint Force. Despite many donors'
generosity while pledging, the majority of those pledges
have still not been disbursed, disrupting operations and
long-term planning. In addition to our development and
humanitarian funding of $380 million over the past three
years and our contributions through the EU funds, the
United Kingdom has pledged an additional $2.7 million
for infrastructure support to the element of the Niger
component of the Joint Force and for helicopter-borne
medical-evacuation support. We intend to make that
funding accessible next month and we strongly urge all
partners to make good on the financial commitments
they have made to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force as soon
as possible.

The United Kingdom recognizes the contribution
of the regional actors working for stability in the
Sahel, including the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
Operation Barkhane and various EU missions,
among them the EU Training Mission in Mali. We
strongly encourage strengthening the coordination
mechanisms among those actors to ensure that efforts
are not duplicated.

In addition to those regional activities, it is important
that individual countries continue to take action at the
national level. In Mali, we welcome the recent progress
that has been made on the peace process, and we hope
that this momentum will continue up to and beyond
July's presidential elections. Political efforts must
be redoubled if we are to genuinely implement the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We,
as the Security Council, should not hesitate to use all
the tools available, including sanctions against any who
obstruct that process, if necessary. We particularly urge
the full participation of women in the implementation
and monitoring of the Peace Agreement.

Military operations, including by the Joint Force,
will succeed only if they are based firmly within a
larger framework of improved security, governance,
development, human rights and humanitarian protection.
In that regard, we urge the G-5 Sahel States to take
forward the establishment of the support group in order
to address the challenges facing the Sahel in a holistic
and comprehensive manner. Development assistance
must address the drivers of conflict, for example by
tackling marginalization or helping to promote more
accountable governance, and development work must
be linked to the G-5 Sahel and, indeed, to MINUSMA's
operations. It is important to ensure that military
operations go hand in hand with the provision of services
for the population. We therefore look forward to seeing
the details of a revamped integrated strategy for the
Sahel, which must have a holistic, cross-United Nations
and cross-border approach to conflict prevention at its
heart. This is where the sustaining peace concept will
be tested. Let us hope that we will not have to relearn
the lessons that we have learned in many other theatres.

Any military action must of course be conducted
in full compliance with human rights law and
international humanitarian law. We welcome the
endorsement of the human rights and international
humanitarian law compliance framework, as part of the
technical agreement among the EU, the G-5 Sahel and
the United Nations, and the G-5 Sahel's commitment
to implementing it with the support of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and MINUSMA. Failure to protect civilians
will feed extremist recruitment and put future funding
contributions at risk. In that regard, I support the
comments made by my American colleague about the
recent incident.

A solution that addresses the underlying causes
of instability is the only way to ensure long-term
security in the region. The ultimate solution will be a
political one, with development assistance and military
support. It must be inclusive and ensure the full and
equal participation of the whole of society, including
women, if it is to succeed. It must provide economic
opportunities and present an attractive alternative to
extremism. That is the best way to improve the lives
of those who live in the Sahel, and it is the best way to
improve our collective peace and security.
