Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): On behalf of
the Government of Viet Nam, I would like to start by
thanking you, Mr. President, and the Government of
the Russian Federation for taking the initiative of
organizing this important debate of the Council. We
welcome the presence of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and thank him for his statement.

This debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, is taking place at a
critical juncture, when recent positive developments
are being overshadowed by continued insecurity,
instability and increasing tensions in the region. We are
heartened by the increasing international consensus
rejecting Violence in support of a peaceful solution; the
positive outcome of the International Conference in
Support of the Palestinian Economy for the
Reconstruction of Gaza, held in Sharm el-Sheikh,
Egypt, in early March 2009; and the continued
undertakings to translate such a positive outcome into
concrete actions in support of the National Early
Recovery and Reconstruction Plan for Gaza presented
by the Palestinian Government.

These positive developments, however, cannot
overshadow the extent and scope of challenges facing
the international community. We note with great
concern that, more than three months since the
temporary ceasefire was announced, Israeli military
incursions into the occupied Palestinian territory and
rocket attacks against populated areas in Israel
continue to take place. While Palestinian civilians in
Gaza are struggling to cope with the numerous
hardships and difficulties caused by the 22-month
siege, tensions in the West Bank continue to escalate as
a result of Israel's expansion of illegal settlements and
construction of the separation wall.

Repeated cycles of violence and counter-violence
over the years demonstrate more clearly than ever that
a lasting solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
must be a comprehensive one that takes into account
the legitimate interests and rights of all the parties
concerned. We support the collective efforts of the
United Nations, the Quartet, the League of Arab States
and regional countries in search of a two-State solution
based on internationally recognized guidelines such as
the Road Map, the Annapolis outcome, the principle of
land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
relevant Security Council resolutions, including the
recent resolutions 1850 (2008) and 1860 (2009). Viet
Nam is ready to join efforts to reactivate and move
forward the Middle East peace process.

The recent tragic events in Gaza have caused the
loss of many innocent lives, including those of women
and children, and created and prolonged a humanitarian
crisis, making the living conditions of the Palestinian
people there more and more difficult. We urge all the
parties concerned to lift all restrictions, create every
condition necessary to facilitate humanitarian relief
operations, and abide by international humanitarian
and human rights law. We commend United Nations
agencies, particularly the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
and other humanitarian organizations for their bravery
in rendering emergency and humanitarian assistance to
Gazans. While reaffirming Viet Nam's position that
any attack against diplomatic and United Nations
premises and personnel is unacceptable, we take note
of the report of the Board of Inquiry, prepared at the
request of the Secretary-General and the appeal of the
Security Council, and support investigations to
determine the culprits.

Intra-Palestinian unity is an important factor for
making the Middle East peace process sustainable.
Continuing our support for the Palestinian National
Authority, we hope that all Palestinian parties will soon
reconcile and establish a national unity Government.

We are pleased to note the relative calm and
stability prevailing in Lebanon since the signing of the
Doha agreement a year ago. We hope that the
parliamentary elections scheduled for 7 June 2009 will
be held in optimal conditions of security, transparency
and fairness. We reaffirm our support for a solution
achieved through dialogue and cooperation on the basis
of respect for the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon. We would also like to
reaffirm our support for the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon and the full implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006).

Finally, we welcome the proposal of Russia to
convene an international conference on the Middle
East peace process in Moscow later this year. We thank
the Russian delegation for introducing the draft
presidential statement, which, with flexibility and a
spirit of cooperation, we are ready to support.

