Mr. Kumar (India): Let me, at the outset, thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
the working methods of the Security Council. I also
thank your delegation for authoring the concept paper
(S/20l3/6l3, annex), which gives a perspective on the
various issues being discussed under the broad rubric
of working methods. I would also like to put on record
our deep appreciation of Ambassador Maria Cristina
Perceval's stewardship of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions
during the year 2013.

In the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1), Heads of State and
Government supported an early reform of the Security
Council and recommended that the Council should
continue to adapt its working methods to the exigencies
and imperatives of a vastly altered global order. It is a
matter of regret that so far very little has been done to
achieve either of those mandates.

As the primary organ of the United Nations system
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
the working methods of the Council are ofinterest to the
entire international community, and not only to Council
members or the permanent members. As your concept
paper has rightly mentioned, Mr. President, issues of
transparency and interaction with non-members of the
Council, troop- and police-contributing countries and
relevant United Nation bodies are important for the
overall efficiency of the Council and urgently need
to be addressed. I would like to briefly share India's
perspective on how the Security Council could improve
on its performance.

Let me start by quoting the famous writer and poet
Victor Hugo, who said, "There is nothing more powerful
than an idea whose time has come". The reform of the
Security Council in tune with contemporary realities
is an idea whose time has come. The permanent
members of the Council must recognize, not only
individually but also collectively, that the Council
must be reformed to make it reflect the contemporary
realities of the international system. It is self-evident
that the expansion of the Security Council to reflect
contemporary geopolitical realities would improve its
representative character and grant greater legitimacy
and credibility to its decisions. Also, the improvement
of the Council's working methods would enhance its
effectiveness and efficiency. We strongly believe that
real improvements in the working methods need change
in both processes and approach, which requires a reform
in the composition of the Council.

The most important change required in the working
methods is to make them transparent and inclusive.
The Security Council needs to increase access to
documentation and information and curb the tendency
to hold closed meetings that have no records. Even
worse is the practice oftaking decisions among the five
permanent members to the exclusion of other Council
members, as was seen just last month on an important
issue of international peace and security.

During the past few years, my delegation has
strongly supported efforts within the Informal Working
Group aimed at improvements in the Council's working
methods. I will offer a few specific suggestions in that
regard.

First, the Council should amend its procedures so
that items do not permanently remain on its agenda.

Second, the reporting cycle should be practical
and results-oriented, so that issues do not come up for
consideration simply as a matter of routine, putting
pressure on the limited time the Council has at its
disposal.

Third, Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter must
be fully implemented through consultations with
non-Security Council members on a regular basis,
especially members with a special interest in the
substantive matter under consideration by the Council.
There is a need to strengthen the trend of meeting
more often in public, including through holding public
briefings and debates.

Fourth, penholders should allow greater and
systematic participation of elected members as
co-penholders.

Fifth, non-members should be given systematic
access to subsidiary bodies of the Security Council,
including the right to participate. Furthermore,
the participation of troop- and police-contributing
countries in decision-making concerning peacekeeping
operations must cover the establishment, conduct,
review and termination of peacekeeping operations,
including the extension and change of mandates, as
well as for specific operational issues.

Sixth, there is a need to ensure more informative
annual Security Council reporting to the General
Assembly. The Council should also concentrate its
time and efforts on dealing with issues concerning its
primary responsibility concerning international peace
and security, as mandated by the Charter of the United
Nations, rather than encroaching upon the mandate of
the General Assembly and other United Nations organs.

Seventh, before mandating measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter, the Council should first make
serious efforts for the pacific settlement of disputes
through measures under Chapter VI.

In conclusion, let me reiterate India's considered
view that genuine reform of the working methods of
the Security Council requires comprehensive reform
in the membership of the Council, with expansion in
both permanent and non-permanent categories, and not
only improvement in its working procedures. This is
essential both for the Council's credibility and for the
continued confidence of the international community
in this institution. It is our sincere expectation that
these ideas will be pursued by Council members so
that the views expressed by the wider United Nations
membership find resonance in the Council's work and
working methods.

