Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial
Guinea congratulates Ambassador Djani, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), on his briefing on the activities and programme
of work of the 1540 Committee for 2019. We express
our support for the success of the aforementioned
programme of work.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is fully
aligned with the pillars that support and promote the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and reaffirms
its commitment to stepping up its cooperation and
to raising awareness of the activities of the 1540
Committee to fulfil its mandate to ensure that Member
States fully implement resolution 1540 (2004). The
Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that it is
important to strengthen the non-proliferation system
for nuclear, biological and chemical weapons, as well
as civil nuclear security.

As a country committed to global security and
international non-proliferation instruments, we held our
first workshop in December 2018 in close cooperation
with the 1540 Committee and the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs, represented by its regional
office in Africa, the United Nations Regional Centre
for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, to establish
mechanisms for the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) in the Republic of Equatorial Guinea. We believe
it essential that all countries of the world participate
in reporting on national implementation plans and
encourage the Committee to pursue its negotiations
and educational activities on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

Africa, my region, is a nuclear-weapon-free zone
thanks to the signing of the Treaty of Pelindaba, which
represents a model of collective action in working
towards a nuclear-weapon-free world and in developing
the most advanced regional treaties on the prohibition
of nuclear weapons. For example, the management of
its uranium resources is a fundamental issue for Africa
because certain companies are increasingly eyeing
Africa's uranium. We want those reserves, which
were given to us by God, to be used only for peaceful
purposes, as the Treaty of Pelindaba states.

In order to prevent confrontation that could lead
to the destruction of humankind, it is essential that we
continue to progress towards the overriding objective
of nuclear disarmament throughout the planet and in
every corner of the world, including States that possess
weapons ofmass destruction as well as those that intend
to possess them. Effective nuclear weapons control
requires solutions that go beyond national borders. The
threat to life on our planet from nuclear weapons poses a
particular problem to the existence of those same States
that possess such weapons as well as countries such
as ours that do not possess them, animals, vegetation
and all humankind. Dealing with each of those threats
requires a concept of international security that is more
focused on love for humankind.

We have seen from the relevant reports that on
28 February of this year the Government of Vietnam
had carefully prepared for the hosting of the second
summit on peace and non-proliferation on the Korean
peninsula between the leaders of the United States of
America, Donald Trump, and the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, Kim Jong Un. We would have like
to have heard that the summit was a complete success.
We hope that the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea and the United States continue to make more
substantive progress towards denuclearization, peace
and stability on the Korean peninsula based on what has
already been achieved. The position of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea on the issue of the Korean peninsula
is to achieve the peninsula's denuclearization and to
ensure and safeguard lasting peace and stability in the
region and in the world in general.

We highlight the valuable support of the radiation
and nuclear regulatory bodies to their members, such
as the 1540 (2004) Committee and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, and their work to update and
improve the regulatory framework in each member
State and for regional and international consistency.
My delegation wishes to highlight the readiness of our
Government for technical and scientific exchange with
other States in the context of cooperation, assistance
and a joint review on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).

We also wish to say to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) that the dissemination
and implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in States
Members of the United Nations should not be only
through the adoption of legislation. The Committee
should also support technical aspects, such as assistance
for the detection of nuclear and radioactive material at
the main entry and exit points for goods in countries, in
particular those such as ours.

