Mr. Nishida (Japan): I thank you, Madame
President, for the opportunity to give my Views on the
subsidiary bodies that I have chaired. I shall try to be
brief in order to promote the effectiveness of the
Security Council. I briefed the Council in my capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) earlier this month. Therefore, I
should like to say a few words on the Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations and the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions.

First, it gives me great pleasure to address the
Council in my capacity as Chair of the Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations. During the past two years,
the Group issued four reports. I wish to thank all
members of the Council for their constructive
contribution to and cooperation with the activities of
the Working Group.

Japan's commitment to the Working Group has
been consistent. The overarching theme of the Working
Group during Japan's chairmanship was how to fill the
gaps that between Security Council mandates and
actual implementation on the ground. As we all know,
we are faced with the challenges of historically high
levels of deployment and increased complexity of
mission mandates. This requires a renewed effort to
minimize capability gaps, manage resource constraints,
expand the contributor base and strengthen cooperation
with other actors within and beyond the United Nations
system.

As stated in the last report, the most important
contribution of the Working Group has been in
bringing Council members closer to major troop- and
police-contributing countries and, of course, the
Secretariat. The interactive dialogue among a wide
range of stakeholders at meetings has served to
enhance transparency and accountability in the work of
the Council. It also provided opportunities to create
some common ground to meet various challenges.

The report included three suggestions for the way
Forward. The first was to further encourage inclusive
dialogue among relevant stakeholders, especially in the
context of the establishment, renewal or modification
of the mandate of a peacekeeping operation. In our
view, this is vital to ensuring the implementation of
mandates. We hope that the current good practices,
including the use of the diagram produced by the
Working Group for scheduling a monthly programme
of work, will continue. The second suggestion was to
facilitate regular reporting on critical gaps affecting
mandate implementation and to find ways to address
them. The third was to build common ground on early
10-70084
peacebuilding tasks in a peacekeeping context in order
to prepare for transitions and exits. We feel that there
remains a lot to be done, and the Working Group can
be a facilitating vehicle to generate practical solutions.

Japan hopes that the Working Group can take
these suggestions into consideration in its future
discussions. We wish the next Chair every success.
Japan will be leaving the Council, but will continue to
be committed to all of these issues and stands ready to
continue working with the Council members as well as
other stakeholders.

Allow me now to say a few words in my capacity
as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and other Procedural Questions. I
would like to thank all members for their cooperation
and constructive input.

The Informal Working Group initially worked on
improving the implementation of previously agreed
measures to improve the working methods of the
Council, including presidential note S/2006/507 of
2006. The Informal Working Group focused on such
issues as the Council's interaction with non-members
and other entities, including the Peacebuilding
Commission; enhancing dialogue with troop- and
police-contributing countries; the format of Council
meetings; Security Council missions; and the timing of
the issuance of reports of the Secretary-General.

The Security Council held an open debate on its
working methods in April of this year under Japan's
presidency (see S/PV.6300). Thirty-eight non-members
participated, and statements were made on behalf of
many regional groups. We believe that it was a
constructive discussion. We hope the Council will
periodically hold such Open Debates.

Taking note of the views expressed by Member
States during the open debate, the Informal Working
Group worked to revise presidential note S/2010/507
and the new note (S/2010/507) was adopted by the
Council on 27 July. In the new note, new measures to
enhance the Council's interaction with non-members
and other relevant entities are of particular significance.
The informal dialogue is a useful tool in this regard.
Enhancing transparency, efficiency and interaction
with non-Council members benefits Security Council
members and non-Members alike. I hope that the
Informal Working Group will continue its effort in
these areas in the coming years.
Japan recently finished printing the successor to
the so called "Blue Book". The new Book includes
document S/2010/507 and other useful documents. We
hope it will be a user-friendly guide to the working
methods of the Council. We will make them available
to all missions. I have brought a few copies here today,
and hope that anyone who is interested will take one on
his or her way out.

