Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would like
to start by thanking Special Adviser Karim Khan for
his informative updates on the recent progress made
by the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD). I would
also like to take this opportunity to acknowledge and
welcome the recent appointment of his Iraqi deputy,
Ms. Al-Khafaji. The United Kingdom is grateful to them
and to their Team for the excellent work that they have
undertaken so far. The United Kingdom emphasizes the
importance of recruiting further Iraqi members of the
Team as soon as possible. That recruitment, alongside
training and development opportunities, will provide
an important legacy for Iraq in building capacities and
sharing expertise.

We welcome the strong and positive engagement
of the Team with the Government of Iraq, both in
Baghdad and here in New York. We are grateful to
the Government of Iraq for its continued commitment
to and support for UNITAD's work. That message of
commitment was conveyed strongly to the Council
during its recent visit to Baghdad by the highest levels
of the Government of Iraq. We also welcome the
continued collaboration between the Government of
Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government with the
Team to agree modalities for cooperation. Over the next
reporting period, we encourage the Team to redouble
and prioritize its engagement with the Government
of Iraq in order to ensure the greatest possible use
of evidence collected in Iraqi domestic proceedings,
including allowing for the prosecution of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide under domestic
law. That would constitute a remarkable step forward in
promoting accountability for survivors and the families
of Victims of Da'esh. Maintaining and strengthening
that close engagement with the Government of Iraq,
the international community, non-governmental
organizations and the people of Iraq will be essential
over the coming months.

Less than 12 months after UNITAD received
its first budget, the Team has made remarkable
progress. Over the past six months, it has established
a new official headquarters, developed an investigative
strategy and conducted excavations in Sinjar, as well
as making important progress towards putting in place
the necessary systems to ensure that evidence is safely
stored. We welcome that progress and hope that the
digital storage system will be fully up and running by
the time of our next briefing. We also look forward to
the planned excavation in Mosul and to the remaining
field units becoming operational soon.

The Council's recent visit was also an important
reminder to us all of the scale of the path ahead for the
Government of Iraq in transitioning into a post-conflict
environment. Reconciliation, reconstruction and
accountability for all survivors of Da'esh violence are
essential. The enormity of the task ahead for UNITAD
in gathering further evidence is also clear. The
collection of forensic, physical and biological material
from mass grave sites in Iraq is an essential first step
to providing closure for the families of the Victims. We
urge the Team to continue to focus on that important
task and to share further details on its investigative

strategy as it develops, as well as any challenges that
it may face.

The United Kingdom also acknowledges the
volume of work that the Team has undertaken so far
in gathering witness testimonies. We urge all United
Nations bodies in Iraq to work collaboratively so as to
ensure that they avoid duplication of effort and mitigate
the risks around the potential retraumatizing of Victims.
In that regard, we urge the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq, UNITAD and the United Nations Iraq
team of experts to work together to coordinate their
efforts and share best-practice and technical expertise.

In November, the United Kingdom will host a
conference on preventing sexual violence, entitled
"Time forjustice: putting survivors first". We hope that
all Council members will send senior representatives
of their Governments to signify their commitment to
preventing sexual Violence in conflict and ensuring
accountability for the perpetrators of those crimes and
support for survivors, their children and relatives.

When resolution 2379 (2017) was adopted
unanimously in September 2017, it demonstrated
the Council's full support for efforts to bring Da'esh
to justice. Since its inception, when Nadia Murad
addressed the Council (see S/PV.8052), survivors and
victims have been at the heart of the Team's efforts.
We commend the Team's approach in emphasizing that
there is no hierarchy of victims and the recognition that
all Iraqis suffered at the hands of Da'esh. Its work will
be important in supporting the Government of Iraq in
its efforts to achieve national reconciliation.

The United Kingdom is proud to support the
important work of the Investigative Team, and I am
pleased to announce today an additional £1 million
in funding to the Investigative Team, taking the
total contribution of the United Kingdom so far to
£2 million. We thank the growing number of Member
States that have also pledged support to the Team, and
we encourage other countries to consider providing
financial and in-kind support to ensure that the Team
can continue with and accelerate its valuable work.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the United
Kingdom's full support for the efforts of the Special
Adviser and his team. We look forward to the unanimous
renewal of the Team's mandate in September.

