Mr. Sidikou (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to speak
to you and the Council about the situation in the
Democratic Republic of Congo since your visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in November.

My statement will focus on the political situation,
with particular emphasis on the good offices undertaken
by the Conference episcopale nationale du Congo
(CENCO) and the arrangements made by the Mission
with regard to the deadline of 19 December and the
security situation in particular in the eastern part of
the country.

Two weeks after the constitutional end of President
Kabila's second and last term, and more than six
weeks after the signing of the comprehensive political
agreement of 18 October, on peaceful, credible and
transparent elections, the political situation remains
uncertain. The good offices led by CENCO since early
November, with the endorsement of President Kabila
and which had aroused great hope for a peaceful exit
from the political impasse, seem or seemed to be fading.
In complex situations, appearances can sometimes
be misleading.

The positions of the key players, namely, those of the
presidential majority and the Rassemblement des forces
politiques et sociales acquises au changement - known
as the Rassemblement de l'opposition - appear not
to have changed. The presidential majority continues
to reject a second dialogue and the Rassemblement
insists on a truly inclusive dialogue. A few moments
ago I learned, through a presidential communique, that
President Kabila just relaunched the CENCO initiative
in person, called on it to pursue its mission and assured
it of his full support.

(Spoke in English)

While we are steadfastly continuing our good
offices engagement with the Government, the security
services, political parties and civil society, we are now
fast approaching the symbolic date of 19 December
and the period going into early next year with a sense
of apprehension. In that context and drawing lessons
from the violent events of 19 and 20 September, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
has further updated its contingency plans and is further
adjusting its posture and deployment to mitigate
politically driven violence and protect civilians, to the
extent possible within its available resources and in its
areas of deployment.

Specifically, the Mission has reinforced its presence
and coordination mechanism in Kinshasa to implement
our protection of civilian mandates, within capacity,
while the force and police continue to carry out day
and night patrols in Kinshasa, as well as in other parts
of the country. We have also established in Kinshasa,
Goma and Lubumbashi three mobile teams to monitor
and report on human rights violations and restrictions
of political space. Those teams are designed to deploy
into areas that are without a permanent MONUSCO
presence but are deemed at high risk of politically
driven violence. The Mission is also coordinating
its plans with the United Nations country team, in
particular with regard to the provision of humanitarian
assistance to civilian populations that may be displaced
by such violence.

Let me stress here that those efforts may not be
fully sufficient to mitigate or respond adequately to
any major outbreak of politically related violence.
First and foremost, it is the political will of the main
political actors that will determine how the existing
and real tensions are managed and whether or not they
degenerate into violence. Secondly, the force and police
capabilities available to the Mission in Kinshasa are
stretched thin. Furthermore, as the Mission fine-tunes
its plans to ensure the safety and security ofits personnel
and facilities, we are cognizant of the fact that there
may well be requests from the diplomatic community
and other actors present in Kinshasa for support, which
would further stretch the Mission's limited capacities.
My senior colleagues and I will continue to work with
the Secretariat to address those challenges, and I am
grateful for the support of the Council in those matters.

Going forward, it is my hope that the efforts of
CENCO, with the support of countries of the region, in
particular the Republic of Angola and the Republic of
Congo, will eventually broker a rapprochement between
the presidential majority and the Rassemblement de
l'opposition. Such a rapprochement would contribute
to averting violence on 19 December and in the period
immediately following, and in the medium term also
contribute to a peaceful transition process required
for a credible electoral process. I would therefore like
to encourage the members of the Council to reinforce
the message that it conveyed to the Congolese political
actors during their visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo last month, namely, that they remain
primarily responsible and accountable for the peace
and stability of their country. I hope that the Council
might also express its appreciation for the efforts of
CENCO to facilitate a detente between the Government
and the Rassemblement.

It is also important for the Council to urge the
Prime Minister-designate, Mr. Samy Badibanga, to
finalize his commitments with all stakeholders in
order to form an inclusive transitional Government to
promote a spirit of reconciliation and lead the country
through a peaceful and stable transition period.

Iwould like to conclude by highlighting the fact that,
in this period of political uncertainty, the deteriorating
economic situation is also having an adverse impact
on the stability of the country. Socioeconomic factors
constitute an important potential trigger for violence
during this period. I would therefore like to echo the
Prime Minister-designate's personal appeal to me, when
I met with him on 1 December, and his request for the
international community's support as his Government
intends to re-engage international financial institutions
in that regard.

Finally, we must be cautious that the focus on
political events in Kinshasa and our preparations to
mitigate election-related violence do not distract us
from our operations against armed groups in the eastern
part of the country. The situation in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains cause for concern and
could well be exacerbated by armed groups and criminal
networks capitalizing on the political uncertainty at the
national level, thereby compounding the risks faced
by the civilian population. The spill-over effect of the
ongoing conflict in South Sudan, the growing number
of South Sudanese refugees arriving in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the presence of armed actors
along the border between South Sudan the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are also of increasing concern.
We must continue to monitor those developments
very closely. MONUSCO will therefore continue in a
determined manner in its coordinated operations with
the Congolese Armed Forces against armed groups to
ensure the protection of civilians in the eastern part of
the country and with the Congolese police to strengthen
the rule of law.

On regional matters that impact the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, I will also continue my close
coordination and collaboration with Special Envoy
Djinnit in our diplomatic efforts at regional level.

