Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): We welcome your
decision, Mr. President, to convene this open meeting.
The high level of participation and interest in this
debate confirms the wisdom of having such an open
discussion.

Our stated purpose here is to discuss the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH). As is well
known, it expired on 21 June 2002, and it has since
been extended by technical rollovers. There is no
question that UNMIBH performs a valuable function
and that its mandate ought to be renewed. But, as is
also well known, UNMIBH's fate has become
entangled in a more fundamental and controversial
debate over exemption from extra-national judicial
processes for United Nations peacekeepers. The
Security Council has been at an impasse over this
broader question, not over the question of extending
UNMIBH's mandate.

This dilemma is acute because the arguments
advanced by both sides in this debate cannot be
dismissed as being without merit. Article 16 of the
International Criminal Court Statute (ICC) provides as
follows:

"No investigation or prosecution may be
commenced or proceeded with under this Statute
for a period of 12 months after the Security
Council, in a resolution adopted under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, has
requested the Court to that effect; that request
may be renewed by the Council under the same
conditions."

It has now been proposed that article 16 be
indefinitely and automatically renewed. It has also
been argued that it is within the Security Council's
authority to do so. Article 103 of the Charter provides
for Charter obligations to prevail in the event of a
conflict between Charter obligations and other
international obligations. The question here is whether
it is desirable for the Council to take such action. We
note that this question of desirability of Council action
has indeed been addressed by several speakers in the
debate today.

Singapore has not yet acceded to the ICC Statute,
but, as a small State, it is in our fundamental interests
to exist in a rule-based international order. We are,
therefore, concerned that the Security Council does
nothing to undermine the viability and the integrity of
the multilateral legal framework. As a small State, we
are equally concerned with the credibility of global
institutions like the United Nations. We recognize the
importance of removing obstacles to the deployment of
peacekeepers in order to ensure that the Security
Council can respond effectively to threats to
international peace and security. The Council's
effectiveness will be severely damaged if its
peacekeeping functions are jeopardized.

It is axiomatic that the United Nations can only
be as effective as its Members allow it to be. The
configuration of international power has changed
drastically since the Charter was drafted. It is a reality
that the United States deploys disproportionate
strategic weight in the post-cold-war world. This is a
reality that we cannot brush aside. The principles
engaged by this issue are important, but it is equally
important to factor in the United States contribution to
peacekeeping. As the representative of Denmark,
speaking on behalf of the European Union earlier, said:

"Let me stress that the European Union
attaches great importance to the continued and
major contribution of the United States to
peacekeeping missions around the world."

The international community's interest in
maintaining the integrity of the multilateral legal
framework must be balanced against what is politically
practical under the circumstances and by what will
serve the larger political interests of the international
community. As this debate in the Security Council has
unfolded over the past few weeks - and there have
been many, many discussions on the subject - my
delegation has been encouraged by a significant change
of approach.

Instead of insisting on stock ideological positions
that make compromise impossible, there has been an
effort to temper principle with prudence and to seek
pragmatic solutions. This does not make the dilemma
any less acute, but it does point in the direction in
which the political compromise can be sought. By their
very nature, political compromises are never perfect,
but we live in an imperfect world. Our duty is to find
practical and workable solutions to ensure that the
good work done by UNMIBH is not unravelled and
that the future of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the broader interest of the international community
are not jeopardized.

Finally, we note that the United States is trying to
seek a solution within the ICC framework through
article 16 of the ICC Statute. The first operative
paragraph of the latest United States proposal states:

"Requests, consistent with the provisions of
article 16 of the Rome Statute, that the ICC for a
12-month period shall not commence or proceed
with any investigations or prosecutions".

Article 16 is also the basis of the proposals tabled
by France and the United Kingdom, the thrust of which
we have supported. We believe that, with creative
drafting, there is hope for consensus to be built around
article 16.
