Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Mr. President, for your leadership, as well
as the Security Council Affairs Division, which made
this historic mission possible.

I will now present the report on behalf of the
delegations of Chile and Luxembourg, which co-led
The Hague component of the Security Council mission.

On Monday, 11 August, members of the Security
Council held a meeting at the Peace Palace, The Hague,
where they exchanged ideas with Judge Peter Tomka,
President of the International Court of Justice, and
Judges Christopher Greenwood, Joan E. Donoghue,
Giorgio Gaja and Julia Sebutinde, in addition to the
Registrar of the Court, Mr. Philippe Couvreur. The
purpose of the meeting was to express the Security
Council's support for the work of the International
Court of Justice and to receive updates on its cases
and other developments. Chile, which co-chaired the
meeting, appreciated the opportunity to have an active
interaction between the members of the two major
organs.

The President of the International Court of Justice
welcomed the visit and noted that the Court supported
the work of the Security Council through international
law, referring to the current and historical development
of cases that have been under the Court's consideration.
He stressed that, in addition to traditional topics such
as sovereignty and matters of border delimitation, the
International Court of Justice had devoted itself to
addressing emerging issues.

The discussion included the issue of the recognition
by Member States of the compulsory jurisdiction of the
Court and the execution of its judgments, regarding
which the Court's interlocutors confirmed that most of
the judgments had immediate effect. They also cited
examples ofrecent successful executions. Some Council
members were interested in the relationship between
the Court and other international tribunals, such as
the International Criminal Court and the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea. Others referred to the
International Court of Justice's advisory functions.

The members of the Security Council reiterated
their support for the work of the International Court
of Justice and noted the importance of continued
cooperation by conducting similar exercises, the next
meeting of which could be held in New York.

The members of the Security Council the held
a meeting with judges and representatives of the
international criminal tribunals and courts at The
Hague established under a Security Council mandate
or with its support. The purpose of the meeting was
to reaffirm the relationship of the Security Council
with those tribunals and to receive first-hand, updated
information on their activities. Chile, as co-Chair of
that meeting, highlighted the work of the tribunals
that had contributed to developing a specific area
of international criminal law and the fight against
impunity.

The President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia said that the
creation of special courts represented a commitment
on the part of the Security Council with international
justice. The President also referred to the Tribunal's
completion strategy for its cases. Meanwhile, the
President of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon noted
that his work was related to strengthening the rule of
law and the fight against terrorism from the perspective
of international justice. With regard to the Residual
Special Court for Sierra Leone, the interlocutors
discussed current challenges. The issue of funding the
courts was addressed, and views were exchanged with
regard to the tribunals' independence. The members of
the Security Council and judges and representatives
of the tribunals welcomed the prospect of continuing
mutual cooperation.

With regard to the meeting with the International
Criminal Court, the members of the Security Council
had an exchange of views with Judge Sang-Hyun
Song, President of the International Criminal Court,
Mr. James Stewart, Deputy Prosecutor ofthe Court, and
Mr. Herman von Hebel, Secretary of the Court, as well
as with the Chief of Staff of the President and the Head
of the Jurisdiction, Complementarity and Cooperation
Division. The purpose of the meeting was to reaffirm
the relationship between the Security Council and the
International Criminal Court, to receive an updated
report on its work and to look into the interaction
between the Security Council and the Court. President
Song highlighted the contribution of the International
Criminal Court to the fight against impunity and the
prevention of mass atrocities. He said that the Security
Council could use its unique prestige to support the
Court and the international system of justice.

The three interlocutors of the Court focused
their observations on various suggestions for closer
cooperation between the Security Council and the
International Criminal Court. They stressed the
importance of expanding communication between the
two organs, in particular when the Security Council
addresses situations in which the Court was conducting
a preliminary examination. They also said it would
be useful to involve the Court in the thematic debates
of the Council, especially when it considered the
issue of sexual violence in conflict orthat of children
in armed conflict. Improving communication with
regard to sanctions and situations in countries could
lead to greater synergies than currently exist between
the Security Council and the Court. The Court
interlocutors stressed the need for effective support for
the implementation of Council resolutions that refer
situations to the International Criminal Court. It is
clear that the Court depends upon the cooperation of
Member States.

The Court's interlocutors expressed their satisfaction
with the support to international justice and to the
work of the Court, included in the mandates given by
the Security Council to missions, such as the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic.

Finally, they welcomed any Council initiative
to support requests for cooperation with the Court.
It was pointed out that the Court had sent various
communications to the Council with regard to verifying
Member States' lack of cooperation, all relating to the
situation in Darfur.

The members of the Security Council had an
exchange of views with the Deputy Director-General,
accompanied by the Chief of Staff of the Director-
General of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and Mr. Malik Azhar
Ellahi, Political Adviser of the Director-General and
head of the fact-finding mission in Syria on the alleged
use toxic chemicals, reportedly chlorine. The aim
of the meeting was to thank the Security Council for
the close cooperation between the United Nations and
the OPCW. An example of such cooperation was the
joint mission OPCW-United Nations established to
implement resolution 2118 (2013) and so that the Council
could receive updated information on the progress in
eliminating the chemical weapons programme of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

The Deputy Director-General of the OPCW
thanked the Council for its congratulations and gave
an updated report on the removal and destruction of
chemical weapons in Syria. In response to questions
raised by members of the Council on the deadline for
the destruction of the 12 facilities for the production of
chemical weapons, the interlocutors from OPCW stated
that the destruction would be completed by the first
quarter of 2015, but it was still a complex operation.
Much remained to be done, and the Director-General
of the OPCW would continue to provide updated
information on that work in his reports to the Security
Council. The support of the United Nations continued
to be important to manage security matters.
The Deputy Director-General stressed that there
were many lessons to be learned from the joint mission
of the OPCW and the United Nations. The OPCW
fact-finding mission in Syria on the alleged use toxic
chemicals, reportedly chlorine, is continuing and a
report was expected shortly, while the safety of mission
staff remain the highest priority.

The Deputy Director-General recalled the clear
mandate given to the OPCW in Syria: to guarantee the
full destruction of chemical weapons, nothing more,
nothing less. In addition, when it came to Syria, the
Organization was interested in achieving universal
adherence to the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction.

Finally, the members of the Security Council
warmly thanked the Government of the Kingdom of
the Netherlands for its generous hospitality and for
facilitating its first visit to The Hague. During the Visit,
the members of the Security Council discussed issues
of common interest with the Dutch Government. They
were received by the Secretary-General of the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, Her Excellency
Mrs. Renee Jones-Bos, and later by the Prime Minister,
His Excellency Mr. Mark Rutte, who thanked the
Security Council for its adoption of resolution 2166
(2014) following the downing of the Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-l7, in Ukraine.

In memory of the victims of the shootdown of
the Malaysia Airlines plane, and expressing their
condolences to the families of the victims, members of
the Security Council laid awreath at the commemorative
monument for Flight MH-l7 at Schiphol Airport before
leaving for Africa.

