Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Today is the last time
that Greece will participate, in its capacity as a non-
permanent member of the Security Council, in a
meeting on an issue of the utmost importance for my
country: Cyprus. I would therefore like to take this
opportunity to express my country's most heartfelt
appreciation, first of all, to the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) and to the
Department for Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
the Secretariat in general for all their hard work and
their contribution to maintaining stability on the island,
which is so necessary for the promotion of any
solution.

We also thank greatly all troop-contributing
countries for their continued presence. We all
understand very well the magnitude of the ever-
increasing global demands on United Nations
peacekeeping resources, and we are mindful of the
need to ensure that UNFICYP does not stay one day
more than is absolutely necessary. We sincerely hope
that that day will come very soon. In the meanwhile,
though, and in the absence of a comprehensive
2

settlement and the withdrawal of all occupation troops
from the island, UNFICYP is necessary, and the
contribution of the United Nations is highly
appreciated and, of course, never taken for granted.

Greece shows that appreciation in practical terms
as well, by providing, on a voluntary basis, a
substantial amount of money for UNFICYP. That
contribution and the one third share of the expenses
contributed by the Government of Cyprus amount to
50 per cent of the Force's yearly budget.

The Cyprus problem is a long-standing and
complicated one. But, despite many, and quite
intensive, efforts over the years, unfortunately, 32
years after the Turkish military invasion, its resolution
remains elusive. We remain hopeful that the lessons
drawn from our past efforts will not be in vain and that,
instead, they will guide us - all of us - in the search
for a functional and workable solution acceptable to all
and desired by all. This will lead to a better future for
all of the citizens of Cyprus and will contribute to
peace and stability in the entire region.

A Cypriot-owned solution through a Cypriot-
owned process with the invaluable assistance of the
international community: that is the way forward. We
know it is a difficult way. There might be setbacks, and
patience will be a quality in great demand. But we
should always bear in mind that no step is too small if
it is in the right, forward-looking, direction. Step-by-
step approaches could lead to major breakthroughs.

We all agree that the present status quo is
unsustainable. The two communities have also agreed
on the basic form of the reunification of the island: a
bi-zonal, bi-communal federation. We now have to
build upon what has already been achieved. The 8 July
agreement gives us a platform on which to work
carefully to prepare the ground so that we can achieve
the necessary progress that will allow the entire
political process to move forward and lead to a
comprehensive, permanent and durable settlement: a
settlement that respects international legality and
conforms with both the relevant United Nations
resolutions and the norms and principles of the
European Union.

In closing, I would like to thank the members of
the Security Council for their close cooperation and
their understanding of the difficulties of a particularly
complex problem - especially, if one takes into
account the sensitivities involved in this particular
06-66340
case, which has deep roots in history and is tightly
interwoven with larger geopolitical realities.

