Mr. Fiallo Billini Portorreal (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): The Dominican
Republic is grateful for the convening of this meeting
and thanks Ms. Muller for her valuable briefing. We
welcome the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation.

We are meeting once again to discuss the
humanitarian crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic. The
challenges remain enormous: the situation in Al-Hol
camp, where more than 73,000 people - the vast
majority of whom are women and children - remains
precarious; and the fact that tens of thousands of
people are still in Rukban camp awaiting humanitarian
assistance is worrisome, especially when we are
informed that permission for the entry of a new convoy
has been denied. The remaining needs in the south
of the country and the considerable challenges facing
the political process confirm that the Council has a
responsibility now more than ever to make tangible
progress if it really wants to bring an end to the crisis
in Syria.

The Dominican Republic remains deeply concerned
about the increasing military escalation in recent weeks
in north-western Syria, and in particular the impact it
has had on civilians. The details that Ms. Muller shared
with us today confirm that there is every reason for us
to be absolutely concerned and for us to collectively
seek solutions to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law, the protection of civilians and
access to assistance for people who are already facing
extremely precarious conditions. According to reports,
between February and May of this year, it is estimated
that 300,000 people have been internally displaced by
this new wave of violence. Of those people, 239,000
have been displaced in the past three weeks alone, of
whom an estimated 70,000 are children.
Many humanitarian responders make up part of
that alarming number of internally displaced persons.
The need to protect all of them is urgent and requires
our utmost effort and determination. With such a
massive influx of people, camps for displaced persons
and refugees are already overcrowded, and many have
no choice but to take shelter in open camps without any
type of protection. We must ask ourselves: how much
more are those people expected to endure? For many
of them, this is not the first time they have had to flee
violence, and once again, they find themselves in the
same situation of uncertainty and desperation.

Some reports refer to over 20 attacks on health
facilities, including hospitals and ambulances, claiming
the lives of medical workers. The situation has forced
the interruption of medical services to hundreds of
thousands ofpeople, mainly women and children. In the
same area, an estimated 250,000 school-age children
have been affected. If that is not a catastrophe, what is?

We reiterate once again that, if a large-scale
confrontation were to occur, we would be faced with the
most serious humanitarian crisis in the entire history of
the conflict in Syria. Mr. Lowcock said so just a few
weeks ago (see S/PV.8527) when he forced us to put
ourselves in the shoes of parents faced with the terrible
decision of whether or not to take their children for
medical care, because if they did, their children might
lose their lives in an attack.

As long as the norms of international humanitarian
law are not respected and attacks on civilian
infrastructure, in particular health facilities, continue
and humanitarian access is at risk, the fate of the
3 million people living in the affected areas is simply
uncertain. It is therefore essential that the renewed
ceasefire commitment reached between the Republic of
Turkey and the Russian Federation be maintained and
tangible steps be taken to facilitate access to the most
vulnerable. The protection of displaced people who
still have not found refuge must be a priority, as well
as that of the millions who decide to stay in the area,
primarily because they do not have the means to move
to safer places.

It would be very shameful if we were to return to
the Council next month to deliver statements on the
importance of respecting international humanitarian
law when statistics and reports continue to pile up on
attacks on civilian areas and civilian infrastructure.
We must uphold our urgent responsibility to protect the
most vulnerable and avoid greater suffering for them at
all costs.
