Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Mr. President, we
thank you for having organized this Security Council
open debate on piracy. This is a timely and important
initiative. The concept paper (S/2012/8l4, annex)
prepared by the Indian delegation and the presidential
statement (S/PRST/20l2/24) address piracy in a holistic
manner, enrich our discourse and strengthen the
decision-making process.

We also thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson for his briefing.

In recent times, we have witnessed a resurgence of
piracy. Pirates, once fabled in chronicles of adventure
and crime, have re-emerged to haunt maritime traffic
and international commerce. As the ranks of pirates
swelled, the threat to the peace and stability and
economies of coastal areas and hinterlands increased
proportionately. The collusion of pirates with crime
syndicates, drug traffickers and human smugglers
grew stronger. In the old days, piracy flourished around
archipelagoes primarily due to the failure or laxity of
littoral Powers in patrolling trade routes. As the naval
power and justice sectors of nation States developed,
incidents of piracy decreased markedly.

Unlike medieval piracy, which was a global
phenomenon, modern-day piracy is localized mostly
off the coast of Somalia and the Gulf of Aden. An
inadequate governance structure, a lack of economic
opportunities and the exploitation of coastal areas
in Somalia are major contributory factors. In other
regions, such as the Gulf of Guinea, it can be attributed
to the proliferation of armed groups and the inadequate
preparedness ofmerchant ships. Elsewhere, piracy is an
incident, not a pattern.

After a surge in the past decade, it is gratifying to
note that incidents of piracy are not on the rise annually.
The Secretary-General's latest report on piracy
(S/2012/783) recorded a decline in pirate attacks and
hijackings in 2012. The menace has only diminished;
it has not yet been eradicated. The serious threats
posed by pirates persist. Moreover, we are still dealing
with the consequences of piracy, armed robbery and
hostage-taking at sea. We have to take steps to ensure
the safety and security of seafarers.

We strongly condemn acts of hostage-taking and
violence against hostages. As we speak, pirates hold
more than 200 seafarers hostage. Regrettably, the
plight of hostages falls through the cracks of politics
and commerce and of the responsibilities of the public
and private sectors. What is more, we lack unanimity of
views on ways and means to address the issue.

Hostages are a professional hazard for seafarers.
The issue merits our serious attention. The Security
Council is right in designating the welfare of seafarers,
in captivity and after release, as a priority. In that
context, we welcome the proposal of the hostage-support
programme developed by the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime. We hope that the proposal will
crystallize into a concrete action programme that can
be supported by the international community and
shipping organizations.

Pakistan is of the view that the eradication of piracy
requires a concerted and integrated approach that
encompasses the political, security and justice sector
tracks. We believe that such an integrated approach
must be based on four pillars.

First, we must address the root causes of the piracy
related to the political and security situation in Somalia.
Building the State capacity of the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia and helping it in its economic
reconstruction is imperative to reducing the proclivity
of some segments of the local population to be lured
to piracy. Piracy should be defeated from inside and
outside Somalia. In that regard, adding the maritime
component to the African Union Mission in Somalia is
critical.

We welcome the formation of the Somali
Government and the progress made in consolidating
State institutions in Somalia following the successful
end of the transition period. We are confident that the
new Government will develop a comprehensive national
counter-piracy strategy and work with neighbouring
and regional States for its success.

Secondly, pirates must be deterred by active
naval deployment. The operational preparedness of
naval forces to undertake patrolling and surveillance
is essential. International naval cooperation off the
Horn of Africa, characterized by joint operations, is a
significant deterrence and a leading factor in reducing
piracy. For its part, Pakistan is contributing to a number
of counter-piracy operations. We are participating in the
two naval Combined Task Force (CTF) operations 150,
for countering piracy in the Gulf of Aden, and 151, for
countering piracy off the Coast of Somalia. Pakistan
will reassume the command of CTF 151 next month.

Thirdly, judicial measures and justice sector

development are essential elements of an integrated
approach against piracy. In view of Somalia's unique
location, tackling piracy has become a shared obligation
of the States of the region. Resolution 2015 (2011)
decides to consider the establishment of regional courts
with international support in order to build capacity
for the prosecution of pirates. Countries of the region,
such as Seychelles, Kenya, Mauritius and Tanzania,
are providing critical support for prosecuting pirates.
Those countries should not be left alone in their efforts.
Their views must be given due weight.

International assistance for the judicial sector of
the countries of the region is important. An effective
post-trial transfer framework must be in place for the
regional prosecution centre to be effective. We value the
Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of States Countering
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and its target-oriented
projects in the justice sector. The prosecution and
imprisonment of pirates must be accompanied by
disrupting the systems and networks of the financial
flows generated from piracy.

Fourthly, mercantile shipping companies need
to be cognizant of piracy. Shipping companies have
a responsibility to follow the guidelines for best
management practices and use the adequate protective
measures applicable under the law. In that regard,
we appreciate the role of the International Maritime
Organization. The presence of privately contracted
armed security personnel (PCASP) aboard merchant
ships is a matter that requires further clarity. Pakistan,
in principle, does not object to the presence of PCASP,
subject to prior indication on a case-to-case basis. It
is important that ships notify coastal States about the
presence of PCASP in advance and in a transparent
manner. Elaborate standard operating procedures
should be in place so that the security of coastal States,
at sea and on land, is not compromised. On a broader
plane, all legal and administrative questions associated
with PCASP need to be addressed, with a view to
developing an acceptable regulatory framework.

Pakistan is a willing and committed partner
of the international community in its fight against
piracy. In our national capacity, the Pakistan navy is
vigilant against piracy. Last year, Pakistan organized
the AMAN-ll multinational naval exercise, with the
objective of promoting cooperative and collaborative
efforts to combat crime in the maritime domain. We
are maintaining active surveillance and patrols to
pre-empt any piracy or armed robbery. Our territorial
and regional waters in the Arabian Sea are peaceful and
safe for maritime traffic.

On the legal front, we are amending domestic
legislation to further criminalize acts of piracy. The
draft territorial sea and maritime zone act is being
processed for parliamentary approval. No single country
can counter piracy by itself. We need a multilateral
effort. We need a cohesive United Nations role with
inter-agency cooperation.

Today's draft presidential statement and the
upcoming draft resolution demonstrate the resolve of the
Security Council to eliminate piracy. With the resolve
of the Council and the commitment of the international
community, we are confident that credible and effective
measures can be taken to rid the world of this scourge.

