Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
We are happy, Madam President, that you are with us
today. I am very much aware of the honour paid to us
by your presence in the Chair for this important debate.
I also thank Mr. Olara Otunnu and Ms. Carol Bellamy
for their briefings, which have enlightened our debate.
After the video that we saw at the beginning of this
meeting, it is obviously difficult to resort to mere
platitudes. We must at least try to live up to the strong,
simple messages that those bruised children addressed
to us. The suffering of a child caught in the maelstrom
of a war waged by adults is always unacceptable. But
the fact that that child could be exploited or used in
war and that this suffering could go on in a disturbing
climate of impunity is, of course, repugnant. It is
indeed a scandal that the international community must
not tolerate.

That, I think, is the meaning of United Nations
initiatives taken in recent years in close cooperation
with non-governmental organizations, which in this
and other areas have played a pioneering role. I
welcome this unanimous commitment of the Security
Council, which enables us to go ever further in
condemning and fighting impunity.

This mobilization goes beyond the Security
Council. It was thanks to the commitment of the entire
international community that we were able to adopt the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, which prohibits the recruitment of minors,
and to include in the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court specific provisions on the recruitment
and use of child soldiers, which are defined as war
crimes.

The two latest resolutions adopted by the Council
on this item take note of and welcome those normative
steps and establish the Council's own follow-up
mechanism. As we all know, resolution 1379 (2001),
adopted on 20 November 2001, the anniversary of the
adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
created a black list of parties to armed conflict that
recruit or use child soldiers in violation of their
international obligations. Resolution 1460 (2003) of
January 2002 continues that list and extends its scope.
It opens the way to targeted sanctions against the
perpetrators. At a more operational level, closely
connected to the work of the Council, it provides for a
more systematic inclusion of the protection of children
in the planning of peacekeeping or peace-building
operations.

In brief, today we have a full arsenal of norms.
And I do not think we need to be ashamed of our
record. But the fact that, despite the progress on
regulations and despite the political pressure of
repeated denunciation and systematic naming and
shaming, the reality on the ground remains very grim.
This morning, Mr. Otunnu and Ms. Bellamy recalled
for the Council this reality and its statistics. It is as if
all those who violated international laws on the
protection of children in armed conflict were saying to
themselves, "In the end, New York is a long way
away", and that the decisions made in our glass tower
hardly concern them.

I do not think we can accept that state of affairs.
The question now is clear: what can we do to make
progress in the implementation of the norms at our
disposal? There are many proposals on the table,
including the proposals of the Secretary-General in his
fourth report to the Council. Here again I welcome the
role played by my friend Olara Otunnu and his team, as
well as the role of Carol Bellamy and her colleagues in
UNICEF. Their experience on the ground is
indispensable. We also have the proposals of the non-
governmental organizations with which we met last
week and which shared with us their analyses and
suggestions, which I found very interesting.

Those proposals are many and varied, and - I
repeat - they are unanimous on one point: today we
do not need new norms; we need action. We need
implementation, particularly concrete implementation
on the ground. That message has been understood by
my delegation, which last week submitted a draft
resolution to our partners on the Security Council.
Negotiations should get under way tomorrow,
following our debate, and I hope that we shall be able
to adopt the text, under the enlightened presidency of
Ambassador Mufioz, by the end of January.

I should like to say a few words about what are
essentially our objectives in submitting this text. First
of all, as I just emphasized, we must establish a proper
monitoring mechanism on the ground that will enable
us to assess very precisely progress with regard to
every armed group that the report of the Secretary-
General lists as recruiting and using child soldiers.
Such a mechanism, which will involve the competent
United Nations actors already present on the ground,
will enable the Council, on the basis of precise, reliable
information, to decide on actions to be taken.

Then - and this is an important point, since the
sufferings endured by children in armed conflicts are
not limited to their enrolment in armed forces - we
must take into account all the grave violations of
children's rights in conflict areas. Such violations also
include kidnapping, mutilation, sexual violence and
attacks against schools and hospitals.

Another element to which we attach particular
importance relates to encouraging action by regional
organizations to protect children in armed conflicts.
Two recent initiatives that we think should be
welcomed are that of the Economic Community of
West African States, which, in Dakar in September
2003, created a peer review mechanism, and that of the
European Union, which in December adopted
guidelines on children in armed conflict. My colleague
the representative of Ireland, who will speak later on
behalf of the European Union, will touch upon that
important initiative. Needless to say, I totally support
his statement.

No member of the Council, I believe, can fail to
subscribe to those objectives, even if there may be
some differences regarding their practical
implementation. Therefore, we hope that it will be
possible to swiftly reach agreement on the draft
resolution by the end of the month.
