I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons and Ambassador Djani for their briefings. I commend the work carried out under their leadership by the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). I also listened carefully to the statement of the Afghan Youth Representative. And I welcome the Permanent Representatives of Afghanistan and Iran at today's meeting. The peace and reconciliation process in Afghanistan has entered a period that is critical to its future. China welcomes the first intra-Afghan talks, launched in Doha on 12 September, and congratulates the two parties on reaching an agreement a few days ago on the rules and procedures for the negotiations. The next stage of negotiations will include substantive discussions with a high level of difficulty. Both sides need to demonstrate more political wisdom and determination, and the international community needs to pay more attention and increase its input. History has repeatedly shown that the Afghan issue can be resolved only through political means, and that the use of force will only plunge the country deeper into war. We hope that the two sides will consolidate the positive momentum, maintain a constructive attitude and persevere in the talks, while striving to achieve results in support of peace. We also hope that they will find an effective political solution to the Afghan issue at an early date. China believes that Afghan's future arrangements should be broadly representative and inclusive so that all Afghan parties, ethnic groups and religious sects can participate equally and share State power. The international community should fully respect the will of the Afghan people and ensure that the negotiation process is Afghan-led and Afghan-owned. No external force should impose its will on others or seek personal gain. The Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) has played an important role in promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan. China supports the Committee's continued performance of its duties, as authorized by the Security Council, to help the peace and reconciliation process in Afghanistan. China supports the renewal of the mandate of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015), concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities. Currently, the level of violence in Afghanistan remains relentless. According to the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1182), the number of violent incidents in October this year was the highest since 2007. The international community should continue to support the Afghan security forces in strengthening capacity-building, combating terrorism, protecting civilians and improving the security situation. China calls on all parties in Afghanistan to respond positively to the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and immediately stop the hostilities and violence. Given the current security situation, the withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan should be orderly and responsible in order to avoid leaving a security vacuum to the detriment of the national interests of Afghanistan and the countries of the region. Just now in her briefing, the Afghan Youth Representative condemned the various criminal acts committed by foreign troops in Afghanistan, which reflected the aspirations of the Afghan people and public opinion. All such crimes should be thoroughly investigated. All perpetrators should be brought to justice. The international community should ensure justice for the Afghan people. Development is the key to resolving all issues. Achieving sustainable peace in Afghanistan will not be possible without economic and social development. At the recent Geneva Conference on Afghanistan, President Ghani emphasized the importance of regional cooperation and connectivity to the development of Afghanistan. The international community should help the country to implement the Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework for 2021-2025 and resolve a number of difficult issues, such as poverty, refugees and drugs. We should support Afghanistan in participating in regional cooperation and connectivity in order to help the country exploit its geographical advantage, eradicate poverty and achieve stability and prosperity as soon as possible. China has always actively supported Afghanistan's economic and social development and helped the country to strengthen its connectivity and economic and trade cooperation with countries of the region under the Belt and Road Initiative. On 9 December, China, Afghanistan and the five Central Asian countries held a video- teleconference at the level of deputy foreign ministers on trade and connectivity to build a new platform for regional cooperation, which will help to promote regional economic recovery and maintain regional stability and prosperity. China appreciates UNAMA's initiative to establish a working group with the participation of the Embassies of six neighbouring countries in Afghanistan so as to promote regional cooperation and connectivity. That is in line with China's thinking. We look forward to concrete results from the working group and are ready to work with all parties concerned to contribute to Afghanistan's socioeconomic development and the improvement of people's livelihoods. Just now the Afghan Youth Representative talked about the situation and aspirations of young people in Afghanistan. China attaches great importance to the unique position of young people in Afghanistan, expresses its sympathy for their suffering and calls for them to play a greater role in the country's peace and reconciliation process and in its economic and social development. China has long supported the development of Afghan young people, helping them to tackle health, education, employment and other issues. In recent years, with the assistance of China, a number of projects were successively launched, such as the Afghanistan Technical Vocational Institute and Kabul University's integrated teaching complex. Since 2017, nearly 200 Afghan children with congenital heart disease have received treatment in China and been provided with a full set of post-operative rehabilitation examinations, which received wide acclaim in Afghan society. Since the outbreak of the coronavirus disease, China has provided Afghanistan with several shipments of anti-pandemic supplies and dispatched a medical expert team. We will continue to provide more help to enable the Afghan people, including young people, to finally overcome the virus. China will continue to support, and act as a mediator and facilitator of, the Afghan peace and reconciliation process. We are willing to provide a platform for intra-Afghan dialogue and continue to work closely with all parties through the Shanghai Cooperation Organization-Afghanistan Contact Group and the China- Afghanistan-Pakistan trilateral dialogue. We will continue to support UNAMA's important role in the country and work with the international community to make greater contributions to Afghanistan's peace, reconciliation, development and prosperity.
