Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I should like to
associate my delegation with the European Union
statement to be delivered later in this debate by the
representative of Ireland.

This open debate marks a further stage in what
has been an unprecedented effort to discuss and consult
with the United Nations membership with respect to
the important draft resolution under discussion. My
delegation has been encouraged by the constructive
discussions held so far with both members and non-
members of the Council, by the helpful ideas and
suggestions received, by the opportunity to discuss
and, I hope, allay concerns and by the almost universal
acceptance that we must act now to tackle the threat of
weapons of mass destruction falling into the hands of
terrorists and other non-State actors. We look forward
to listening carefully to the views that will be
expressed today.

The recognition that we need rapidly and
effectively to deal with this threat could not be more
justified. Osama bin Laden has called it a "duty" to
obtain nuclear weapons. His networks have
experimented with chemicals and toxins for use in
attacks. In Afghanistan, Al Qaeda trained its recruits in
the use of poisons and chemicals, while manuals for
the manufacture of deadly substances were widely
distributed. The sarin attack on the Tokyo metro and
the anthrax attacks in the United States in the autumn
of 2001 showed that there are individuals capable of
and willing to use these terrible indiscriminate
weapons, and showed the seriousness of even a
relatively small attack.

It is clear that in the face of this urgent threat
only the Security Council can act with the necessary
speed and authority. My delegation believes that, in
such circumstances, not only is it appropriate for the
Security Council to act, it is imperative that it do so.
The Council has a responsibility to respond to this
threat to international peace and security.

It is in that context that the United Kingdom and
the other sponsors proposed the draft resolution
currently before the Council, on which I would like to
make just three points.

My first point is that the draft resolution does not
negate the importance of disarmament or of the
multilateral treaty framework. In response to the
concerns of many delegations, the draft resolution now
makes clear the importance of arms control and
disarmament obligations. We agree with others here
that progress on these issues is important and should be
pursued in the appropriate forums. At the same time,
however, the sponsors have always been clear that the
focus of this draft resolution must remain the problem
it is trying to tackle: the issue of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and non-State
actors. Bringing in too many additional issues would,
to be frank, risk deadlock. It would also risk treading
on the toes of competent bodies such as the First
Committee of the General Assembly, the Conference
on Disarmament and the review process of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
The draft resolution does not undermine in any way the
importance of disarmament; it is just that disarmament
is not its primary focus.

Nor does the draft resolution negate the
importance of existing multilateral arrangements. The
draft resolution in fact promotes the universalization
and strengthening of multilateral treaties and makes
clear that it will not conflict with those regimes. It does
not rule out future arrangements to deal with the
current gap in the multilateral framework. But the draft
resolution and the urgently needed implementation of it
should not be held hostage to the uncertainty over how
long such arrangements would take to negotiate, how
comprehensive they would be or whether agreement
would be reached at all.

My second point is that the draft resolution is not
about coercion or enforcement. Many delegations have
raised questions about the Chapter-VII legal base for
the draft resolution and about what that implies. In our
view, this legal base simply reflects the fact that we are
dealing with what is clearly a threat to international
peace and security, and we are therefore operating
under the part of the Charter that covers international
peace and security. It would send an odd message if the
Security Council were to act on any other basis.

A Chapter VII legal base also underlines the
seriousness of our response to this issue and the
binding nature of the requirement to establish sensible
WMD controls. It will give States the increased
authority they need to introduce robust domestic
measures, and it leaves it up to Member States to
decide exactly what steps they need to take.

What this draft resolution does not do is authorize
enforcement action against States or against non-State
actors in the territory of another country. The draft
resolution makes clear that it will be the Council that
will monitor its implementation. Any enforcement
action would require a new Council decision.

My third point is that the draft resolution is
instead about a cooperative approach to tackling the
threat of weapons of mass destruction and non-State
actors. The draft resolution, for example, explicitly
encourages technical assistance to countries that may
need held in putting in place sensible controls on
access to WMD materials. It also sets up a Council
subcommittee. As is usually the case, we expect that
that committee will determine its exact mandate, acting
under consensus and involving all Council members.
We see the committee as the heart of a cooperative
approach, allowing countries to compare experience, to
establish best practice and to identify areas where
technical assistance is needed.

We believe the committee would need to draw on
appropriate expertise and to consult closely with the
wider United Nations membership. We also believe
that, given the time Member States would need to
implement the draft resolution, the committee should
have a two-year mandate to allow for a meaningful
cooperative process.

We do not, however, see it as necessary for
legislation or executive action to have been completed
by Member States before they first report, as called for
by the draft resolution. Indeed, Member States that
already have strong laws and controls in this area may
not need to take additional measures.

In conclusion, this draft resolution is all about
effective multilateral action to deal with a real threat to
international peace and security. The cooperative action
and inclusive measures it envisages can help prevent a
tragedy. We should not have to wait for such a tragedy
in order to act. The United Kingdom hopes that
members of the Council will embrace this collaborative
multilateral action.

