Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, for his briefing today and for all of his
sterling work in such challenging circumstances.

The United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2268 (2016), endorsing the
agreement on a cessation of hostilities in Syria. I want
to join others in welcoming the cooperation between
the United States and Russia that made this agreement
possible. If implemented fully, this agreement could be
the most significant step forward in the past five years,
a step that brings us closer to an end to the violence
and one that brings the conclusion of this conflict into
sight, bringing about hope for a political transition.
I therefore welcome Special Envoy De Mistura's
decision to reconvene rapidly political negotiations on
transition, in Geneva on 7 March. It is vital that we
seize the impetus created by this agreement. But as
set out in the Secretary-General's report (S/20l6/152)
on the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015), there
are a number of actions still outstanding that need
to be taken forward to maximize the prospects for
successful negotiations.

First, the task force must agree a transparent
monitoring and verification process for the cessation
of hostilities, and, in the future, for a ceasefire.
Secondly, additional confidence-building measures
are still required to show the regime's commitment to
the political process. Those must include the release
of arbitrarily detained people, especially women and
children. Thirdly, we need to see a complete end to the
obstruction of medical supplies to besieged and hard-to-
reach areas. That practice is completely unacceptable.
As we heard in the briefing from Stephen O'Brien (see S/PV.7631) on Wednesday, there has been a significant
resumption of humanitarian aid access to besieged
areas, and that is welcome. But it is long-overdue, and
it is clear that there remain significant needs, including
reaching areas of eastern Ghuta. We must begin to see
that in the coming days.

There is so much more to do. Russia must turn
words into actions and use its unique influence on
the Al-Assad regime, its affiliated militias and other
backers to abide by this agreement. If they do, some
much-needed confidence will be brought to our hopes
for a political settlement; if they do not, we will falter
again and the spiral of violence will continue. We should
not forget that 1,380 civilians have been killed and 5,789
injured by Russian and regime airstrikes since Russia
began its campaign in Syria, including attacks on at
least three camps for refugees and internally displaced
persons. For all uor optimism today, we must therefore
recognize that the cessation of hostilities is an overdue
milestone. Rather than dwell on our past failures, let us
now seize the momentum and see urgent progress aimed
at a political transition - away from Al-Assad - and
a Government that represents all Syrians. That is the
only way to end the longer-term conflict, and in doing
so allow us to defeat the Da'esh threat.

Finally, I would like to make clear the United
Kingdom's position that it is the Syrian High
Negotiations Commission that must represent the
Syrian opposition in formal negotiations in Geneva.
The Commission represents a broad sweep of the
opposition forces fighting in Syria against the tyranny
of Al-Assad. They deserve our wholehearted support,
which regrettably was not reflected in this resolution.
It is crucial now that all members of the international
community work in good faith to implement this
resolution and resolution 2254 (2015), alongside the
agreements reached in Munich. In doing so, we can
ensure that this finally is the year that the bloodshed in
Syria comes to an end.

