Mr. Celem (Turkey): Albania and its friendly people
have passed through very difficult times. These difficulties
were, to a great extent, the result of a painful process of
adaptation to a new political, social and economic order.
Peace, security and stability on the Balkan peninsula, of
which Turkey is a part, has become all the more critical in
view of the long ordeal of the breakup of Yugoslavia. We
viewed the crisis in Albania against that background. We
were convinced that ensuring internal peace and stability in
Albania was a prerequisite for the preservation of peace and
stability in the region. As a matter of fact, our contingent
in the multinational protection force was only a reflection
of Turkey's continuing interest in and commitment to
regional stability and international peacekeeping efforts.

As will be recalled, the initiative for finding an
effective solution to the problem emanated from the
political will of the Albanian leadership. It was the
Albanian Government which asked for the assistance of the
international community, and Member States and friends
and neighbours of Albania felt duty-bound to provide that
country with the necessary and firm support that enabled it
to move forward rapidly on the road to peace and stability.

This support was given through the multinational
protection force, within the legal framework drawn up in
resolutions 1101 (1997) and 1114 (1997). In this respect,
Italy deserves the appreciation of the world community for
the leadership role it has undertaken in this act of
international solidarity. Turkey was among the sponsors of
both of those resolutions. Those resolutions provided the
framework for an operation limited in purpose and
duration, but capable of meeting the requirements of the
mission. The operation itself acquired an ad hoc character
of its own. It was not a United Nations peacekeeping
effort in its classic meaning.
It is possible that, in the future, such a method could
be contemplated and employed with respect to other
contingencies. As a matter of fact, the arrangement
foreseen in resolution 1125 (1997) for the Central African
Republic could be considered another example of a new
form of peacekeeping operation. The peacekeeping effort
in Bosnia has also turned into a North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) peacekeeping operation with
similar features. We believe that the advantages and
disadvantages of such undertakings are worth closer
examination.

In any case, the operation in Albania was successful.
It enjoyed the full cooperation of the Albanian authorities
and particularly of the Albanian people. The Turkish
contingent fulfilled its task in a friendly and cooperative
atmosphere. Planning and coordination among the troop-
contributing States secured a smooth operation. It was
thus possible for the Albanian people to hold the
parliamentary elections that paved the way for the
resolution of the crisis. My Government welcomed the
elections as a first step in providing the basis for the
lasting solution of Albania's problems through democratic
means.

The multinational protection force was only one part
of a large scale international effort to help bring about
peace and stability to Albania and to assist it in resuming
its progress on the road to full political, economic and
social recovery. The contributions of other international
organizations should also be mentioned, especially the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) which, by providing the coordinating framework
for international assistance to Albania, has been
instrumental in the joint efforts for the containment and
elimination of the crisis. But the real work begins now.
Continued international support is necessary for lasting
stability and development in Albania.

The operation has effectively contributed to the
fulfilment of one of the main purposes enshrined in the
Charter of this Organization, the maintenance of peace
and security; it has also contributed to the stability of one
Member country, Albania. Now is the time for the
fulfilment of another main purpose: to achieve

 

international cooperation in solving Albania's economic,
social, cultural and humanitarian problems.

My Government will, as always, continue to support
Albania, with which we share close historical and cultural
bonds, both through bilateral arrangements, and by
assuming its part of the responsibilities in collective efforts
in international forums.

