Mr. Kamal (Pakistan): I do not intend to respond to
the statement that we have just heard, coming as it does
from a person who has neither de facto control, nor de
jure legitimacy within his own country. But it is,
unfortunately, full of inaccuracies, which may, somehow,
lead the Security Council to base its own decisions on
false information. It is that information which needs to be
put correctly on the record.

I made the statement that the Organization of the
Islamic Conference had decided to follow a "vacant seat"
approach with regard to Afghanistan. That formula was
used in the Jakarta meeting of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, and in the Islamabad meeting. Those
were not ambassadorial-level meetings; they were at the
ministerial level and above. It was at that level that the
Organization of the Islamic Conference decided not to
have anybody sitting in the Afghanistan seat at its
meetings.

A statement was made about Pakistan's involvement
in Afghanistan. We have said repeatedly that we have no
favourites in Afghanistan. We are convinced that the
Afghans themselves will be able to find peace and
security in their country only through a broad-based
dispensation. We know that those in this Chamber who

 

claim to represent Afghanistan do not have de jure
legitimacy. They were chosen as the result of a particular
formula evolved in Islamabad by which they were given
eight months, no more, to organize elections only. They did
not do it. At the end of the eight months - minority
Government that they were - they tried to hold on to their
seats, thinking that they could overrun the whole of
Afghanistan. That was a moral denial of the commitment
that they had given to their own Afghan colleagues.

It is their insistence on trying to run matters alone -
as a minority which, as is generally known, has the backing
of no more than 15 per cent of the population - that has
led to the situation in which Afghanistan finds itself today.
Pakistan is a neighbouring country of Afghanistan and I
agree with all the representatives of other neighbouring
countries who have spoken today and have expressed fear
about the fallout from the situation, the root cause of which
is the insistence of this particular Rabbani regime on
holding on to power, and its failure to honour commitments
solemnly made to colleagues and in the holiest of holies of
the Muslim world.

It is not in anger that I speak, because I cannot be
angry with people who have no legitimacy. But pain can be
caused even by a mosquito bite, and it is that pain to which
I am responding. We are here in the Security Council to try
to help find a solution to the problem of Afghanistan. It is
not an easy situation. We are faced with a country that is
ethnically divided. The formula with which we, as
outsiders, have tried to come forward, is that the country
requires a broad-based government. The United Nations has
subscribed to that formula. It is fundamental to the United
Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan. That is the formula
on which we need to go forward. In order to proceed on the
basis of that formula, it is essential for this body to hear all
the representatives of the Afghan people. It cannot decide
in isolation. That was the point that we made: it is
incumbent upon the Security Council, if it wants to find a
logical and legal solution that will be durable in
Afghanistan, to base such a solution on hearing the Afghan
people across the board, by any formula that may be
deemed fit - inside this Chamber, or outside it if
necessary. The parties must be heard; they must be heard
before conclusions are reached. The facile argument has
been made that to hear them would mean bypassing the
special representative. So why are we sitting here for this
debate? We do not need it: the special representative is
good enough. We all have respect for Mr. Norbert Holl.

But we are meeting here today so that we can
exchange views. And those views have to be based on
dialogue and a willingness to listen to all before deciding.

I do hope that the Security Council will prove itself to be
up to that task of listening to all the representatives of the
Afghan people by whatever formula it deems fit.

