Mr. Ney (Germany): Germany fully aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
the Czech Republic on behalf of the European Union.

Allow me to start by wishing you, Mr. President,
all the best in your new function as the Chairman of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. My
particular thanks also goes to France, as the outgoing
chair, for its important and crucial contribution during
the first formative years of the Working Group.

I would also like to extend my gratitude to the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict for their dedicated
engagement in taking this important issue forward.
Finally, allow me to thank the staff of UNICEF and all
other United Nations agencies participating in the
monitoring and reporting mechanism for their valuable
contributions.

Germany attaches great importance to the
promotion and protection of the rights of the child and,
in particular, to the situation of children in armed
conflict. I am proud to say that Germany is one of the
main donors in this field, both bilaterally and
multilaterally. We welcome the recent report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict

(S/2009/158) and fully endorse the recommendations
contained therein. At the same time, we are acutely
aware that the United Nations child protection
framework for children in armed conflict needs further
strengthening.

The international community has come a long
way in dealing with the issue of the protection of
children in armed conflicts since it was first included
on the agenda of the Security Council in 1998.
Resolution 1612 (2005) is rightfully regarded as a
milestone, as it created an effective international
monitoring and reporting mechanism for children and
armed conflict and a Working Group to provide follow-
up to those reports.

Progress so far shows that the mechanism is
working. It provides Member States with evidence of
grave violations being committed against children in
armed conflict, in particular concerning the illegal
recruitment and use of children as soldiers.

At the same time, the naming and shaming of
perpetrators in the reports of the Secretary-General
seems to have a real impact on the ground, as some
parties to conflict enter into dialogue with United
Nations country-level task forces or even adopt and
implement time-bound action plans to address the
grave violations for which they have been cited. This is
no small achievement, given that these violations are
often perpetrated in a rule of law vacuum.

However, in our view, the impact of the United
Nations child protection framework on the ground in
situations of armed conflict is not as decisive as it
could and should be. Important challenges remain. The
international community must not watch and keep
silent in the face of deteriorating conflict situations,
like the one we are currently witnessing in Sri Lanka,
affecting children in particular. An immediate
humanitarian ceasefire is imperative in Sri Lanka to
allow for a United Nations-assisted evacuation of those
still trapped in the conflict zone, among them many
children.

Let me highlight three points to address the
challenges that I have mentioned. First, rape and other
forms of sexual violence against children remain
widespread in many armed conflicts and are
exacerbated by a culture of impunity. Germany
therefore welcomes and fully endorses the proposal
made by the Secretary-General to expand the so-called
trigger for the listing of perpetrators in the annex of the
annual report to also include cases of rape and other
forms of sexual violence against children in armed
conflict. In that regard, Germany calls upon the
Security Council to take appropriate steps as a matter
of urgency. Synergies with other protection agendas,
especially on sexual violence against women and
children in situations of armed conflict, as set forth in
Security Council resolution 1820 (2008), should be
realized, for example with regard to data sharing.

Secondly, in our view, it is essential that the
threat of forceful Security Council follow-up to
reported violations against children remain credible.
Regrettably, 19 of the approximately 60 armed groups
listed by the Secretary-General in this year's report are
persistent perpetrators which have been repeatedly
listed for at least four years. We call upon the Security
Council to consider strong and urgent measures,
including targeted sanctions or referrals to the
International Criminal Court where appropriate,
against those parties that persistently ignore calls by
the Security Council Working Group to cease their
illegal practices with regard to children in armed
conflict. What we need is more systematic
communication between the Security Council Working
Group and the relevant sanctions committees.

And thirdly, the Security Council should remain
fully engaged in mainstreaming the issue of children in
armed conflict into all United Nations peacekeeping
and political operations. In that regard, we welcome
the deployment of an increasing number of child
protection advisers in peacekeeping operations and the
conceptual work on a policy directive in this field
currently being finalized by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.

Let me conclude by reiterating our full support
for the analysis and recommendations of the report of
the Secretary-General and our firm commitment to join
hands with all those striving to improve the situation of
children affected by armed conflict worldwide.
