Ms. Duarte-Rodriguez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Colombia would like to thank Prime Minister
of Timor-Leste Xanana Gusmao for his important
contribution to our debate today. We would also like to
commend the work of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ameerah Haq and Mr. Finn Reske-
Nielsen, Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Governance Support,
Development and Humanitarian Coordination, as well
as that of the Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Security Sector Support and
Rule of Law.

As a non-permanent member of the Council in
September 2002, Colombia participated in the
discussions that led to the establishment of this new
State and its entry into the United Nations. My
delegation therefore notes with particular satisfaction
the ongoing developments towards quickly
consolidating peace, development and stability in
Timor-Leste. We agree on the importance of continuing
efforts to promote national unity and dialogue through
cooperation with the various political, national and
regional forces, including civil society, the Catholic
Church, the United Nations and other stakeholders in
T imor-Leste.

We are pleased to see that bilateral relations with
Indonesia remain strong. The Bali meeting in
December is proof of that, in particular the
commitment shown by Indonesia to help Timor-Leste
in its plan to become a member of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations.

We emphasize the outcomes of the concluding
conference of the national consensus dialogue on truth,
justice and reconciliation, in particular with regard to
reparations for victims of human rights violations
committed between 1974 and 1999, and to the serious
crimes committed in 1999. As President Ramos-Horta
has said, it is necessary to find a balance between
punitive and restorative elements.

We would like to highlight the progress made in
the area of security, in particular in those districts in
which the national police have resumed their functions.
In that regard, we share the concern of the Special
Representative about the certification of the 52 officers
accused of committing serious crimes. While that
procedure was based on the review and
recommendations of the new certification scheme
established by the Government, we believe that a more
thorough review to prevent impunity is necessary.

We view the fact that domestic violence has been
defined as a public order offence under the criminal
code as an important step forward in judicial reform.
However, we are struck by the continued use of
traditional mechanisms that are not consistent with
international human rights. We call for the full
implementation of existing standards. We encourage
initiatives developed in that regard by the Secretary of
State for the Promotion of Equality, with the support of
the United Nations Population Fund and the United
Nations Development Fund for Women.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/32)
refers to much progress with regard to economic and
social development. We are pleased to learn that
Timor-Leste is growing at a rate of 10 per cent and that
it has reduced the poverty level and improved human
development indicators. However, we are concerned
about the difficulty young people face in finding
employment.

We endorse the work of the High-Level
Committee on Transition. In that regard, we highlight
the beginning of the work of the joint technical
working groups on democratic governance, the police
and security sector, the rule of law, justice, human
rights, economic development, mission support and
logistics, training for national officials and the impact
of the Mission's departure on the local economy.
Throughout that process it is necessary to regularly
consult and duly inform all stakeholders, political
parties, civil society and donors.

Colombia expresses its satisfaction at the
progress achieved in Timor-Leste with the coordinated
support of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT), other agencies and programmes
of the United Nations system, financial institutions and
donors. We should continue such support work while
making preparations for the transition and permanent
transfer of all functions to the authorities of Timor-
Leste,

Given the progress achieved in the stabilization
of Timor-Leste, my delegation supports the extension
of UNMIT's mandate for another year.

