Mr. Almagro (Uruguay)(spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is speaking on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti, composed of Argentina, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, France, Peru, the United
States and Uruguay.

We wish to congratulate the President of
Colombia, His Excellency President Juan Manuel
Santos, for taking the important and opportune
initiative to organize this open debate on the question
concerning Haiti, coinciding with the issuance of the
midterm report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
(S/2011/183*).

Our Group is very grateful for the presence of the
President of Haiti, Rene Preval, among us. We also
welcome the participation in today's debate of the
United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti, former
President William Clinton, of the Secretary-General of
the United Nations and of the Secretary-General's
Special Representative and Head of MINUSTAH,
Ambassador Edmond Mulet. I wish to highlight Mr.
Mulet's tireless efforts to help the Haitian people break
the cycle of poverty, to help the Haitian Government
create the conditions for a peaceful political transition,
and to mobilize international assistance and investment
intended for the social and economic recovery of the
country following the tragic earthquake of 12 January
2010.

I also wish to express thanks for the presence of
the Secretary General of the Organization of American
States, Mr. J ose Miguel Insulza, and of the President of
the Inter-American Development Bank, Mr. Luis
Alberto Moreno. The Group also wishes to thank all
United Nations personnel on the ground for their
dedication and selfless sacrifice.

The Group of Friends of Haiti once again
reaffirms its continuing support for the Government
and people of Haiti in the reconstruction of their
country, the consolidation of peace and stability and
the promotion of recovery and sustainable
development. The presence of several Ministers for

Foreign Affairs and representatives of countries
members of the Group of Friends of Haiti in today's
meeting, as well as your own direct involvement,
Mr. President, constitute clear evidence of the
sustained commitment of the Group to the Haitian
process.

As the coordinator of the Group of Friends of
Haiti, I wish to express our strong support for
MINUSTAH and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for their efforts to improve stability
and governance in Haiti. The latest report of the
Secretary-General, dated 24 March 2011, highlights the
progress made in the implementation of the Mission's
mandate as set out in resolution 1944 (2010) and
previous resolutions.

The Group of Friends of Haiti wishes to
congratulate the Haitian authorities and the candidates
in the presidential and legislative elections, as well as
the people of Haiti themselves, for holding, for the first
time in their history, a second round of presidential and
legislative elections, which took place on 20 March
2011. Although we are still awaiting the final results, I
wish to underscore that the voting was held in a
generally calm and peaceful atmosphere, which
represents an important step for the consolidation of
the democratic process. The Group also commends the
Provisional Electoral Council of Haiti and thanks the
missions on the ground of the OAS and the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM), MINUSTAH and the United
Nations Development Programme, which made Vital
contributions to the electoral process.

As the Secretary-General pointed out in his latest
report, the incoming Government of Haiti will inherit a
set of daunting challenges, compounded by the onset of
another hurricane season and the need to strengthen the
country's institutional capacity and to improve
governance and the delivery of public services.
The Group of Friends of Haiti encourages the
current and upcoming representatives of the executive
and legislative branches of government to work
together to meet the aspirations of the Haitian people
and to achieve the reforms the people have been
longing for for far too long. We stand ready to support
Haitians in the implementation of a strategy that will
transform plans into reality, working more closely with
the Haitian authorities and MINUSTAH.

Haiti continues to struggle with poverty and a
fragile humanitarian situation. In those areas, partly
due to the earthquake of January 2010, there has
unfortunately been a marked deterioration in the daily
living conditions of the vast majority of the Haitian
people. The Groups of Friends of Haiti acknowledges
the efforts of the donor community and calls upon them
to fulfil without delay the pledges made at the
International Donors Conference Towards a New
Future for Haiti, held in New York on 31 March 2010.
We believe that donors will be especially motivated in
the fulfilment of their commitments if the international
community enhances and strengthens Haiti's
institutional capacities, enabling them to improve their
planning for and implementation of projects in their
long-term development strategy.

We emphasize the importance of promoting the
rule of law in Haiti as a fundamental building block for
a just and prosperous society that must confront the
important challenges of its reconstruction, especially
after the 2010 earthquake, and respond to the needs of
Haitians living in poverty. As the Secretary-General
11-29014
pointed out, this will call for a genuine commitment on
the part of the new authorities to create an independent
and effective judiciary, a parliament that is increasingly
accountable to the people and a Government that acts
with increasing transparency, effectiveness and
awareness, responding to the needs of the country and
being truly representative of the Haitian people.

Furthermore, in the Group's view, the promotion
of the rule of law should be accompanied by the
creation of complete land and civil registries,
construction and building codes and commercial laws.
The rule of law should be evident in the capacity of the
State to guarantee adequate legal protection as a way to
facilitate economic development.

