Mr. Lancry (Israel) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for allowing me to make this additional
statement. I will try as best I can not to make my
response a rejoinder, despite the particularly difficult
context that has elicited it.

In order to keep peace moving ahead, in spite of
all the detours and setbacks that, in very painful and
tragic episodes, have set the pace of the peace process
between Israelis and Palestinians, we must exhibit a
healthy restraint in act and in speech. As we see it,
there is one choice only: the language of peace and the
teaching of peace cannot include white-hot rhetoric. I
therefore wish deliberately to speak in a muted voice
so as clearly to enunciate convictions that are as
earnest as they are necessary.

The first of these is on the need for a total and
immediate halt to the violence in order to provide
concrete and psychological support for the
consultations in Paris and Sharm el-Sheikh between us,
the partners in peace.

Only an abusively simplistic and reductive vision,
only a perception that is obstinately one-dimensional
could identify Israel as being solely responsible for the
tragic deterioration that we have witnessed. With the
passage of time, everyone will know and understand
this better. The truth is far more complex than the
systematically embroidered cliche of an Israeli war
machine launched against defenceless Palestinian
civilians.

Above and beyond young Palestinians throwing
stones, acts of Palestinian violence are being
committed by the armed militia of Tanzim and the
Palestinian police. This armed and organized
Palestinian violence, both civilian and military, is
directly answerable to the hierarchy of the Palestinian
Authority and is being carried out in strict obedience to
it. This campaign is in itself a continual source of
provocation and bears heavily on the tragic course of
events.

Moreover, even Mr. Marwan Barghouti, a
member of the Palestinian Parliament and the head of
Tanzim, makes no secret of this. His recent call for the
wholesale killing of Israelis was based on the militia
members at his service and on the green light given by
the Palestinian Authority that supports him. In past
times and in a far more upbeat context, I personally
had the opportunity to promote peace with Mr.
Barghouti at the many Israeli-Palestinian talks in
Greece and as founding members of the Israeli-Arab
alliance for peace in Copenhagen.

The visit of Mr. Ariel Sharon has been identified
by most speakers in this Security Council debate as the
primary cause of the outbreak of violence of the past
few days. Some have gone so far as to imagine
premeditated collusion between Mr. Sharon and Prime
Minister Barak aimed at better establishing the Israeli
right to sovereignty on the Temple Mount. Others have
seen in it a loathsome profanation of Islamic holy sites.

These assertions seem to us to be so excessive
that they deserve to be recorded so that we may
underline, step by step, the full import of each.

First, whatever its motives and implications,
Mr. Sharon's visit was undertaken in full compliance
with the fundamental principles of Israeli democracy.
Further, and because of this same democracy,
Mr. Barak could not impede Mr. Sharon's visit to the
Temple Mount. A clear and unbiased view of Israeli
democracy would allow those who felt a responsibility
to be objective to qualify their judgements and to
distance themselves from entirely unfounded
presuppositions.

Finally, it is out of absolute respect for Islam and
its holy sites - Al-Haram Al-Sharif in particular -
that I would like to contribute to this serious and
solemn discussion. The Temple Mount is also the
foremost holy place of Judaism. Confronted with the
attempt - methodically pursued here and elsewhere -
to conceal this fundamental truth, we need to affirm
that the Temple Mount, sacred to Islam on the side
where Al-Haram Al-Sharif is located, is equally sacred
to Judaism for its more ancient layers, on which Jewish
identity and history are based.

We believe this reminder is necessary not only in
the context of the issue that concerns us here and now,
but also for the dialogue aimed at reaching a definitive
peace between the Palestinians and us. Only if the two
sides are able to consider and accept each other's
symbolic systems and political systems can peace be
achieved.

Sudden progress and new forms of progress were
achieved at the Camp David negotiations and in the
negotiations that followed them. This progress was the
direct outgrowth of the Barak Government's policy of
peace. During those negotiations, the untouchable
became tangible, the forbidden became palpable, and
some huge difficulties were removed.

We find ourselves at exactly this crucial stage.
President Arafat and his negotiators know this only too
well. The international community witnessed this fact
at the Millennium Summit. President Arafat and Prime
Minister Barak were summoned by history to agree to a
real peace - that is, a peace that cannot fulfil all the
dreams and utopian visions of either side.

This discussion that has been spread out over
several meetings of the Security Council could not
have been more solemn and bitter. Some of the residue,
some of the wilder scraps need, therefore, to be cleaned
up. Calumny cannot lie forever hidden under the most
forceful rhetoric. For example, there were the Bahraini
and Libyan delegations' cold, oblique allusions to the
Nazi regime, and the Iraqi delegation's repudiation of
Israel's right to exist. As for Algeria, from the bottom
of our hearts we wish that it might put an end to the
succession of massacres occurring on its own territory.
Such an action would certainly put it in a better moral
position to denounce massacres occurring elsewhere.

In this unhappy and tragic moment in Israeli-
Palestinian relations, there is a neither mawkish nor
superfluous need for compassion. How can one not
sympathize - from the heart, not condescendingly or
arrogantly - with the strong feelings that the
Permanent Representative of Palestine, Ambassador
Nasser Al-Kidwa, expressed during his statement this
past Tuesday. How can one not sympathize - with a
torn soul - with the distressing death of the young
Mohammed Jamal Al-Durra. It is with the Palestinians,
not against them, that we cry, as we cry for our own
dead.

At this point I would like to appeal with all my
heart for a return to calm and the rapid coming of
peace. This Israeli-Palestinian peace process is not yet
completely free of all contradictions. Sometimes the
process brings us together, at other times it distances
us. Ourjoint healing, our redemption, must be achieved
by reaching peace with those near and far.

I would like to tell the Council the meaning of
this last idea in Hebrew and in Arabic to
simultaneously call attention to the visceral closeness
of these two languages and to the desires for symbiosis
that unite us.

(spoke first in Hebrew, then in Arabic)
Peace, peace be unto those far and near, God said.

