Mr. Lucas (Angola): We welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and Montenegro, Mr. Vuk
Drascovic, and his participation in the current meeting
of the Security Council. We thank Mr. Harri Holkeri
for his briefing introducing the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2004/348), and we commend the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Kosovo for their efforts to
establish lasting peace in Kosovo based on the
principles set by resolution 1244 (1999).

Today's meeting takes place amid renewed
concerns over the future of Kosovo and a feeling of
dismay at the serious setback to the normalization and
stabilization of Kosovo. It will take time and
painstaking efforts to repair the damage. The ethnically
motivated violence against minority groups of Kosovo
must be condemned and measures must be taken so
that it does not occur again.
The deterioration of the security environment and
the overall political situation after the incidents in
March has prompted the Security Council to take a
very clear stand, particularly through the presidential
statement of 30 April (S/PRST/2004/13), stressing the
need to review and revise, in a timely manner, key
sections of the Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan
on returns and the rights of communities and on
freedom of movement. We extend our full support to
UNMIK for introducing tough actions to implement
those standards.

Actually, we believe that in the end the standards
for Kosovo policy will make sense only when the
rights of all communities are fully protected and
respected and Kosovo becomes a democratic, multi-
ethnic society. Anything short of that will mean failure
for the great efforts and investments made by the
international community for Kosovo. To reach that
goal, we deem it essential that the rule of law be
established and guaranteed, as well as effective
operation of the police and the judicial and penal
systems. We hope that UNMIK's measures to enhance
the security situation will produce tangible results in
guaranteeing full respect for the rule of law and for
human and minority rights, including respect for
religious, historical and cultural sites.

We further hope that those measures will promote
full participation by the Serb minority at all levels of
government. We took note of the proposals by the
Government of Serbia and Montenegro on
decentralization. It is our view that Serb participation
in the provincial institutions is the best means to
guarantee security and economic sustainability of the
Serb community in Kosovo.

We wish to underline the crucial role and
responsibilities of the Kosovo leadership in promoting
a climate of tolerance among the communities and the
responsibilities of the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government to take a stand and live up to their
commitments to ensure that threats and acts of violence
are not repeated.

My delegation underlines the need for
constructive dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina to
achieve meaningful progress on issues of common
interest and, above all, to ensure that each inhabitant of
Kosovo may live in his country in dignity, liberty and
security.

To conclude, we reiterate our full support for the
Special Representative, for UNMIK and for KFOR in
their efforts to achieve reconciliation, reconstruction
and restoration of the political process in order to fully
implement Security Council resolution 1244 (1999)
and the standards for Kosovo policy.

