Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): My delegation shares
concerns about the significant work that still needs to
be done in the area of preventing illicit flows across
borders. Addressing this problem is of particular
relevance to Botswana, as it is to the African continent
as a whole. We therefore thank the United States
delegation for convening this open debate during its
presidency of the Security Council.

Botswana believes that the concerted efforts of
the international community are required to address the
problem of illicit cross-border flows, including of
small arms and light weapons, weapons of mass
destruction, human trafficking, particularly trafficking
in women and children, drugs, illicit minerals and
wildlife trophies, terrorists, fugitives and illicit
financial transfers. My delegation views such activities
as serious threats that undermine efforts aimed at
achieving sustainable economic and social
development.

Transnational organized crime and terrorism are
global in nature, and we believe that any meaningful
effort to counter such activities should involve giving
special attention to improving border control,
immigration and customs security. Botswana supports
stronger and more robust cooperation to prevent and
combat illicit flows at the national, regional and global
levels. We also support a comprehensive approach
which we believe would save both time and costs in the
global effort to stem illicit flows.

My delegation strongly believes that the
international community should join efforts in
prioritizing border control in the implementation of the
United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. We look forward
to consideration of this subject during the United
Nations Conference to Review Progress Made in the
Implementation of the Programme of Action, which
will be held in August 2012.

Botswana also places a high premium on the
conclusion of an arms trade treaty in July 2012 as an
effective and balanced, legally-binding instrument of
the highest possible common, international standards
for the transfer of conventional arms. We will support
an arms trade treaty, the implementation of which shall
include closer international cooperation and assistance
in the prevention of illicit flows across borders.

Botswana appreciates the assistance it has
received from the United Nations system, as well as
from bilateral partners, towards the strengthening of its
border control, immigration and customs security. We
therefore look forward to the report of the Secretary-
General later this year, which will provide a
comprehensive assessment of the United Nations
efforts to assist Member States to counter illicit flows.

