Mr. Serrano (spoke in Spanish): I would like at
the outset to express my gratitude for the invitation
extended to the European Union (EU) to participate in
this debate.

The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia, Azerbaijan and
Georgia align themselves with this statement.

In the interests of the smooth conduct of this
debate, I shall read out a condensed version of the
European Union's statement.

As other speakers have done, I should like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate.
The participation of the Secretary of Foreign Affairs of
Mexico was a reflection of her personal engagement in
this important issue. It also illustrated the intensive
work done by the delegation of Mexico under the
leadership of amba Heller as Chair of the Security
Council's Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict.

I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Coomaraswamy for her
tireless efforts on behalf of children affected by armed
conflict. I wish in particular to send a special greeting
to Ms. Manju Gurung, whose powerful and moving
words shed light on the reality we face.

(spoke in English)

As the Council is aware, the fight against the
adverse impact of conflicts on children is high on the
EU's foreign policy, development and humanitarian
agenda. The European Union is a firm supporter of and

partner to the United Nations in this context, both with
regard to policy development and to implementing
actions. I am happy to announce that the European
Union plans to review and further enhance its
engagement so that we can improve our response to
current challenges and our contributions to the work of
the United Nations in this area.

Important progress has been made over the past
year. Like many others, we welcomed resolution 1882
(2009) and the expansion of the triggers for listing to
the killing and maiming of children, as well to rape and
other sexual violence. We look forward to the further
implementation of the resolution, in particular steps
aimed at strengthening the United Nations ability to
gather and analyse information. In that context, we
look forward to closer cooperation with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict.

The European Union is grateful for the Secretary-
General's most recent report (S/2010/181) and its
recommendations, and welcomes the attention that is
drawn therein to persistent violators. We also commend
the work of the Security Council Working Group and
its country-specific conclusions and recommendations.
The European Union, through its programmes and
projects, lends concrete support to their
implementation.

Moreover, we welcome the first steps taken
recently towards increasing the exchange of
information with Sanctions Committees. We would like
to encourage much more interaction with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Sanctions
Committees and their expert groups, and the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. Furthermore,
the European Union encourages the Security Council to
include in the mandates of Sanctions Committees,
where appropriate, provisions pertaining to violations
of applicable international law committed against
children and of resolutions on children and armed
conflict.

In line with the European Union's strong
commitment to international law, we also firmly and
actively support the Special Representative's campaign
for the universal ratification of the Optional Protocols
to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the
Child.
The European Union systematically brings up
children's rights issues in political dialogues and when
discussing country strategies with partner countries.
We also cooperate with civil society on these matters.
We particularly seek to help to prevent the recruitment
of children and to ensure their unconditional release
and reintegration. We also pay special attention to the
situation of girls.

Furthermore, the European Union uses its early
warning mechanisms and conflict-sensitive approaches,
flexible financial tools and procedures to provide quick
responses to children in need. We have also increased
the awareness of our staff of these issues, both at
headquarters and at the country level. European Union
personnel are engaged in gathering and sharing
information on situations and countries of concern. Our
priority countries for action are in line with those
identified by the United Nations.

Like the Special Representative, we support the
mainstreaming of children's rights into crisis
management. Within the European Union Common
Security and Defence Policy, we use a checklist to
integrate the protection of children affected by armed
conflict into the planning and conduct of European
Union crisis management missions. As an example, I
would like to refer to our security sector reform
mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which promotes the enrolment of children in school.

The European Union funds numerous
programmes and projects to contribute to the protection
of children in armed conflict. These address prevention
issues, respond to the needs of girls, foster the social
inclusion of children affected by armed conflict, and
attempt to make justice and other services accessible to
victims. In that context, the European Union would
like to express its grave concern about the increased
number of attacks on educational facilities and to
encourage the Security Council to address this problem
in its future deliberations.

The European Union also believes in the
importance of investigating, prosecuting and punishing
all those who commit grave violations against children.
We have repeated on numerous occasions that every
effort must be made to end the culture of impunity. We
would like to recall here that children are specially
protected by the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. As the Council is aware, the European
Union strongly supports the effective functioning of
the International Criminal Court and other international
criminal tribunals.

As has been mentioned, during the second half of
2010 the European Union will review its
implementation strategy for children and armed
conflict-related actions so as to align them even better
with current needs and with international developments
in this field. To that end, we look forward to working
closely with the Office of Special Representative
Coomaraswamy and with other relevant United Nations
actors, such as UNICEF.

