Mr. Zuma (South Africa): I would first just
introduce the colleagues I am with here. I think it is
important. We have Julia Dolly Joiner of the
Commission for Political Affairs of the African Union,
who is sitting behind me, representing the African
Union. We also have Ambassador Welile Nhlapo, who
is one of the deputy heads of the African mission in
Burundi, and Adonia Ayebare, who is Ambassador of
Uganda in Kigali and Burundi and a deputy head of the
mission in Burundi.

I thank you very much, Mr. President, for the
opportunity once again to speak, and the Council
members for their contributions. I believe that it is
clear from those contributions that the Council
appreciates the progress that has been made in Burundi.
I think it is clear, too, that the Council feels that there
must be support for that process, and I thank members
very much for that support, which is very necessary. It
is similar to that which we received when we came
here exactly a year ago, and I take it as stronger this
time than it was last year. Last year, we said that we
had an agreement, but that there were still outstanding
issues; now we are saying that there are no more
outstanding issues, particularly with regard to the
Conseil national pour la defence de la democratie-
Forces pour la defence de la democratie (CNDD-FDD),
led by Pierre Nkurunziza, which is the biggest armed
group that was operating throughout the country. Its
signing of the Agreement and joining of the process
really took the process in Burundi significantly
forward. As I said, they are very committed and
enthusiastic. That is why they are in Bujumbura now to
join the process. The peace process therefore needs the
very specific support of the United Nations.

I know that organizations have procedures that at
times make things move at a particular pace, but I do
not know whether there are no exceptions making it
possible to move quicker or to take shortcuts -
especially taking into account that we are dealing with
a process that has moved far beyond those in other
areas that are still struggling to find peace. By and
large, we have moved beyond struggling for peace in
Burundi.

We are also facing a situation in which elections
are barely a year away. One of the issues that we must
deal with in this process is to ensure that the elections
are held - that they are not delayed - so that we can
establish a democratic Government in Burundi. In a
sense, I think that makes the situation even more urgent
in terms of the practical support that we need to put in
place with regard to Burundi. The Burundians
themselves are very keen to start looking into how the
elections will take place and what kind of formula will
be followed. If the lack of resources causes us delays in
implementing the agreements, it will also delay the
important interaction between Burundians to begin to
focus on the elections: first, to discuss what shape the
elections must take and, secondly, to determine how
Burundians will participate in the process of preparing
for the elections. This is therefore a very urgent matter
that requires us to act as quickly as possible. But I do
feel that the members of the Council have expressed
their appreciation and understanding of this situation.

I also noted that quite a few of the remarks -
and indeed almost every speaker - mentioned the
issue of the Party for the Liberation of the Hutu
People-Forces for National Liberation (PALIPEHUTU- FNL) led by Agathon Rwasa. I think it is natural that
that issue should be raised. It is an issue to which we
are paying full attention. I will certainly report back to
the Council with regard to its concern about this
matter. But, as I said in my opening statement, the
Council itself has taken very specific positions on this
matter in terms of calling upon the FNL to join the
process. I think it is important for the Security Council
to reiterate that position and to add its voice the many
other voices in saying that - as has been put forth here
by those who have spoken - PALIPEHUTU-FNL
must join the process. Certainly, I am sure that at the
end of three months the region will have to consider
the matter of what else can be done to try to bring the
FNL into the process. I hope that by that time, I shall
have been able to interact with the FNL and, perhaps,
to have prevailed in making it part of the process. So I
note that that question had been raised.

I note also that there were specific questions in
that connection regarding what I believe is the best
thing to do. I believe it was our colleague from Guinea
who asked the question. I believe that pressure must be
exerted by everyone; in other words, the calls to
PALIPEHUTU-FNL must come from everyone. But I
also believe that if the FNL does not see itself as part
of the process - meaning, therefore, that it is standing
alone against the entire population of Burundi - and if
it believes it to be proper for it to carry on with its
negative activities, it will, in a sense, be defining itself
as being apart from those who want peace in Burundi. I
am sure all of us will have to sit down and ask
ourselves what we can do in that circumstance. I am
also sure it should be a collective decision by
everyone - not just by the Burundians, the region or
the continent, but also by the international community
and, in particular, the United Nations.

Certainly, after three months we will have to
indicate where we are with the FNL. I am very hopeful
that the FNL will heed the situation, particularly
because since the signing of the Agreement, things are
not well within the FNL itself. A large number of its
armed forces have walked over to join the forces of the
National Council for the Defence of Democracy-Forces
for the Defence of Democracy (CNDD-FDD). We are
also aware that there is great disagreement from within
with regard to those who want to come into the peace
process - and they are reported to be in the majority.
Unfortunately, its leader holds a different view, even if
that is not a majority View. We have to work to find out
what it is that can be done to persuade him, because we
want to find a peaceful solution and a better way to
persuade them to come into the process. I believe that
the current activities might have a positive impact on
the FNL joining the process.

I would also like to express my appreciation for
the statement made by the President of the Economic
and Social Council. I think it was a very clear
statement, and we appreciate it.

I also wish to convey my appreciation for the
position put forth with regard to the very practical and
concrete offers made by both the United Kingdom and
the United States of America in terms of the specific
amounts they have said they will make available to put
forward bilaterally to support the peace process. That is
highly appreciated. I am sure that the appreciation I am
expressing is also that of the continent. That will be of
great practical and concrete assistance in helping us to
move forward. I think that really provides a practical
example for the Council, namely, that the Council must
itself be able to take very positive decisions.

I am very grateful for that support. I think it
means a lot - not only to Burundians and the Great
Lakes region, but to the continent as a whole. I
appreciate what has been done. I feel humbled indeed
by the support given today.

