Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to express
our condolences to the Government and people of Iraq
with regard to the recent heinous terrorist attacks in
Baghdad and the southern province of Basra.

We also wish to thank Special Representative
Mr. Jan Kubis for his update.

I want to commend the Iraqi security forces and
the international coalition against Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) for their efforts to liberate Mosul.
We hope that the end of the operation is near and that
local civilians, who suffered enormously under the
monstrous rule ofISIL, will finally be freed. The recent
statement of the military spokesperson of the Joint
Operations Command instils much needed confidence,
as he declared that Da'esh had been driven out of almost
90 per cent of western Mosul.

It is appalling that ISIL keeps resorting to using
civilians as human shields. We therefore reiterate our
call that the protection of civilians should remain the top
priority for the Iraqi security forces and the coalition,
even if it means a slowdown in military advances. To
prevent more losses among civilians, no effort should
be spared in reaching out to them and providing them
with vital information on developments on the ground,
identifying escape routes and ensuring transparent
screening procedures.

Another worrying trend that requires our attention
is that, since the beginning of the operation in October
last year, the number of internally displaced persons
near Mosul has reached 670,000 persons and 200,000
more could flee the city in the coming days. We are
therefore concerned that, if such a trend continues,
there will be no more space in the camps, most of
which are already full. That requires prompt action,
and we want to commend the Government of Iraq and
all humanitarian partners for their efforts to transfer
people to other camps located further from Mosul. I
hope that UNAMI, with the support of the international
community, will continue assisting the Iraqi
Government in mobilizing the resources necessary to
address the challenges mentioned.

Ukraine is encouraged by the news that Iraqi
stakeholders are tirelessly working on the national
reconciliation process. It is commendable that the Iraqi
Forces Coalition put forward the Historic Settlement
Initiative, and the National Alliance put forward the
National Settlement Initiative. Iraq should unite its
people, regardless of their ethnicity or religious beliefs.
Only inclusive national reconciliation efforts can heal
the wounds that the country has sustained and help to
achieve a lasting national settlement.

