Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we very much thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), for her valuable briefing, as well as
for the briefing of Ms. Anny Tenga Modi, Executive
Director of Afia Mama.

Before I proceed with my statement, I would like
to extend my sincerest condolences to the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to the
families of the victims as a result of the merchant train
crash in Kasai, which claimed scores of lives and left
several injured people, whom we wish a speedy recovery.
I would also like to extend my sincerest condolences
to the families of the victims in several States of the
Southern African region, namely, Mozambique and
Zimbabwe, as well as Indonesia, owing to the natural
disaster that claimed many victims. We extend our
deepest condolences to the families of those victims.

I would like to focus on the following basic
issues in my statement: first, the political situation;
secondly, the security situation; and, thirdly, the
humanitarian situation.

First, with regard to the political situation, I
would like to begin with the conclusion of the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/218),
published on 7 March, on the holding of elections and
the peaceful handover of power in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as well as the taking office
by Mr. Felix Tshilombo Tshisekedi, the new President
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That was
a significant turning point in the country's history
and in the implementation of the 31 December 2016
agreement. Indeed, since the beginning of 2018, the
political situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has seen positive developments, which was
confirmed by Ms. Zerrougui in her briefing (see S/PV.8483) during the meeting with troop-contributing
countries on Thursday, 14 March. We hope that those
positive developments will continue to achieve political,
security and economic stability in the country.

We welcome the official visits by President
Tshisekedi to neighbouring States to discuss issues
of common interest and strengthen partnerships
among States in the region. We also express our
satisfaction with his commitment to endeavour towards
promoting peace, the rule of law and democracy in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo - something
in evidence on multiple occasions since he assumed
office. The most recent declaration was made during
his participation in the thirty-second summit of Heads
of State and Government of the African Union, held in
Addis Ababa. We also welcome the support extended
during the elections period by the African Union, the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the Southern African Development Community and
all international partners. We hope that such support
will continue in future and that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will take advantage
of that important period to step up its cooperation
and partnership with regional and international
organizations, as well as with States in the Great Lakes
region. That is important for achieving stability and
ensuring economic integration.

We also call upon all Congolese stakeholders to
continue to embrace the same spirit that prevailed
during the elections and during the announcement of the
official results, by refraining from violence and moving
towards reconstruction, development and safeguarding
the gains attained.

Secondly, with regard to the security situation,
despite general improvements during the elections and
following the announcement of the results, the incidence
of violence and armed conflict continues to plague
certain regions, particularly in the east of the country
in North Kivu, where has been armed escalation,
with direct repercussions and a threat to the lives of
unarmed civilians. We call upon all parties involved
in armed violence to end those acts, save civilian
lives and achieve peace and stability. In that regard,
we commend the great efforts of MONUSCO and its
personnel to counter armed attacks and safeguard
civilians. We also commend the decision taken by
certain armed groups to lay down their weapons and
rejoin their communities. We call upon other armed
groups to lay down their weapons and cooperate with
the Congolese Government. The Government must also
provide special programmes for reintegrating into their
communities those who have put down their weapons.

Thirdly, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
it is still a source of concern in certain regions due to
continued fighting among armed groups. A total of
13 million people are still in need ofurgent humanitarian
assistance. Epidemics of chronic diseases, such as
cholera and measles, continue to wreak havoc, as well
as the Ebola outbreak in North Kivu and Ituri. It has
been reported that 859 individuals have been stricken
by Ebola, of whom 536 have died.

We commend the efforts of the Congolese Ministry
of Health, in coordination with the United Nations and
World Health Organization (WHO), to combat the Ebola
virus. We also welcome the third strategic response plan
adopted by those three entities on 13 February - drawn
up by the Ministry of Health with technical support
from WHO and United Nations agencies, for a duration
of six months. We hope that the virus will be totally
eradicated in the upcoming months.

We are also concerned about nearly 13 million
people suffering from malnutrition in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, of whom a total of 4 million
children suffer from acute malnutrition due to persistent
armed clashes. In that regard, we recall the inter-ethnic
armed violence between the Banunu and Batende
groups in mid-December 2018 in Yumbi, which resulted
in at least 500 victims.

Also on the issue of violence and murders, more
than two years have passed since the assassination, on
12 March 2017, of Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalan,
who were members of the Council's Group of Experts.
We urge the Congolese Government to identify the
perpetrators of those crimes and hold them accountable
as soon as possible, as well as to cooperate with the
mechanism established by the Secretary-General in
that regard.

In conclusion, I again thank Ms. Zerrougui and
all MONUSCO personnel for their tireless efforts
and steadfast support for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We look forward to the discussions on
the draft resolution on the extension of MONUSCO's
mandate. As penholder, France will soon circulate it to
the members of the Council, with a view to adopting
it by the end of the month. We support the Secretary-
General's recommendation in his report on the extension
of the mandate.

