Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic): It
gives me great pleasure, Sir, to extend to you once again
our congratulations on presiding over the Council. I
should like also to take this opportunity to thank His
Excellency the Ambassador of Gabon on his presidency
of the Council.

The Sudan, thanks to the close neighbourly ties of
kinship and regional integration that characterize our
relationship with our sisterly neighbour the Central
African Republic, had the honour to participate -
represented by the President of the Republic - in the
signing of the historic reconciliation pact in the Central
African Republic. This pact has proved once again that
Africans can shoulder their responsibilities and solve their
problems peacefully.

This pact provides a good example of the African
continent's longstanding tradition of patiently and wisely
settling disputes through tolerance, forgiveness,
consultation, democracy and dialogue. This has proved to
the entire world that Africa has a time-honoured history
and civilization as well as a promising future.

The delegation of the Sudan would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the mediation efforts of the
group of Heads of State of the sisterly countries that
make up the family of one African house - the
continent - efforts aimed at restoring peace and stability
to the neighbourly Central African Republic.

 

We cannot but express our admiration for the paternal
role played by His Excellency President Omar Bongo in
guiding the ship to a safe haven. We would like also to pay
tribute to the effective role undertaken by His Excellency
President Amadou Toumani Toure, who played his role
very wisely, competently and sincerely, as did the other
brother Presidents in the Mediation Committee. We would
also like to pay tribute to the important role of the African
States that participated in the Inter-African Mission to
Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements
(MISAB) by establishing the pillars of peace and security
in the country.

We support the draft resolution which is before the
Council today on deploying international forces in the
Central African Republic and salute the sincere efforts of
the Secretary-General and the Council, which made possible
the realization of this important achievement in the
maintenance of peace and security.

We reiterate the importance of peace, stability and
security in all the region so that we can realize our great
objective: regional cooperation and integration and
achieving development for our countries and peoples. Let
us, at this historic moment in which our neighbour, the
Central African Republic, enters a new era, turn the page
on a recent history that was replete with wounds, sadness
and wars. Let us gaze from a new vantage point upon the
twenty-first century - a century in which we will have
been liberated from dependency, backwardness and poverty,
and in which we will step into a new world in which
multilateralism, diversity, and different ethnicities and
cultures will be new sources of riches and in which our
differences will be transformed into conciliation, our
conflicts into amity, and our altercations into a dialogue and
cooperation.

In conclusion, the delegation of the Sudan reiterates
the provisions of the draft resolution, with regard to the
importance of the international community, represented by
Governments and the various institutions, helping the
Central African Republic to proceed towards the economic
development to which it aspires.

