Mr. Ney (Germany): Let me express my gratitude
to you, Sir, for having prepared and convened this very
useful debate. Your concept paper (S/2010/l65)
provides a helpful summary of what has been achieved
since the Council's last debate on the issue (see S/PV.5968) and where there is still room for
improvement. I would also like to thank the group of
five small countries - Costa Rica, Jordan,
Liechtenstein, Singapore and Switzerland - for their
valuable ideas on and unwavering commitment to this
significant issue.

The three issues highlighted in the concept paper -
transparency, interaction and efficiency - rightfully
continue to occupy centre stage in this debate. Let me
address transparency first.

With the increased involvement of the United
Nations in conflict resolution around the world in
recent years, the role of the Security Council has
become ever more prominent. This heightened level of
activity has been accompanied by a growing interest of
the general membership in the Council's proceedings.
Thus, now more than ever, transparency is of
paramount importance if the Council is to meet
expectations. While we welcome progress in this
regard, transparency could be enhanced by further
moving the consultative process into the open. There is
little rationale for having routine meetings take place
behind closed doors. Also, Council documents such as
reports, statements and draft resolutions, as well as
briefing notes, should be made available to
non-members in a timely fashion.

With regard to enhanced interaction with the
general membership, we strongly support the notion
that access to the Council by affected parties should be
facilitated. This should include, first and foremost,
Member States that have a vested interest in the item
under discussion, such as countries contributing troops
or police to a peacekeeping operation. This should also
include increased cooperation with the main financial
contributors. It is certainly fruitful to also consider
enhanced interaction with stakeholders outside the
United Nations membership, such as non-governmental
organizations or non-State actors, that play a crucial
role in solving a specific conflict. These forms of
interaction could provide the Council with an even
better basis for its decisions and ultimately make it
more effective. In this regard, we welcome the use of
new formats such as informal interactive dialogue.

Let me add that interaction should also be
strengthened with other institutions within the United
Nations, for example the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council needs to consider ways to
maximize the use of the Peacebuilding Commission's
advisory role, particularly with regard to early
peacebuilding activities carried out by peacekeepers.
To that end, we need a stronger, organic and more
dynamic linkage between the Council and the
Commission throughout the various stages of the
Council's consideration ofa specific conflict.

The fact that the Security Council is today
holding its third open debate on this subject under
Japan's tenure is in itself an expression of the welcome
attention this body is paying to improving the
interaction with non-members of the Council. The long
list of speakers for this meeting in turn demonstrates
the great interest of the general membership in further
pursuing this path.

Of course, increased access for non-members
must not undermine efforts to make the work of the
Council more efficient. We are convinced, however,
that transparency, interaction and efficiency can be
enhanced hand in hand. Let me assure members that
Germany, as a candidate for a non-permanent seat on
the Council for 2011-2012, remains deeply committed
to the aim of improving the Council's working methods
and that this commitment will continue should we take
a seat at this table.

While efforts to further improve the working
methods of the Council remain necessary, we must not
lose sight of the one big step this Organization has yet
to take: a comprehensive reform of the Security
Council that will make this body more legitimate, more
representative and thus more effective. The question of
its working methods cannot and must not be de-linked
from the overall reform debate, as improving working
methods alone will not bring about the change desired
by the general membership.

We must address the fundamental issue: the
necessity of bringing the Council into line with the
geopolitical realities of today's world. We must address
the untenable underrepresentation of Africa, Latin
America and Asia, as well as the need to ensure
adequate representation of other major contributors to
the maintenance of peace and security. To improve
working methods without reforming Security Council
structures would ultimately create a source of political
frustration among the general membership and risk
eroding the authority of the Council.

