Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to thank the team of
Mr. Jan Kubis, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), for their comprehensive
and detailed briefing, in which the main events of the
past quarter were highlighted. My delegation is pleased
to note that the Parliament of the Republic of Iraq has
finally elected a President, a duty that has been granted
to Mr. Barham Salih, whom we congratulate and to
whom we wish every success throughout his time in
office. We also welcome the appointment of the new
Prime Minister.

We believe that the election of the new President
represents not only a further step towards ending the
political crisis that had left the country at a standstill
since the elections on 12 May, but also sends out a
clear message on the political will of the Iraqi people
and leaders to collaborate in facilitating the process
of democratization that is already under way in the
country. We hope that all political parties will support
and respect that decision. Like many other countries,
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea wishes to urge the
newly elected President to support the political will
of the people by promoting policies of national unity
that take into account the concerns of citizens from all
social strata and all of the different peoples that make
up the State of Iraq, while underscoring the urgent
need to continue working to address the differences
between the central Government and the Kurdistan
Regional Government.

In that regard, it is important to highlight the
important work carried out by UNAMI, which
particularly supported the electoral process and supports
the new Government's policy to guarantee the progress
of the State reconstruction process, which requires
promoting an increasingly inclusive political dialogue
and reconciliation. On the parliamentary elections held
in Kurdistan on 30 September, we commend the fact
that they took place successfully and we call on the
main political parties to respect the final outcomes of
those elections, and that all of the complaints that arise
be dealt with according to established legal procedures.

We wish to voice our concern about the violent
incidents outlined in the report (S/2018/975), carried
out in the form of street demonstrations in the south
and other parts of Iraq, which, unfortunately, have even
affected the security of certain resident diplomatic
offices and Consulates. We hope that the local
authorities will be able to deal with the situation and
address with due attention the grievances and concerns
of the demonstrators, those of which seemingly pertain
to the basic needs ofthe citizens. However, we also take
into account the actions taken by the Parliament and the
Government, which include certain measures towards
finding a satisfactory solution to that situation. We
commend the tireless work of the Iraqi security forces
for their ongoing clean-up of areas that have been
cleared of explosives and other dangerous materials, as
well as for their continued search for the remnants of
Da'esh, which threaten the security of the population
and hinder the ongoing process.

I would like to express our sincere appreciation and
recognition for the work of the UnitedNations Assistance
Mission for Iraq, which is perceived positively and
favourably in various areas of Iraqi society, such as
the public sector, electoral processes, human rights and
the rule of law and operational and security issues. We
would like to reiterate our recognition and gratitude to
Special Representative Jan Kubis for his commitment
and tireless efforts in leading UNAMI over the past
nearly four years. We wish him all the best in his
future activities. Finally, we urge all the members
of the Council and the international community to
continue to support the Iraqi people and their President
on their path to democracy and the reconsolidation of
the State, whose stability is fundamental to that of the
entire region.

