Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting, and we welcome the fact that you are
presiding it.

We express our deep appreciation for the presence
of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and for
his valuable briefing. His presence today is a clear
indication of what this humanitarian issue means to
him, Security Council members and the international
community as a whole. We highly value his tremendous
efforts pertaining to the crisis of the Rohingya minority
refugees, and we emphasize our full support for his
noble endeavours.
I would also like to thank Mr. Gettu of the United
Nations Development Programme and Ms. Cate
Blanchett, United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) Goodwill Ambassador, for their
valuable briefings.

August marks one year since the start of violence
in Rakhine state in Myanmar. That violence has led
to the displacement of more than 800,000 people of
the Rohingya minority to Bangladesh, according to
statistics published by UNHCR, bringing the total
number of Rohingya refugees in the biggest refugee
camps in the world to 1.1 million.

Today's meeting comes one day after the issuance
of the report (A/HRC/39/64) of the Independent
International Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar,
which documented crimes that amount to genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity in Myanmar.
The report confirms the conclusions reached by many
international organizations regarding those crimes, and
is consistent with what we witnessed during Security
Council visits to Rakhine and what we heard from
eyewitnesses to those crimes during our meetings with
Rohingya refugees in the camps of Cox's Bazar.

The world is following the proceedings of our
Security Council meeting today and expects nothing less
from us than to maintain our moral and humanitarian
stance and to rise above all political considerations in
dealing with one of the worst catastrophes in modern
history - a catastrophe that the Rohingya minority,
subjected to killings and torture, are still suffering as a
result of their oppression and forced displacement. Such
events can only be described as ethnic cleansing, aimed
at erasing their culture and wiping out their identity.

Since the Security Council visit to Bangladesh and
Myanmar in April, we note some of the initial steps
taken by the Government of Myanmar towards resolving
the humanitarian crisis. Meetings among officials
in both Bangladesh and Myanmar, the signing of a
memorandum of understanding and the establishment
of a body to investigate violations of human rights are
all good, albeit limited steps, the majority of which are
yet to be implemented on the ground.

The demands identified by the Security Council
in its presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/22) and
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission
on Rakhine State, led by Kofi Annan, are clear and
concrete, aimed at resolving the root causes of the
crisis, ending the suffering ofthe refugees and ensuring
their voluntary return in a peaceful and dignified
manner to their original homes in Myanmar. Such a
voluntary return cannot begin without taking a series
of confidence-building measures to ensure a safe return
and dignified life in Rakhine state.

I recall some of the measures that should be taken
prior to the voluntary return of refugees: undertaking
an independent and transparent investigation into the
crimes and other transgressions committed against the
Rohingya minority in Rakhine state; the Government
of Myanmar's taking all measures to guarantee
the immediate cessation of violence and ethnic
discrimination and to ban the excessive use of force in
violation ofthe rights ofcivilians in Rakhine state; closing
all internally displaced persons camps; the Government
of Myanmar's taking all the necessary measures against
incitement of violence and hatred in order to ensure
peace and harmony among all communities, under the
rule of law; granting permission for all United Nations
agencies and other partners to freely enter Rakhine
state and ensure their freedom of movement safely
and without impediments; the elimination of all root
causes of the crisis of the Rohingya minority, without
discrimination and regardless of ethnicity or religion,
while granting their inherent right to citizenship, as
stressed in General Assembly resolution 70/233; and
undertaking comprehensive social and economic
reforms accompanied by eliminating the root causes of
the crisis of the Rohingya refugees.
The humanitarian tragedy ofthe Rohingya refugees
compels the international community to redouble its
efforts towards alleviating their daily suffering. As
we hold our meeting today, refugee camps are facing
the challenges of monsoons, rains and floods, which
have led to the collapse of some sites, due to hurricanes
and mudslides.

In closing, paragraph 3 of Article 1, Chapter
I of the Charter of the United Nations stresses the
importance of achieving international cooperation in
solving international problems of an economic, social,
cultural or humanitarian character, and in promoting
and encouraging respect for human rights and for
fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as
to race, sex, language or religion. There should be no
discrimination between men and women. That is the
Charter that we, the peoples of the world, have pledged
to observe with a view to saving future generations
from the scourge of war; the Charter that determines
the course of future generations; the Charter that joins
us in unity to face all issues threatening international
peace and security; and the Charter that compels us
to rise above our political differences for the sake of
protecting the vulnerable and seeking final solution
for their predicaments. Among those individuals are
the refugees from Rakhine state with whom we met in
Cox's Bazar and listened to their concerns and suffering.
Those refugees implored us not to forget their demands
after we left their camps.

