Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): I would
like to thank Canada for its initiative to focus the
attention of the Council on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. The United States shares Canada's desire
to bring to international attention the new character of
armed conflict, in which civilians, including humanitarian
workers, are often not simply random, incidental victims
of conflict, but its very targets. We must work together to
find ways to halt this trend, and we must strive to
strengthen international protection of civilians,
recognizing that the Council's task of maintaining peace
and security can extend to the protection of individuals as
well.

Over the past several months, the Security Council
has wrestled with the issue of protecting civilians in
armed conflict, including refugees, children and
humanitarian workers. As one example, the United States

 

chaired the Council's thematic group that drafted resolution
1208 (1998), which identified the maintenance of the
security and the civilian and humanitarian character of
refugee camps as an urgent and important issue. In its
resolutions and presidential statements, the Council has also
addressed the challenges of illicit arms flows, children
affected by armed conflict and protection of humanitarian
workers.

We welcome the discussion of these matters in other
forums, particularly in this year which marks the fiftieth
anniversary of the four Geneva Conventions and the one
hundredth anniversary of the Hague Convention. We salute
the Red Cross Movement and look forward to the results of
the upcoming International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) humanitarian forum in Wolfsberg, which will focus
on "protecting people affected by armed conflict". These
efforts in other forums are vital and complement the action
the Council takes today in the exercise of its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security.

We particularly welcome the Council's reaffirmation
today of the need for the international community to assist
and protect civilian populations affected by armed conflict;
of the need for all parties concerned to ensure the safety of
civilians and to guarantee the unimpeded and safe access of
United Nations and other humanitarian personnel to those
in need; of the obligation of all States to comply strictly
with their obligations under international law; and of the
need to bring to justice individuals who target civilians, as
such, in armed conflict, or who otherwise commit offences
under international humanitarian and human rights law.

We also support the Council's willingness to respond,
in accordance with the United Nations Charter, to situations
in which civilians have been targeted or humanitarian
assistance to civilians has been deliberately obstructed.

In summary, the Government of the United States
welcomes the Council's efforts to address these critical
issues. The many constructive suggestions we have heard
today from the ICRC, the United Nations Children's Fund
and the Special Representative deserve careful and urgent
consideration by the Council. We pledge ourselves to the
pursuit of practical applications of these suggestions.
Finally, we look forward to the Secretary-General's
recommendations, both on ways the Council can improve
the physical and legal protection of civilians in all situations
of armed conflict and on contributions the Council can
make towards more effective implementation of existing
humanitarian law.

