Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuelais honouredto speak on behalf of the 120 States
members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

We express our gratitude to the delegation of the
People's Republic of China for convening this debate on
a topic of great importance to the Movement, bearing
in mind that 88 per cent of the peacekeeping personnel
deployed in the field come from non-aligned countries.

The Movement reiterates its commitment to the
promotion of the peaceful settlement of disputes under
the provisions of Article 2 and Chapter VI of the
Charter of the United Nations, all relevant resolutions
of the Organization and international law as a whole,
convinced that it will contribute to the strengthening of
international peace and security.

At the most recent ministerial conference in April,
member States reaffirmed their position on operations,
which must be carried out in strict compliance with
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations. At the same time, they stressed
that respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence, as well as non-interference in the
internal affairs of States, are fundamental elements
for promoting peace and international security. In
that regard, the Ministers reiterated that respect for
the principles of peacekeeping - namely, consent
of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force,
except in self-defence and in defence of mandates - is
essential to the success of operations, particularly those
mandated to protect civilians.

The implementation oftasks assigned to operations
must be supported by a broad political process that
is based on national ownership and backed by the
international community, as well as on the consent
and commitment of the parties concerned. Operations
should not be used as an alternative to address the root
causes of conflicts or to manage conflicts themselves.
From the outset, they should receive political support
and human, financial and logistical resources, as
well as clearly defined mandates and exit strategies
to guarantee the safety of the personnel deployed in
the field.

Moreover, we reiterate the importance that we attach
to the deliberations and reports of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations, which is the only body
mandated to consider all aspects of peacekeeping
operations, including the development of concepts,
policies, doctrines and strategies. In that regard, we
emphasize the need to establish a relationship of shared
responsibility among the Security Council, police- and
troop-contributing countries and the Secretariat, with
a view to making objective evaluations and harnessing
the potential of mandates and operations. That will
ensure the formulation of clear mandates responding to
the challenges on the ground. However, it will come
to pass only if such cooperation is continuous and
substantive, including before the renewal of mandates.

The Movement welcomes the determination of
the United Nations to strengthen its relationship with
regional and subregional organizations, in particular
with the African Union, in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations. We are convinced that such
cooperation is essential, while taking into account
African potential, as long as peace and stability prevail.

States members of the Movement reaffirm their
support for efforts to strengthen African peacekeeping
capacities and underline the importance of implementing
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security,
signed on 19 April 2017. In that regard, and in line with
our principled position in favour of African solutions
to African problems, we stress the importance of
securing financial support for African Union-led peace
operations mandated by the Security Council so that
deployed missions - including the African Standby
Force, which has demonstrated its ability to respond
to complex security situations - can maximize their
effectiveness on the ground.

In conclusion, we believe that the security of
United Nations mission personnel remains a matter
of great concern. We therefore categorically condemn
all attacks and acts of violence against peacekeeping
personnel, and we call for measures to be taken to
ensure that those responsible are brought to justice. In
that regard, the Movement pays tribute to the work of
the men and women peacekeepers who carry out their
duties in the context of armed conflict and who work
in adverse conditions, even at the risk of their lives.
We express our sincere recognition of all peacekeepers,
including those who have lost their lives on the ground
while defending the flag of the United Nations and the
cause of peace.

