The President: I thank the representative of Gabon
for his kind words addressed to my delegation.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Foreign Minister of Slovenia.

I would like to express our satisfaction and
appreciation to the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Their presence and interaction with the Security Council
today has a great political value and is deeply symbolic
in its historical message. It demonstrates the vitality of
the spirit of Bosnia and Herzegovina as an independent,
sovereign and multi-ethnic State, a value of paramount
importance for the future of their country.

Four years have passed since the conclusion of the
Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement. It needs to be stressed
today, in the presence of the Members of the Presidency
and in the presence of Ambassador Richard Holbrooke -
the main architect of the Agreement - that ending the

 

war is the main condition for the construction of peace.
Ending the war is the beginning of peace, while the
construction of peace requires additional efforts. Today
Bosnia and Herzegovina is in the middle of those efforts.
The Presidency has the essential role in that process, which
requires fostering internal stability, political normalization
and economic prosperity. The Members of the Presidency
have contributed much to the implementation of this role.

Today these general requirements are easily
translatable into more specific priority tasks. The return of
refugees, including in particular minority returns, constitutes
the first priority. The others include the establishment of a
State border service, the creation of conditions for foreign
investment, the creation of new jobs and the strengthening
of the judiciary. We are heartened that the commitment of
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina to these
objectives has been renewed today.

The New York Declaration, adopted by the Members
of the Presidency on the eve of the present meeting of the
Security Council, is a landmark document. It demonstrates
the reinforced will of the Presidency to proceed more
speedily towards the realization of the accepted priority
objectives.

Recently, the crisis in Kosovo severely tested peace
and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We commend all
parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina for their responsible and
wise attitude, which contributed to the preservation of
stability in their country. The peace, stability and unity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina are of critical importance for the
resolution of other problems in the region, most notably the
problem of Kosovo. Therefore, every effort must be made
to strengthen Bosnia and Herzegovina and its institutions.

Implementing the Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement will
be the best guarantee of prosperity for future generations
and the best way to prevent the extremist forces from
spreading destructive nationalism all over again. Slovenia
therefore calls upon the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and upon its common institutions, to remain sincerely
committed to the principles spelled out in the Dayton/Paris
Peace Agreement.

Bosnia and Herzegovina must not be left alone in
these efforts. The international presence and assistance is
still required, and Slovenia will do its utmost to contribute
its share. We stood by Bosnia and Herzegovina in its hard
times, and we wish to do the same in its brighter future.
Let me conclude with an observation from last year's
meeting of the Peace Implementation Council, namely,
that Bosnia and Herzegovina is a European country. For
Slovenia, Bosnia and Herzegovina has always been a
European country, and we support it as such. We also
support its efforts to join the Council of Europe and other
European institutions.

But Bosnia and Herzegovina is also a proud member
of the United Nations. This meeting today is a testimony
to the determination of the international community to
support the independence, sovereignty, multi-ethnic
character and stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ante Jelavic,
Chair of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to
respond to the comments and questions.

