Mr. Guillermet (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to start by thanking Renate Winter,
President of the Special Court for Sierra Leone, and
Prosecutor Steven Rapp for their presence among us
and for their briefings. This Council and the
international community must be proud of the work of
and the trail blazed by the Special Court for Sierra
Leone.

The Special Court has been a bellwether. It was
the first Court to be established with a shared model of
responsibilities under an agreement between the United
Nations and one of its Member States - Sierra Leone.
Primarily, however, it was the first step taken by that
country in its fight against impunity and accountability
for serious crimes whose excessive cruelty shocked
humankind.

As Justice Winter eloquently described, the
Special Court for Sierra Leone has set precedents in
many matters. Its jurisprudence was the first to develop
the principle of non-applicability of amnesties in
international prosecution and to establish limitations on
the immunity of heads of State before an international
criminal court, and it was the first to recognize the use
of child soldiers as an international crime. Its
invaluable legacy to international criminal justice and
to international law deserves our acknowledgement and
the praise of the international community.

Now, it is to be the first to end its judicial
proceedings and to set up a residual mechanism that
will remain once it has closed its doors. It will serve as
an example for other courts. In that regard, we
acknowledge the need to redouble the international
community's efforts towards completion and to ensure
justice for the victims.

The last trial, which has been pending since
October, is that of the former President of Liberia,
Charles Taylor, which is a clear example that the arm
of the law reaches the highest political leaders,
guaranteeing their right to a legitimate defence with
internationally recognized procedural guarantees.

My delegation fully agrees that the conclusion of
the trial of Charles Taylor is essential to making peace
and stability sustainable in West Africa. The work of
the Court proves to this Council that the contradiction
between peace and justice that is sometimes posited is
non-existent. The achievements of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone show us that peace and justice are not
incompatible, but that, on the contrary, justice is a
decisive factor in ensuring sustainable and lasting
peace.

