Mr. Ndekhedehe (Nigeria): May I begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January 2004. We also thank you for organizing this
debate. In the same vein, I would like to congratulate
your predecessor on the able manner in which he
conducted the affairs of the Council in the month of
December 2003. At the same time, however, my
delegation regrets the fact that we did not have
sufficient time to study the report (S/2003/1147), given
the importance of the entire subject matter and of the
Security Council mission to the West African
subregion.

We further wish to congratulate Algeria, Benin,
Brazil, the Philippines and Romania on their election
as non-permanent members of the Security Council.
We look forward, as always, to working closely with
all members.

On behalf of my delegation, I have to compliment
the Security Council for its continued engagement with
the situation in West Africa. We recall with
appreciation the various efforts of the Council, which
culminated in the establishment of the United Nations
Office for West Africa about two years ago.
My delegation warmly welcomes the presentation
of the progress report of the Secretary-General on the
recommendations of the Security Council mission to
West Africa. The report highlights the steps taken in
the implementation of the recommendations of the
Security Council mission with respect to Guinea-
Bissau, C6te d'Ivoire, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The
report adequately addresses the concerns of my
delegation by setting out practical ways of addressing
cross-border issues identified by the Council mission.

On the situation in Guinea-Bissau, we note that,
following the Council's visit to the country last year
and the consultations held, also last year, between the
Council and the new leadership of Guinea-Bissau, the
Security Council continues to monitor developments in
that country. We have thus received some good
information on the progress being made in the electoral
process and on the possible provision of financial and
technical assistance by some donors. Given the serious
economic decline in Guinea-Bissau, Nigeria will urge
the Council to come up with a robust, comprehensive
economic rescue package for that country. We believe
that this could be achieved with the assistance of the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.

On the situation in Cote d'Ivoire, we recall that
the Council graciously held consultations with a
ministerial delegation from the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) in the last quarter of
2003. The establishment of a United Nations special
political mission in Cote d'Ivoire has significantly
contributed to the stabilization of the otherwise volatile
political situation in that country. Impressed with the
efforts of the Security Council, the ECOWAS
delegation specifically requested the Council to
establish a United Nations peacekeeping mission in
Cote d'Ivoire. I therefore take this opportunity to urge
the Council to urgently finalize the necessary
arrangements and to adopt a draft resolution that would
effectively establish a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in C6te d'Ivoire.

Nigeria commends the United Nations for
facilitating the various peace processes that eventually
led to the cessation of hostilities in Liberia. We note
the political support of the United Nations for the
ECOWAS rapid response operation which effectively
secured Monrovia before the deployment of United
Nations personnel. We commend the early
establishment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Liberia. With the ceasefire now in effect and
the interim Government in place, the security situation is
sufficiently stable for the resumption of humanitarian
operations. The disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation programme has been
completed for 38,000 combatants, including some child
soldiers and 1,000 female combatants. A National
Committee for Disarmament, Demobilization,
Reintegration and Rehabilitation has also been
established under the Chairman of the National
Transitional Government of Liberia and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for that
country. Nigeria commends their efforts and
achievements, and would urge continued strong United
Nations engagement in Liberia so that the mistakes of
the past will not be repeated.

On the situation in Sierra Leone, we note with
satisfaction the consolidation of peace in that country
with the active support of the United Nations.
However, Nigeria would continue to urge that extreme
caution be applied in the implementation of the
drawdown of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone in order not to negate the gains made in terms of
stability.

In conclusion, Nigeria expresses its appreciation
to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, to the
Security Council and to the entire United Nations
system for their assistance and efforts in injecting some
peace and stability into the West Africa subregion.

