Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me begin by
congratulating the delegation of the United States on
its assumption of the presidency of the Council. I also
wish to thank the Mission of the United Kingdom for
its excellent handling of the Council's business last
month.

I wish to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for the comprehensive briefings they
have just provided. The work carried out by the
Tribunals since their inception is of significant
importance to the fight against impunity and to
advancing the rule of law and paving the way for
reconciliation among the States concerned. We also
acknowledge the significant contribution the Tribunals
have made to international criminal justice.

However, in spite of their dedicated work and
continued efforts to pursue the completion strategy, the
Tribunals are not able to finish their work before the
target dates envisaged in resolutions 1503 (2003) and
1534 (1534), respectively. Thus, we are now at a point
where all the necessary steps must be taken to establish
an international residual mechanism for criminal
tribunals, which should have competence to complete
all pending trial proceedings. The issue is still under
consideration by the Informal Working Group chaired
by Austria, which has made substantial progress in
bringing such a mechanism to life. We expect a draft
resolution to be adopted before the end 2010. We thank
the Austrian delegation for their valuable efforts. We
also appreciate the fact that the Tribunals have
undertaken several measures in preparation for the
transition to a residual mechanism. We encourage them
to continue their efforts.

We take note of the comments of both Presidents
concerning the terms and conditions of staff and judges
of the Tribunals. As members will recall in connection
with the issue of extending judges' mandates, the
Council responded positively to the demands of the
Presidents of the International Criminal Tribunals in its
resolutions 1931 (2010) and 1932 (2010) of 29 June.
We are confident that at such a critical juncture further
extension requests will also be accommodated by the
Council in the days to come.

We are still concerned by the fact that the number
of fugitives remains unchanged since the last biennial
reports of the Tribunals. All States, especially those in
the regions concerned, must fully and effectively
mobilize all available resources and continue to give
full support to the operational services that have been
tasked with tracking and apprehending the remaining
fugitives, including Ratko Mladie and Goran Hadzic'.
In that respect, cooperation by the States of the former
Yugoslavia remains crucial.

Effective cooperation by States in other areas,
such as access to archives, documents and witnesses,
continues to be an essential part of the work of the
Tribunals. We take positive note of Croatia's continued
and serious efforts regarding cooperation with the
Office of the Prosecutor. We note that the Prosecutor's
report recognizes the responsiveness of the Croatian
authorities in general and refers to the access provided
to witnesses and evidence. Within that context, we
welcome the work of the Croatian Interagency Task
Force to locate or account for the missing military
document that was requested by the Court.

We also welcome Serbia's continued cooperation,
as well as the adequate response by Bosnia and
Herzegovina to requests from the Prosecutor. Likewise,
we appreciate Rwanda's continued cooperation with
the ICTR in various areas. We commend those
countries for their improved level of cooperation and
hope that it will lead to the achievement of full justice
and reconciliation.

In conclusion, I should like to express once again
our sincere thanks to the Presidents, Prosecutors and
all judges of both Tribunals for their professionalism
and dedicated work.

