Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing on the escalating
situation in the Middle East and especially for his
efforts to seek a peaceful solution to the several issues
in the region.

With respect to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, we
are seriously concerned by the trends of a complicated
humanitarian situation, economic backwardness, the
ongoing construction of settlements and the growing
acts of violence - all of which are unacceptable.
The peaceful coexistence of two States, which must
start with the early resumption of Palestinian-Israeli
negotiations, especially in the bilateral format and via
intensified efforts in the framework of the Middle East
Quartet and all other diplomatic initiatives, is the only
viable option.

The rights to life and to security are among
humankind's major postulates. Let us therefore grant
the right to life to an independent Palestinian State
and the right to security to the State of Israel. We call
on both sides to demonstrate wisdom, responsibility
and the political will needed to reach a historic peace
agreement that would meet the legitimate aspirations of
both their peoples.

As the Chair of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe in 2010 and of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation in 2011, and
having established the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-Building Measures in Asia, Kazakhstan
is convinced through first-hand experience that long-
term stability and sustainable peace can be achieved
only by understanding the strong connection between
peace, security and development. We would therefore
like to call for restoring mutual trust by increasing
investments in sustainable development and economic
growth as confidence-building measures between the
parties.

Kazakhstan commends France for organizing, on
15 January in Paris, the international Peace Conference
on the Middle East and considers it a contribution to
international efforts to find a Viable road map for the
two sides to work together towards a mutually agreeable
solution.

The devastating situation in Syria concerns
Kazakhstan, as it does the rest of the world. The
catastrophe has spread beyond the region, with far-
reaching, perilous implications. Kazakhstan continues
to support the measures taken by the United Nations, the
League of Arab States, the United States, the Russian
Federation, Turkey and the international community
to bring the Syrian Government and opposition
forces together for dialogue and reconciliation. We
particularly commend the unceasing efforts of Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria Staffan de
Mistura and appreciate the solidarity and unity exerted
by the members of the Council in adopting unanimously
resolution 2336 (2016), presented by the Russian
Federation and Turkey, to end the violence in Syria and
jump-start a renewed political process. The upcoming
meeting in Astana, as the platform provided by my
country's leadership, is intended to be an important
part of the Syrian-led political process and will be a
significant step ahead of the resumption of negotiations
under the auspices of the United Nations in Geneva
next month. Preparations for the Astana meeting are
well under way.

As a country that prioritized food, water and energy
security as the foundations for peace, Kazakhstan calls
upon all parties to stop civilian deaths and suffering
and provide access to those basic necessities, along
with health services. Of special importance is to
allow the much-needed delivery of humanitarian
aid in the besieged areas. To that end, we commend
the neighbouring States of Syria, such as Lebanon,
Jordan, Turkey and Iraq, which opened their borders
to accommodate refuges and are struggling hard to
cope with one of the largest refugee exoduses in recent
history.

Iraq deserves special attention because of the
grave humanitarian situation in the northern part of the
country, namely, in Mosul. We call for safe corridors and
full mobilization of emergency assistance, life-support
services and humanitarian assitance in order to relieve
the suffering of the population.

Counter-terrorism is central to any discussion on
the Middle East, as terrorism today, in all its forms
and manifestations, constitutes one of the most serious
threats to regional and global peace and security,
most of all in the Middle East region, because of the
destructive activities of well-known violent extremist
organizations. In that regard, we would like to remind
the Council of Kazakhstan's proposed initiative to
develop a code of conduct for anti-terrorist operations,
as well as establishing a United Nations-led worldwide
coalition/network for the implementation of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

Finally, we reiterate our robust commitment to
ensure peace in the Middle East, based on building a
secure, just and prosperous world for all.

