Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I would like to welcome
the Presidents of the International Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), Judges Meron
and Joensen, as well as Prosecutors Brammertz and
Jallow. We commend their work and continued efforts
to ensure accountability and promote international
criminal justice, and we thank them for today's
briefings and their comprehensive reports.

Those reports, though they register progress, also
testify to the fact that international justice can be
a frustratingly slow and incomprehensible process.
It is certainly so for many of the victims and their
families, who are still waiting for justice to be done. It
is beyond their understanding that, 22 years after the
establishment of the ICTY and 20 since the end of the
wars in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, some of
those with the greatest responsibility for the heinous
crimes committed during those wars, including the
genocide in Srebrenica, have yet to receive their long-
overdue sentences.

The trials have frequently been prolonged due to
the ill health of the accused. Such has been the case
with Goran Hadzic', charged with war crimes against
Croats and other non-Serbs in Croatia and whose trial
has been suspended since October 2014 owing to his
ill health. A few days ago he was again granted a
provisional release on account of his health. In that
particular context, the case of Slobodan Milosevic
comes to mind. Although he masterminded the terrible
events in the former Yugoslavia and was responsible for
so much human suffering, his trial lasted so long that he
died before a verdict could be rendered. We encourage
the Tribunal to take all appropriate and necessary steps
to ensure that Goran HadZie's trial recommences as
soon as possible and is duly completed and brought
to its final judicial conclusion. It is also extremely
important that the judgements in the Tribunal's two
other pivotal cases - those of Ratko Mladie and
Radovan Karadzie - be delayed no further. We are of
the opinion that the Tribunal has sufficient resources to
accomplish that.

I would like to reiterate once again that in our
view a speedy trial resulting in a court decision,
whether a conviction or an acquittal, represents not
only one of the most essential rights of the accused
but an equally essential right of the victim. The trial of
Vojislav Seselj, indicted in 2003 for war crimes, crimes
against humanity and making inflammatory speeches
fomenting hatred, has been anything but speedy and

efficient. In my statement to the Council six months
ago (see S/PV.7332), I drew the Security Council's

attention to the Seselj case and the detrimental effect
of the Tribunal's decision to allow his temporary
release on humanitarian grounds. We therefore heartily
commend Prosecutor Brammertz's efforts to revoke his
provisional release and welcome the Appeals Chamber's
decision of 30 March ordering the Trial Chamber to act
on that immediately.

We note with displeasure, however, that the Appeals
Chamber's decision has not yet been carried out; we
expect the request for Seselj's return to custody to be
respected and implemented. It seems that the Tribunal
has intensified its efforts in that regard, and we hope
to see concrete results soon. In recent months, we have
again witnessed Vojislav Seselj's warmongering hate
speeches, his public burning of the Croatian flag and
his appalling mockery of victims. That toxic public
display was paired with the recent incomprehensible
decision to rehabilitate Seselj's infamous ideological
predecessor, a notorious war criminal in the Second
World War.

The recognition ofvictims' suffering is an important
prerequisite for reconciliation, and we share the view
that reconciliation begins with the acceptance of
established facts. Revisionism and the denial of crimes,
including genocide, are unacceptable. The upcoming
commemoration of the genocide in Srebrenica, as well
as the commemoration later this year of the atrocities
committed in Vukovar and elsewhere, is indeed an
opportunity to send a clear message in that regard.

Croatia has used its comprehensive negotiations
over its accession to the European Union (EU), now
successfully crowned with Croatia's membership
of the EU - we mark our second anniversary on
1 July - to fully develop its capacity for investigating
war crime cases and sending them to trial. In view ofthe
possibility of referrals by the ICTY of its proceedings,
we expect candidates and potential candidates for the
EU from south-eastern Europe to take advantage of the
same opportunity and to improve their capacities and
performance in that area.

I would like to conclude by reiterating Croatia's
continuing and full support of the ICTY, despite any
criticism voiced today or on previous occasions. We
appreciate the Tribunal's work, which has contributed
to ending impunity and advanced both the development
and implementation of international criminal law
and international humanitarian law, changing the
landscape of international justice profoundly. We
would particularly emphasize the contribution of both
the ICTY and the ICTR to international jurisprudence
on sexual violence.

Croatia hopes to contribute to the fight against
impunity for sexual crimes committed during conflicts
through our Parliament's recent enactment of a law on
the rights of victims of sexual violence. Under the law,
Croatian citizens, women and men alike, who were
victims ofrape and other forms of sexual violence during
the war in our homeland, will be entitled to financial
compensation and a permanent monthly allowance, as
well as the services and support they need to help them
heal after their trauma and rebuild their lives.

In conclusion, although the ICTY has done much,
its work is not finished yet. Thousands of victims
are still waiting for justice. Justice should be served
without any unnecessary delay. For our part, we will
continue to support and assist the Tribunal in its efforts
to complete its important work.

