The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that l have received a letter from
the representative of Sierra Leone to the United
Nations, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kamara
(Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
eleventh report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, document 8/2001/857
and Addendum 1. Members of the Security Council
also have before them document 8/2001/874, which
contains the text of a draft resolution.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to the following revision to be made to
the text of the draft resolution contained in document
S/2001/874 in its provisional form. In operative
paragraph 11, the word "ongoing" should be inserted
before the word "efforts".

It is my understanding that the Security Council
is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/2001/874) before it, as orally revised in its
provisional form. lfl hear no objection, I shall now put
the draft resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.
In favour:
Bangladesh, China, Colombia, France, Ireland,
Jamaica, Mali, Mauritius, Norway, Russian
Federation, Singapore, Tunisia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.


The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution, as orally revised
in its provisional form, has been adopted unanimously
as resolution 1370 (2001).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 5.45 pm.

