Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the Italian
presidency and you, Mr. Minister, for convening this
meeting and highlighting the security challenges
that the Mediterranean faces today. I also thank
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his
comprehensive briefing.

The security environment in the Mediterranean
region has indeed changed dramatically in recent years.
The conflicts, threats and unprecedented humanitarian
crises in North and West Africa, the Middle East and
the Sahel have deeply impacted stability in Europe as a
result of contemporary security challenges. Those can
be categorized as unconventional terrorism, irregular
migration and organized crime involving arms, drugs
and trafficking in persons, all of which generate an
atmosphere of fear, distrust and intense hostilities.
They, in turn, further negatively affect the social and
political structure of European society and regional
stability, as well as international peace and security.

We are deeply concerned about the growing
migration flow through the Mediterranean to Europe,
primarily through Libya, which has become the largest
illegal channel for the transit of migrants and refugees.
Instability, a fragile and volatile security situation, and
a lack of unity within Libya create a breeding ground
in which human traffickers are able to actively operate
in the country. Hundreds of thousands of migrants
and refugees in Libya suffer abuses and detention in
inhuman conditions.

Kazakhstan therefore welcomed the adoption of
resolution2380 (2017) on5 October, extending foranother
year the mandate of the European Union (EU) military
operation in the Southern Central Mediterranean and
conferring upon it the charge of combating smuggling
and human trafficking on the high seas off the coast of
Libya. More importantly, my delegation also urges for
the immediate and strict implementation by all Member
States of its various provisions.

We commend the outcome of the annual
Mediterranean Conference of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation (OSCE) in Europe, held in
Palermo last month under the Italian chairmanship
of the OSCE-Mediterranean Contact Group, which
focused on the large movements of migrants and
refugees across the Mediterranean. The results of
this significant meeting have a direct bearing on the
necessary steps that need to be taken.

Tackling the challenges of migration is of common
interest to all European States and the rest of the world.
It is not only a humanitarian issue, but also a political
and a security problem, which could be solved through
close partnership among the United Nations and the
EU, NATO, the African Union, the League of Arab
States and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
as well as countries of origin and transit. The rights
of refugees and migrants must be protected, including
through their active engagement in the social life of
their host countries and through their integration within
European society, so that people build a future in their
new home. This comprehensive development response
helps drive long-term economic growth, as well as jobs
and opportunities for potential economic migrants.

The role ofthe EU remains vital to support affected
countries by implementing the mandates of the EU
Trust Fund, the Joint Communication on the Central
Mediterranean route, and the Malta Declaration.
However, global challenges can only be effectively
addressed by the involvement of the international
community as a whole, working together in a balanced
and human rights-compliant way. The key principle of
such global support is balancing non-interference in the
internal affairs of States with the provision of technical
assistance and capacity-building for strengthening
State institutions.

Fragile Member States must be helped to protect
their citizens through bilateral and multilateral support
for the rule of law, good governance and security-
sector reform, and by promoting human rights and
investing in development, so as to create political,
economic and social stability. Understanding the root
causes of displacement, together with strengthening the
security-development nexus, is necessary for long-term
development, for which a regional approach consistent
with the "One UN" strategy would be most effective.
Such an approach cannot bear fruit without investing
in poverty reduction, education, job creation and
basic services.

Kazakhstan is strongly committed to reaching
concrete outcomes on the issue of migrants and
refugees, working together with the United Nations as
well as other Member States, based on the fundamental
principles of human dignity, justice and freedom. We
firmly believe that through our joint efforts we can
make the Mediterranean a region of new opportunities
and an oasis of global prosperity and stability.

