Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Sir, for convening this debate, in
accordance with the wish expressed by the Council last
month.

I also thank the Secretary-General for his
participation in this meeting, and in particular for his
enlightening statement early in the debate.

Allow me first to recall the importance that my
delegation attaches to the Abuja Agreement, the
conclusion of which was welcomed unanimously by
our Council and the entire international community,
which indicated their readiness to contribute to its
implementation. The Abuja Agreement remains our
common reference point and the direction towards
which all efforts should be directed with a view to
restoring peace and stability in Darfur. It is therefore
now more desirable than ever that the movements that
have not yet signed the Agreement rally to it, and that
all the people of Darfur be brought in so they can
discuss their common problems together.

My delegation is therefore particularly concerned
about the fact that the military option is still being
pursued by some rebel movements that have not signed
the Abuja Agreement, and about indications that that

Sudanese authorities are preparing to relaunch military
operations. Such options, as Council members have
already stressed, cannot restore peace and stability to
Darfur today any more than they could in the past.
They will only further prolong the terrible suffering
that the population has endured since the beginning of
the conflict more than three years ago. In contravening
Council resolutions, decisions taken by the African
Union Peace and Security Council and the Abuja
Agreement they can only thwart the major efforts that
the United Nations is prepared to make to restore peace
to Darfur.

Resolution 1706 (2006) is a continuation of
earlier efforts by the Security Council to support the
implementation of the Abuja Agreement. In my
delegation's view, the resolution was adopted for two
reasons. The first reason was the deteriorating
humanitarian and security situation in Darfur, which
has been of great concern in recent months, as the
Secretary-General has just reminded us. The worsening
situation compromises the implementation of the
Agreement. Several hundred thousand civilians are
threatened by the intensification of the fighting and the
worsening of conditions for humanitarian access that
has been seen in recent months.

The Council cannot resign itself to the
continuation of a conflict that has given rise to the
most serious violations of human rights which could
destabilize neighbouring countries and which are
forcing millions of people to rely on international
assistance for their survival.

The second reason that the Council took the
decision - and I think we should remember this -
was because the African Union asked it to do so. The
request was made before the signing of the Abuja
Agreement, and it has since been reaffirmed by several
decisions taken by the African Union Peace and
Security Council. The United Nations, which has
steadfastly supported the political and military efforts
of the African Union to restore peace to Darfur, had a
duty to respond positively to that request.

The Sudan must now accept the deployment of
the operation that we have decided to set up. It owes
that to its population, which - as has been noted today
several times - it has the responsibility to protect, if
necessary with the assistance of the international
community. I do not need to remind Council members
that that responsibility is set out in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome document and in resolution 1674
(2006).

The Sudan owes it to the African Union and to
the United Nations, whose only objective is to help to
restore peace to Darfur and to provide for the effective
protection of the civilian population there, while
respecting its sovereignty and territorial integrity.

I believe it essential that the same language be
used in communicating with the Government of
National Unity of the Sudan by all Council members
and by all of the regional organizations concerned. For
its part, France will continue its efforts to make sure
that that message - a message of responsibility,
dialogue and cooperation - is fully understood by the
Sudanese authorities.

I would like to conclude by recalling the
consequences of the conflict for the stability of the
region, including its consequences for the humanitarian
situation across the border as seen in the situation in
the camps in Chad. Resolution 1706 (2006) deals with
these issues, and we look forward to the Secretary-
General's proposals about ways to improve the security
situation in the Chad camps and the contribution that
might be made by the United Nations to monitor the
border area in the territory of Chad.

