Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): Allow me to begin by
congratulating you and your delegation, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and for the manner in which
you are conducting the Council's work.
I would also like to begin by welcoming
Presidents Byron and Robinson and Prosecutors
Brammertz and Jallow and by thanking them for their
briefings on the implementation of the completion
strategies of the two Tribunals. Croatia welcomes the
progress achieved thus far and hopes that the current
intense pace of work at both Tribunals will be
sustained in order to conclude their mandates in a
timely and orderly manner.

We note concerns raised by the fact that the
projected dates for the completion of trials will not be
met. That said, Croatia firmly believes that the early
closure of the Tribunals, albeit a legitimate objective,
should not come at the expense of the mandate with
which they were established or of respect for fair-trial
guarantees. Let us not forget that late arrests and the
remaining fugitives are the single most important
obstacles to the early closure of the Tribunals.

With regard to the mandate of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
the mandate of the Tribunal must not be declared
complete without bringing to justice Ratko Mladic and
Goran HadZie, the two remaining fugitives who have
been indicted for the most atrocious crimes committed
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Croatia, namely, the
massacres in Srebrenica and Vukovar.

For its part, Croatia - an early advocate of
establishing the ICTY - welcomes the Tribunal's
accomplishments, which have shown that peace and
justice are complementary. The Croatian Government
remains firm in its commitment to sustaining its full
and equivocal support for the Tribunal's efforts to close
the impunity gap, thus advancing the rule of law and
paving the way for reconciliation and cooperation by
individualizing criminal accountability and providing
justice and dignity to victims.

As my Government has made clear on many
occasions, Croatia remains committed to full
cooperation with the ICTY. Over the reporting period
under consideration, the highest officials of our
country remained engaged in direct dialogue with the
Prosecutor, while the Ministry of Justice and the Office
of the State Prosecutor maintained close, frequent and
intense working relationships with the Office of the
ICTY Prosecutor.

My delegation appreciates Prosecutor
Brammertz's assessment, in which he stressed the
overall responsiveness and general improvement in the
quality of work undertaken by Croatian authorities.
Last fall, Prime Minister Kosor established a special
task force in order to deepen and, where necessary,
broaden the work already undertaken by the
administrative investigation conducted following the
order issued by the Trial Chamber in June 2008. I
would like to state my delegation's appreciation for the
acknowledgment expressed by the Prosecutor and the
members of the Council with regard to the notable
results produced by the task force during the reporting
period, which were contained in the seven reports on
its activities delivered to the Trial Chamber and the
Office of the Prosecutor.

I should also like to underline that the task force
will continue to vigorously pursue several avenues
aimed at finding, clarifying or accounting for missing
documents. We are convinced that these additional
explorations will only further strengthen the credibility
of my Government's efforts.

In order to further confirm the extent of our
efforts, I should like to highlight some of the results
achieved. Following new insights gained by the task
force, 69 persons were interviewed, houses, cars and
offices were searched, and additional materials were
seized. The task force submitted new criminal charges
against nine persons on the grounds that they had
destroyed or concealed archive materials, bringing the
total of indicted persons to 13, and the total of
convicted persons to four.

As referred to in paragraph 13 of the Prosecutor's
report (see S/2010/270, annex II), I should like to
highlight that criminal proceedings have been initiated
in Croatia against several members of the special
police forces for crimes allegedly committed in the
village of Grubori in 1995 in the aftermath of
Operation Storm. The complete court file, as well as
subsequent updates, has been transferred to the Office
of the Prosecutor.

In pursuing the path of full support to the
Tribunal, we serve our shared goal of ensuring
accountability for all crimes, with the aim of achieving
justice, peace and reconciliation, as the best road map to
a future of lasting security and prosperity in South-East
Europe. As the Tribunal is beginning to downsize and
wind down, strengthening relationships between the
Office of the Prosecutor and national prosecutorial
authorities becomes even more important. Strengthening
skills and capacity at the national level - at which we
continue to deal with a growing war crimes caseload -
is a crucial dimension of the Tribunal's legacy.

Croatia is determined to continue with domestic
efforts to prosecute war crimes committed on its
territory since 1991. To that end, it has not only
developed a close working relationship with the ICTY,
but also taken the lead in strengthening cooperation
with prosecutorial authorities in the region. Only a few
weeks ago, Croatia hosted, for the third time, the
annual regional conference of State prosecutors from
countries of the former Yugoslavia. In this context, we
also welcome initiatives such as the Tribunal's legacy
conference, which was held in February this year, as an
opportunity to factor in the views and experiences of
countries directly affected, in particular on issues in
which we have lasting interest, such as the
management of the Tribunals' archives.

Before concluding, I should like to extend my
delegation's sincere gratitude to Ambassador Mayr-
Harting of Austria and his colleagues who, over the
past 18 months, have made dedicated efforts in steering
the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, notably in setting up a residual mechanism
to replace the Tribunals. This is an issue of most direct
relevance to my country and to the other countries
affected by the Tribunals' jurisdictions, in particular as
concerns such long-term issues as the management of
archives, the protection of witnesses and the serving of
sentences. Furthermore, the credibility of such residual
mechanisms is part and parcel of the Tribunal's
historical legacy. Croatia hopes that the Council will be
able to provide timely and sustainable solutions for the
residual issues.

