Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining
previous speakers in thanking Assistant Secretary-
General Menkerios and Mr. Zenenga for their
briefings. We welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representative of Somalia and the
Permanent Observer of the African Union. We also
welcome the participation of the Secretary-General of
the International Maritime Organization in today's
meeting, in accordance with resolution 1816 (2008).
We are thankful for their respective statements.

The statements that we have heard this morning
and the Secretary-General's report (S/2008/709) clearly
caution us that, while we may have reason to be
optimistic that the parties in Somalia are going to make
further progress in forging a political solution, their
efforts are taking place against the tide of the
deteriorating security and humanitarian situation. It is
most unfortunate that the situation in Somalia is at a
stage where a military solution is becoming more
attractive and appearing to be more achievable to some
Somali parties than it was a year or so ago. That is
evidenced by the expansion of territorial control and
other successes of the opposition armed groups.

The leaders and the people of Somalia are
ultimately responsible for the fate of their country. All
of them without exception need to come together and
agree on a political framework to achieve peace and to
decide on what should follow the transitional period.
Therefore, the commitment to the Djibouti process and
to the agreement to cease armed hostilities signed on
26 October are welcome, and we look forward to their
ongoing compliance.

The international community clearly has no
magic wand for resolving the Somali situation, but it
could - and obviously should - do more to help the
Somalis to settle one of the most persistent situations
of violence and humanitarian suffering. The political
process, including the coordinating role of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, requires
sustained international support. We welcome the
contribution of the members of the international
community to the Djibouti process. The unity of efforts
with the strong coordinating role of the Special
Representative is more crucial now that circumstances
are increasingly challenging.

The resolution adopted today on the expansion of
the sanctions regime against Somalia will, we hope,
contribute to the early establishment of peace and
stability in Somalia. On the peacekeeping track, it will
be useful and perhaps unavoidable to presume a hostile
environment. The Secretary-General makes that point
clear in the report. In reality, it is a prerequisite for any
kind of deployment that it enjoy the consent and
acceptance of the leaders and a majority of the
population of Somalia. The political framework
therefore remains key to the success of United Nations
involvement.

What is essential at this stage is the continued
planning for and exploring of options and
contributions. We want to ensure that, when the time
comes for the international community to deploy a
force, United Nations Member States and the
Secretariat are well prepared.

In the meantime, the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) remains central. We welcome the
Secretary-General's continued support for AMISOM,
but the urgent resolve of the United Nations and the
international community to strengthen support for
AMISOM. is needed. AMISOM. is facing greater
challenges and, at the same time, is called on by the
Djibouti agreement to assume greater responsibilities.

Finally, turning to the issue of piracy, we would
like to reiterate our condemnation and deplore all acts
of piracy and armed robbery against ships in the waters
off the coast of Somalia. We would also like to extend
our sympathies to the flag States and others that have
fallen prey to such illegal acts. We are constantly
reminded by the incidents that take place on an almost
daily basis of the seriousness of the issue. Not only is it
a threat to humanitarian assistance to Somalia and to
the security of maritime activities off the coast of
Somalia, but it also has an adverse impact on the social
and economic of the affected countries.

For that reason, Indonesia supported resolution
1816 (2008) and 1838 (2008). They provide the
required legal framework for assisting Somalia in
fighting piracy and armed robbery against ships off the
coast of that country. There can be no doubt of the
importance of enhancing States' cooperation in curbing
such acts. The issue of piracy off the coast of Somalia,
however, as we and others have reiterated on various
occasions, including in today's discussion, is the by-
product of lawlessness and the lack of law enforcement
capacity. The key to combating piracy and armed
robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia lies in the
political process, which needs to be continuously
supported by the international community, including
the Security Council.
