Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): My delegation, too, is
grateful to the Secretary-General for his report, which
contains a number of important recommendations to
take the peace process forward in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Our thanks also go the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ngongi,
for his comprehensive briefing on the situation in the
country. We welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mr. She Okitundu, who is
participating in today's meeting of the Council, and we
would like to thank him for his important statement.

After the disengagement phase has been
successfully completed, there will be numerous
complex tasks ahead in the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in terms of moving
forward the disarmament and demobilization of the
armed groups and achieving the withdrawal of foreign
forces from the territory of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We take note of the observation of the
Secretary-General that, despite existing difficulties, the
overall situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo continues to be favourable. We believe that the
momentum should be sustained by common efforts to
continue to promote the peace process. The Security
Council and the international community have always
demonstrated their determination to assist the parties in
their efforts to achieve peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and the progress achieved
during the two phases of the operation of United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) are testimony to
that.

However, we strongly believe that the dynamic of
the entire peace process can be maintained and moved
forward only if the responsibilities and the political
will of the parties is fulfilled and translated into real
action. This is the driving force of the peace process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, without which
international support would be ineffective.

With respect to MONUC's future role, we
welcome the Secretary-General's plans and
recommendations concerning the initiation of
MONUC's phase III deployment. We fully realize that
the security situation, the political climate and
logistical constraints require planning a step-by-step
approach for that deployment. Given that the main
focus of MONUC'S phase III deployment is
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration (DDRRR) we agree with the
Secretary-General that the main prerequisites for the
establishment of an enabling environment in which the
armed groups will give up their military options are the
continued adherence by the parties to the ceasefire and
the cessation of military support to the armed groups.

We also believe that constructive dialogue
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda and the demilitarization of Kisangani continue
to remain critical for DDRRR. We urge the parties to
fully implement their commitments under the Lusaka
Agreement and the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

We must mention the importance of the inter-
Congolese dialogue for achieving national
reconciliation, unity and peace, and we greatly
welcome the efforts of President Masire towards
facilitating the irreversibility of this process. We
realize how important the parties' full cooperation with
MONUC is. The provision by the parties of
unrestricted access and exhaustive information to
MONUC are only a few key elements of such
cooperation. Since it is clear that MONUC's role in
phase III would be the establishment of temporary
reception centres for disarmament and the initial
demobilization of former combatants, the close
engagement of United Nations agencies, the Bretton
Woods institutions, bilateral donors and non-
governmental organizations in support of MONUC'S
coordinating efforts would be critical to the success of
the DDRRR process as a whole. In this context, we
welcome the Secretary-General's intention to take
measures to strengthen cooperation between these
entities through a clear definition of the division of
labour.

The economic revival of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is one of the important elements for a
return to peace and stability, and it requires increased
assistance from the international community. In this
context, we are concerned about the continued
plundering of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and we look forward to the first
analysis by the panel of experts.

The humanitarian situation and human rights
violations continue to be a source of concern for the
international community and they should be urgently
addressed. We welcome the proposed expansion of
civilian operations by MONUC, including the civilian
police component. In this regard, I am pleased to
indicate that the Government of the Ukraine is
prepared to make its contribution to MONUC by
providing personnel for the civilian police component.

Finally, in the context of our discussion today, my
delegation hopes that the momentum that has been
generated by the mutual efforts of the parties and the
international community with regard to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will continue to move forward
if we continue to move forward together. We are of the
view that the presidential statement that we are to
adopt today will send an appropriate message in this
regard.

