Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): Let me take this opportunity to congratulate Afghanistan's President, Ashraf Ghani, on assuming office for his second term. I would also like to acknowledge the presence of our colleague, the Permanent Representative of Qatar, and applaud her country's role in the recent agreement that was signed in Doha on 29 February. I would like to express my gratitude to the United States for its leadership in creating the important and timely resolution 2513 (2020). Saint Vincent and the Grenadines voted in favour of the resolution with the hope that it will promote inclusive intra-Afghan negotiations that will achieve a political settlement and a permanent and comprehensive ceasefire. It will also promote the efforts of all regional and international partners of Afghanistan in informing and mobilizing support for the peace process. We need to focus on the elements of sustaining peace: supporting Afghanistan's unity, promoting reconciliation and restoring confidence in the political process. We therefore call on the internationalcommunity to support the peace process and the upcoming intra-Afghan talks. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines stresses the importance of an Afghan-led, Afghan-owned peace process that leads to an inclusive, negotiated political settlement. Indeed, only through a whole-of- society approach can we make inclusive peace agreements that actually hold and bear fruit of prosperity for all of society. This means, in practical terms, having all Afghans, including minorities, young people and women, integrally involved from the making to the implementation of the peace agreement. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, as a member of the Group of Friends of Women in Afghanistan and a delegation comprised mostly of women, welcomes that the resolution recognizes the critical role of women in the peace process. However, we can and must go further than the words written on paper. We cannot emphasize enough that women are agents of change and architects of peace. This undeniable fact needs to be reflected in all peace processes. Let us do our utmost to ensure that women are crafters of, participants in and beneficiaries of peace processes.
