Mrs. Kalajdzisalihovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of
September. My delegation is confident that the Council
will be on a safe and prudent course under your guidance.
Further, I should like to express the deep appreciation of
my delegation to His Excellency Ambassador Nugroho
Wisnumurti of Indonesia for leading the work of the
Council during the month of August.

The Government of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina fully supports the United Nations and North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) action against the
military targets of the Karadzic Serbs, and considers that
the legitimacy of this action is beyond doubt. This action
is fully provided for in resolution 836 (1993), which all
15 members of the Security Council voted for. The air
strikes against the military targets of the Karadzic Serbs
are the only way to stop the terrorizing and the
cold-blooded killing of innocent civilians in the safe areas
and to protect these areas from possible invasions, such
as those which recently happened in the safe areas of
Srebrenica and Zepa.

Since their establishment, the safe areas have in
essence been deprived of everything needed for their
survival by malicious, criminal cut-offs of water,

 

electricity, gas and all kinds of communications with the
outside world and by the incessant blocking of the United
Nations Protection Force and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in carrying out
their humanitarian missions and delivery of the necessary
aid to our population. Does this mean that the questioning
of this United Nations and NATO action, whose goals are
finally to stop this unbearable and unacceptable terrorism
and degradation of the United Nations, is also an
acceptance of the further sellout of respect for this world
Organization as a barren club of debaters or even the return
of the world to former times of confrontation and
polarization which for decades gnawed at this world
Organization?

The present-day answer of the international community
to the 41-month terror against civilians - which has
reduced the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina to dust
and cinders and deliberately wiped from the face of the
earth invaluable treasures created on that territory over
thousands of years - came, unfortunately, after a long
delay. It came when more than 200,000 non-Serbs, a
majority of whom were Bosnian Muslims, have been killed;
when over 500,000 people have been wounded, many with
lasting consequences; and when more than 1.5 million
people have been expelled from the territories occupied by
the Karadzic Serbs in genocidal ethnic purges.

The United Nations and NATO action is being carried
out very carefully with the intention of silencing the
weaponry of unchecked terror or of moving it to a distance
from which it will not be able to kill civilians on the streets
of Sarajevo. It was undertaken only when Pale again
sneeringly rejected the request that the same weaponry be
withdrawn beyond the exclusion zone. This action clearly
revealed the unlimited stockpiles of weaponry and
ammunition available to the Pale Serbs and how
disproportionately superior the terrorists are in heavy
artillery and war materiel over the armed forces of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The action of the United Nations and NATO
unpleasantly compromises the arms embargo, as a means of
support to the aggressor and as a way of preserving its
superiority over unarmed civilians and their defenders, and
undoubtedly shows that the arms embargo affects only the
legal Government of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. After this action, the question must be posed
as to how it can be that the world tolerates the unchecked
flow of arms, ammunition, fuel and other war materiel to
the Karadzic Serbs, with all its fatal consequences, and at
the same time stubbornly and unmercifully prevents any
action to enable the legal Government of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to exercise the inherent right of
every Member of the United Nations to self-defence.

All these tragic circumstances - all the
inconsistencies, this prevention of the legal Government
of the Republic Bosnia and Herzegovina from defending
itself and the caving in to the Pale criminals officially
accused of war crimes - have yet to provoke the kind of
worry that is now being demonstrated by some members
of the Security Council because of the legal and justified
actions that have been taken in order finally to stop and
halt the terrorism, which today claimed another seven
victims, wounded by the Serbian shelling of a civilian
area in Sarajevo.

The United Nations and the Security Council must
in their actions be guided exclusively by norms and
principles of the United Nations Charter and other
important documents of international law, and not by
momentary, partial and narrow-minded interests and other
unprincipled motives.

With the declaration of peace principles agreed upon
in Geneva today, this is a critical moment for taking this
fateful turn and finally freeing the world from relapses
into the cold war, which are unfortunately now re-
emerging.

