Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this open debate and for the excellent
concept note (S/2017/1016, annex).

Again, we strongly welcome and support the
prominence of production and sustaining peace as
a policy priority and as an overarching goal of the
United Nations system. Armenia has been a consistent
promoter ofthat concept. We are convinced that conflict
situations are detectable at a considerably early phase
because conflicts are, in essence, a reaction to the
persistent injustice, discrimination and denial of rights
that are often the root causes of a conflict.

The human rights aspect in conflict prevention
should therefore receive a prominent focus across the
entire United Nations system. All human rights are a
function of security. Early preventionre sts on the premise
of detecting, recognizing and acting upon deteriorating
human rights situations. The irresponsibility of hate
speech, intolerance, xenophobia, racial and ethnic
profiling, glorification of hate crimes, especially
those led and encouraged by political leaders within a
State, should be a concern to the entire international
community and serve as a clear early-warning sign of
potential conflict and atrocity crimes.

Asymmetric threats of transnational terrorism
represent a common challenge for international peace
and security. We welcome the creation of the Office of
Counter-Terrorism. Terrorism cannot and should not be
associated with any religion, nationality or civilization.
At the same time, we should acknowledge evidence
pointing at extremists and terrorists targeting specific
communities based on their religion or ethnicity.

The atrocities perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida and associated groups,
individuals, undertakings and entities, particularly
against ethnic and religious groups, are premeditated
and grave identity-based crimes on a massive scale. The
suffering of Yazidis, Christians and other ethnic and
religious minorities in groups, including, for example,
the indiscriminate attacks and forced displacement of
the ethnic Armenian populations of the Syrian cities of
Kesab and Deir ez-Zor must not remain unaddressed.
Armenia has been continually providing humanitarian
aid to the Syrian population to alleviate their suffering
and hardships. Furthermore, Armenia has sheltered
around 22,000 refugees from Syria and has been
implementing policies aimed at facilitating housing,
education, health care, social welfare, jobs, business
opportunities and other measures for the integration in
the new homeland.

Cyberterrorism and cybercrimes represent a
qualitatively new and significant threat to national
and international security. The evolving cyberthreats
and their unprecedented destructive capacity compel
enhanced and extensive cooperation involving not just
competent Government agencies, but also the private
sector and all other stakeholders.

The regional context of conflict prevention requires
continued broad recognition and support. Division of
labour, coordination and non-duplication of efforts and
activities are the building blocks of effective utilization
of the capacity of regional organizations in conflict
prevention and conflict resolution.

Armenia consistently welcomes the support of the
international community of the United Nations and
of the Secretary-General given to the Minsk Group
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) co-Chairs in the peaceful resolution of
Nagorno Karabakh conflict. In their latest statement of
7 December, the heads of delegation of the OSCE Minsk
Group co-Chair countries reiterated their commitment
to mediating a peaceful settlement of the conflict based
on the core principles of non-use of force or threat
of force, territorial integrity and the equal rights and
self-determination of peoples. They also welcomed
the resumption of the high-level dialogue between
the Presidents of Armenia and Azerbaijan in Geneva
on 16 October, as well as the meeting of the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Armenia and Azerbaijan on
6 December in Vienna under the auspices of the OSCE
Minsk Group co-Chairs. They also urged acceptance
of the expansion of the existing office of the Personal
Representative of the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office and
the implementation of the decisions adopted during
the summit in Vienna and St. Petersburg in 2016.
Armenia remains fully committed to negotiations for
the exclusively peaceful settlement of the Nagorno
Karabakh conflict within the internationally agreed
format of the OSCE Minsk Group co-Chairmanship
and based on the agreed basic principles and main
elements presented as an integrated whole.

In conclusion, Armenia remains a committed
contributor to United-Nations-led peace operations. A
platoon of 32 Armenian peacekeepers is deployed in
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Armenia
also supports the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali by contributing
one staff officer. Armenia steadily develops its
peacekeeping capabilities in accordance with the pledge
made by its President at the 2015 world leaders summit
on United Nations peacekeeping to establish a special
explosive ordnance disposal, counter-improvised-
explosive-device company, as well as level-II field
hospital. Armenia has also joined as a founding State
the Vancouver communique and Vancouver principles
on peacekeeping and the prevention of the recruitment
and use of child soldiers adopted on 14 November on the
margins of the United Nations Peacekeeping Defence
Ministerial Conference. Within the framework of its
partnership with NATO, the Armenian peacekeeping
contingent is also engaged in peace support missions in
Kosovo and Afghanistan.

We recognize and support the efforts of the
Secretary-General to enhance the effectiveness of the
architecture and the working methods of the peace
and security pillar of the Secretariat. The complex and
diverse challenge to peace and security require a holistic
approach and alignment of all three pillars ofpeace and
security, development and human rights, both in terms
of policy formulation and operational activities.

