Let me begin by thanking Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Under-Secretary- General Mark Lowcock for their briefings on the situation in Syria. South Africa is deeply concerned at the recent increase in hostilities and violations of the ceasefire agreement in the Idlib de-escalation zone. This increase in violence jeopardizes the already fragile ceasefire in the area. We call on all parties to strictly adhere to the provisions of the ceasefire agreement and refrain from actions that may further inflame tensions in the region. South Africa reiterates its full support for a complete and immediate nationwide ceasefire across Syria, as previously called for by Special Envoy Pedersen and in line with the appeal of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire. As we have mentioned before, South Africa remains concerned about the continued presence of armed forces in Syria and the need for external interference to come to an end, especially in terms of the provision of support to these armed groups. The sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Syria must be respected. South Africa continues to support the critical work of the Constitutional Committee and applauds the continued efforts of the United Nations and Special Envoy Pedersen in this process. The Committee plays an important role in providing a platform for all sectors and groups within Syrian society to voice their views and engage in dialogue on the future they want and deserve. Thanks to its own democratic transition and Constitution-building process, South Africa understands that progress cannot happen overnight. Trust and relationships take time to build. However, we must also acknowledge that the Syrian people want change. We therefore encourage the parties to reach consensus on the agenda and agree to a date for the fourth round of Constitutional Committee discussions. Additionally, we call on all parties to the Constitutional Committee to actively engage in constructive and genuine discussions on the agreed agenda. Turning to the humanitarian situation, Under-Secretary-General Lowcock's briefing on the stark reality of the humanitarian situation in Syria is of great concern. Let me take this opportunity to commend the dedication and work of all humanitarian actors operating in Syria, particularly in the light of the challenging circumstances these workers and the Syrian people face each day. Continuing violence, a deteriorating economy, the impact of unilateral sanctions, the impediments brought to the fore by the coronavirus disease pandemic and the after-effects of a nine-year conflict have all contributed to a humanitarian situation in dire need of assistance. The cost of food and basic essentials puts them out of reach for most Syrians, which is exacerbated by the additional expense of masks, gloves, sanitizer and other personal protective equipment. It is therefore critical that humanitarian assistance, both through the cross- border mechanism and from within Syria, is made available to all those who require it. With regard to the cross-border mechanism, the closure of the Bab Al-Salam crossing point has led to decreased access to the northern parts of Idlib and Aleppo. It is expected that the needs in these and other parts of the north-east will escalate as winter approaches; accordingly, humanitarian assistance and access must also increase. We call on the Syrian Government to further facilitate scaling up the cross- line humanitarian assistance provided by the relevant humanitarian agencies. South Africa reiterates its call for the safe, unimpeded and impartial delivery of humanitarian aid and assistance to all who require it, in line with the provisions of international humanitarian law and the need to ensure the safety and security of humanitarian workers. In addition, we urge all parties to respect their obligations under international humanitarian law and international human rights law for the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure, particularly schools, health facilities and water and sanitation facilities. The grave humanitarian and economic situations have been exacerbated by the imposition of unilateral sanctions on Syria. At a time when we have all acknowledged the dire situation Syrian civilians face, the added burden of unilateral coercive measures is unacceptable. The Council has heard from some of its members that economic measures have no impact on the humanitarian situation, without their offering credible information to support this claim. We therefore call on the Secretary-General to include in his reports to the Council an overview of the effects and impact, both direct and indirect, of unilateral sanctions on the humanitarian situation in the country. In conclusion, the situation in Syria can be resolved only through negotiations and dialogue. We call on all parties to spare no effort in striving for the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). Additionally, we welcome the combined briefing of the political and humanitarian situations in Syria, as we have long stated that these two tracks are interlinked. Progress in either track cannot be made independently of the other, given that, when there is no progress on the political front, the humanitarian situation further deteriorates, leading to increased loss of life and destruction. An alternative to war must be found. We call on the five foreign military forces in Syria to respect the sovereignty of the country, in line with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, whose seventy-fifth anniversary we all celebrated yesterday. We urge Special Envoy Pedersen to continue with an upsurge in - and enhanced - diplomacy between Syrian political stakeholders, so that they may overcome differences, build trust, ensure inclusive and transparent processes, get consensus on an agenda and prepare for a potentially difficult, protracted - and yet bloodless - political and constitutional dialogue. We appeal for no foreign interference. Special Envoy Pedersen can count on South Africa's support on the road ahead.
