Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union. I should like to add a few remarks in my national
capacity on some specific questions.

We fully share the logic and purpose of the Chilean
presidency's initiative to convene an open debate of
the Security Council on inclusive development and
its centrality in maintaining international peace and
security. As highlighted in the concept note (S/2015/6, annex), only a holistic approach towards issues of
peace, the safeguarding of human rights and economic
development, can make the vision of the founders of the
Organization - a world without war - a reality.

It is highly significant that this debate is taking
place on the eve of the launch of the intergovernmental
process to determine the post-2015 agenda on
sustainable development. Our moral imperative is to
promote inclusive societies, which in itselfis a strategic
investment in terms of enhanced security, greater
economic development and stronger institutions. In this
spirit, inclusive development has become a constant
in Italy's actions, in its cooperative programmes
since its launch of pioneering initiatives such as the
PRODERE Programme in Central America in the
1990s - a multi-disciplinary development programme
for refugees, displaced persons and returnees in six
Central American countries, assisting 700,000 people.
In light of our development cooperation experience,
and in full alignment with the action taken to date to
prepare the post-2015 development agenda, we are
particularly pleased to find the concept of inclusion
across the board in all of the objectives highlighted in
the outcome document of the Open Working Group on
Sustainable Development Goals (see A/68/970).

Minorities today are among the most vulnerable
against the many crises at hand, often based on
religious, ethnic and social factors. Precisely,
individuals belonging to minority groups are among
the main victims of violence. Their civil and political
vulnerabilities are worsened in many situations by
economic and social disparities, which are a particular
impediment to ensuring the enjoyment of the economic,
social and cultural rights of every citizen. An answer
to this double challenge could be the inclusion of
minorities in decision-making processes.

Italy has long supported the early warning
mechanisms of the United Nations aimed at offering a
timely detection of risks of mass atrocities. Italy has
supported the updating of the "Framework of Analysis
for Atrocity Crimes" drafted by the Office of the
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Adama
Dieng, and of the Special Adviser on the Responsibility
to Protect, Jennifer Welsh, launched in December 2014
here in New York.

A field in which Italy is very active is that of
professional training of officials from law enforcement
bodies of countries in transition. Among these are
training courses for Afghan government officers and
attaches, ongoing since 2010, offering theory and
practical applications of international humanitarian
and human rights law, with a particular focus on the
more vulnerable groups. The programmes of the Centre
of Excellence for Stability Police Units (CoESPU),
launched in 2005 in Vicenza and directed by the Italian
Carabinieri for instructors of specialized police units,
maintain in all of their modules the protection and
promotion of human rights, including in reference to
minorities. CoESPU courses are attended by officials
coming mainly from African and Asian countries, who
make up approximately 70 per cent of the participants.

What is more is that any discussion on inclusive
development must necessarily, in our opinion, focus on
gender issues. Since the inception of resolution 1325
(2000), Italy supported its adoption and implementation.
It is among the countries that adopted a national action
plan to implement the resolution and has taken a
number of actions to combat violence against women.
Moreover, Italy was the first Member State to stress the
introduction of women and peace and security issues
in the framework of the Universal Periodic Review. In
the same spirit, we have developed specific projects in
relation to the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
in Afghanistan, Lebanon, Somalia and the Palestinian
autonomous territories.

It is ultimately essential that we closely follow
the connection between crime prevention, criminal
justice and the rule of law for the sake of inclusive
development. This is a field in which we believe we
must endeavour to find a balance, even at times when
security needs and efficacity in responding to crime
can be at odds with the principles of the rule oflaw and
the separation of powers. This belief is expressed, first
and foremost, in the General Assembly resolution on
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime (resolution 55/25), of which Italy was
a sponsor and facilitator. The resolution clearly recalls
the values tied to the rule of law, understood as respect
for international and national legality, and those tied
to respect for human dignity, particularly of the more
vulnerable components of society - minors, women,
migrants.

To that end, in view of the thirteenth United Nations
Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, to
be held in Doha in April, five countries, including Italy,
have called for a debate on 24 February to be chaired
by the President of the General Assembly and centred
specifically on the interlinkages between criminal
justice, the rule of law and development. Another high-
level side event on issues linking human rights and the
rule of law to criminal justice against transnational
crime will be organized by Italy and Thailand for the
opening days of the Congress.

