I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the African members of the Council, Tunisia, South Africa and the Niger, as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. We would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this important and timely meeting on the Democratic Republic of Congo. We would also like to thank and commend the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on the situation in that country and the activities of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) (S/2020/554). Similarly, we thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of MONUSCO, Leila Zerrougui, for her comprehensive briefing. We recognize the encouraging political developments in the Democratic Republic of the Congo despite the existing security and humanitarian challenges. Our delegations commend the governing coalition's continued commitment to resolving their differences through dialogue. We are fully convinced that a constructive dialogue among all Congolese is required for the realization of their national priorities. In this regard, the African members and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines echo the sentiments of the Secretary-General that dialogue remains the only solution to resolve differences. On the security front, our delegations are concerned by the continued instability in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo owing to the destabilizing activities of armed groups and persistent intercommunal tensions. We therefore underscore the centrality of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region as a long-term solution to create stability in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the wider region. Our delegations also emphasize the importance of MONUSCO's role in stabilizing eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and recognize the efforts of the Force Intervention Brigade in addressing the threat posed by the armed groups. The Force Intervention Brigade requires the continued support of the Council in this regard and needs to be fully capacitated in order to remain effective in addressing the threat against the civilian population in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. The African members and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines condemn all violent attacks on civilians and MONUSCO in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which often result in casualties, and call for MONUSCO to be more responsive overall to the requirements to fulfil its protection of civilians mandate and to effectively address such attacks. In relation to the recent attacks against MONUSCO, we express our deepest condolences to the family of the deceased peacekeeper and to the Indonesian authorities. We also wish the injured peacekeeper a speedy recovery. In this connection, our delegations reiterate calls on the international community and partners to mobilize the necessary resources to support the Democratic Republic of the Congo in its efforts to strengthen its institutions and to advance the security sector reform (SSR) and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) processes. In that regard, we call on the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the country's partners to include a community-based approach in the SSR and DDR priorities, especially as relates to the reintegration of demobilized combatants. On the humanitarian situation, the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues to experience a worrying humanitarian crisis, and the coronavirus disease pandemic is exacerbating the situation. The unintended consequences of the pandemic response have increased vulnerabilities to other public health issues, while the re-emergence of Ebola virus cases are also a cause for concern, as they delay the progress of the important stabilization work by MONUSCO and other partners of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Nevertheless, we commend the ongoing swift response and decisive efforts undertaken by the Democratic Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO, other United Nations agencies, the African Union and the World Health Organization. Our delegations call for sustained international support to the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to mitigate the negative impact of these diseases on its people and economy. We also emphasize the need for flexible financial arrangements to bolster development efforts within the country, in line with national priorities and in accordance with the aims of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Turning to the situation in the region, our delegations wish to underline the importance of fostering strong and effective regional relations and cooperation and, in that context, wish to commend President Tshisekedi for his continued outreach to the regional Heads of State. We support the continued commitment of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) to assist the Democratic Republic of the Congo in achieving sustainable peace, security and stability. SADC's response to recent calls by the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia to help mediate the border issue attests to that commitment. Furthermore, our delegations are encouraged by the cooperation between the African Union and the United Nations and by their undertaking to continue engaging in support of the consolidation of stability and democratic governance in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The African members and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines also commend the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region for its efforts, alongside MONUSCO, in pursuing a regional strategy to address the illegal exploitation of natural resources. The illicit extraction and trade of minerals remains a major source of revenue that sustains armed group activity in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. Therefore, we commend the recent efforts of Member States of the region to improve traceability in the gold sector, namely, Rwanda's adoption of a national certification mechanism and Burundi and Tanzania's implementation of domestic certification processes following the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, in accordance with the Lusaka Declaration. Our delegations encourage further efforts of the regional and international partners to tackle illegal supply chains. Finally, our delegations commend the United Nations, MONUSCO, troop- contributing countries, the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and international partners for their commitment and efforts to stabilize the Democratic Republic of the Congo and protect civilians from ongoing threats despite the prevailing challenges. It is our considered view that any drawdown of MONUSCO should be based on the positive evolution of the situation on the ground for the handover of MONUSCO tasks to the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The African members and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines are of the firm view that it is imperative for the international community - through the African Union, the United Nations and international partners - to continue to maintain solidarity with the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to provide the necessary political, financial and other support in an effort to ensure that there is no reversal of the gains made thus far.
