At a time when the world is only beginning to understand the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and efforts are being made in various international forums to deal with the multitude of adverse impacts, we thank Indonesia, through Minister Marsudi, for convening this Security Council debate to prioritize sustaining peace in the midst of pandemics. We also welcome the important and insightful briefings by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, Former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Sarah Cliffe, which have lent substantial weight to our discussion. South Africa has had to learn many lessons from the pandemic, such as the critical need for international collaboration and robust multilateral institutions, and the urgency of socioeconomic assistance in sectors that should be helping the most vulnerable. We support the Security Council addressing the possible link between the pandemic and peace and security. This multilateral approach, which requires financial assistance, is of the utmost necessity given the intractable nature of global pandemics, in general, as well as the complex array of challenges that emerge from such a pervasive global phenomenon. It requires us to be aware of how deeply interconnected our world is and how solidarity and cooperation are becoming more and more indispensable. South Africa is deeply concerned about the potential adverse effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on conflict situations that are currently the focus of the Council, particularly the potential to delay or reverse vital gains in peace and political processes. It is crucial for the international community to continue to support countries affected by conflict in order to preserve those gains and sustain investments in stabilization and peacebuilding. Another impact area that will continue to require more attention is post- conflict reconstruction and sustaining the hard-won peace that has been achieved through the Council's efforts and those of the broader international community over many years. We must not lose sight of what it has taken to assist those in conflict situations to extricate themselves from violence, destruction and insecurity, and what the adverse effects of renewed instability and the re-emergence of conflict would entail. These may be especially pronounced due to the adverse humanitarian impact of coping with conflict amid a global pandemic. In that regard, South Africa will continue to support the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and a humanitarian pause in order to give due attention to the pandemic and attempts to mitigate its impacts, a call that has been reiterated and emphasized by the African Union. At this stage, we must acknowledge and commend the leadership and proactive action of the United Nations, which put in place measures to protect the health and safety of peacekeepers and to help navigate the effects of the pandemic. In that connection, we commend in particular the leadership and critical role of the World Health Organization (WHO) and its Director-General, Mr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, in preventing and mitigating the broader public health emergency in which peacekeeping and other peace-related activities are embedded. The WHO has also been working with affected countries and regional organizations such as the African Union to address the spread of COVID-19, thus exemplifying a global cooperative effort. While it is important to focus on post-conflict support in all peacebuilding efforts, we must be wary not to provide support, on the one hand, while inhibiting the adequate responses of Governments to protect their people from the pandemic and weather the economic difficulties and implications, on the other. It is for this reason that South Africa strongly supports the Secretary-General's call for the waiving of unilateral coercive measures and sanctions in order to allow affected Governments and societies to have the requisite resources to secure the much-needed life-saving and medical supplies, and personal protective equipment to respond to the pandemic. We also support calls for debt relief and deferral, and robust support for recovery in Africa. South Africa has consistently held the position that sanctions should be used to support peace processes and not as a means of collective punishment, which is made all the more devastating in the context of a pandemic that even the most capable economies have been struggling to deal with. The notion of a comprehensive response to the pandemic, which includes both additional efforts and resources, and the enhanced engagement of the Security Council in areas such as sanctions, will be key to the Council's role in the broader global effort. It is for this reason that South Africa believes that sustaining peace amid a global pandemic requires concurrently addressing the confluence of factors that determine the context for peace to endure in these trying times. For Africa, in particular, countermeasures against the threat posed by the COVID-19 virus, such as stay-at-home and social distancing laws, have adversely affected informal economies on which many people's livelihoods depend. Family incomes, in particular, have been jeopardized, deepening the social plight of countless people across the continent. In mostly developing nations, this scenario is likely to pit distressed citizenry against national Governments through heightened national protests, thereby threatening national security, peace and stability. Given the challenges that many African countries face with weak health systems, the implications of the COVID-19 pandemic on public health and peace and security in the COVID-19 landscape are dire. The linkages between public health, societal well-being, politics and the performance of national health systems are well documented in Africa, particularly in post-conflict countries and those experiencing protracted conflicts. Furthermore, considering the economic toll the virus has taken on both low- and middle-income African countries due to resources to contain the effects of COVID-19, African countries may not be able to manage the debt service for a few years to come. These conditions undermine peace, stability and prosperity. South Africa maintains that it is in our collective interests for the United Nations to begin setting its sights on this grim reality by focusing the attention of United Nations agencies on the disruptive socioeconomic effects of COVID-19 on developing nations. In conclusion, sustaining peace depends on the overall political, social, economic and physical health of societies. In addition, we inhabit a world that is increasingly global and interconnected. We must therefore come to terms with the necessity of prioritizing sustainable peace through forums such as the Peacebuilding Commission, in cooperation with regional organizations and their peacebuilding counterparts and mechanisms, while also drawing on a system-wide United Nations multilateral effort. That is especially necessary as we work to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, which seek to address the root causes of many conflicts we are facing. It is only through cooperation in the face of the temptation to look inward that we will emerge from the current pandemic the better and confront a new world with a renewed spirit of global cooperation.
