Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I wish first to
acknowledge the presence of His Excellency Mr. Jean-
Marc Ayrault, Minister for Foreign Affairs of France,
and thank him for introducing the draft resolution
contained in document S/2016/846, co-authored by
France and Spain. We also note the draft resolution
contained in document S/2016/847, submitted by the
Russian Federation, on which the Council will take
action later.

Malaysia has repeatedly called for the Security
Council to act more decisively on Syria. We view this
latest effort by France and Spain as an attempt to assert
the Council's authority and discharge its responsibility
to effectively address the deteriorating situation in
Syria. We believe that the main objective of the draft
resolution contained in document S/2016/846 was to
prevent further escalation of violence and hostilities,
including by calling for a halt to aerial bombardment,
is key to reducing the death and destruction that
have disproportionately affected thousands of Syrian
civilians, particularly women and children, for far too
long.

Cessation of aerial bombardment would have
been a very welcome and necessary step in elevating
the despicable suffering of those civilians in eastern
Aleppo who have borne the brunt of such bombardment
in recent weeks. Of utmost importance to my delegation
is the understanding that, had this draft resolution been
adopted, all parties to the conflict with the capacity to
carry out air strikes would have to heed the provisions of
paragraph 3 of the Franco-Spanish text. Given its clarity
of purpose and the compelling reasons behind it, my
delegation voted in favour of the Franco-Spanish draft.
We are gravely disappointed that the draft resolution
was voted down. It is shameful and a betrayal of all the
hopes pinned upon the Security Council to alleviate the
dreadful suffering caused by a brutal conflict.

Briefly, on the draft resolution contained in
document S/2016/847, there is no question that the draft
has some merit and contains elements that also speak to
alleviating the humanitarian situation, on restarting the
political process in Syria and on combating terrorism.
That notwithstanding, Malaysia and other members of
the Council are not privy to the 9 September bilateral
agreement between Russia and the United States. Since
the United States has publicly repudiated the agreement
on account of lack of implementation, we do not believe
that the Council is in a position to endorse such an
agreement. We are therefore not in a position to support
this draft.

We are fearful of the consequences of the Council's
actions, particular on the message of Council disunity
that we have displayed today. The Security Council
cannot afford to continue in this state of paralysis,
with total disregard for the abysmal situations faced by
innocent civilians in Syria. With such deep disunity,
how much hope and prayers can those besieged Syrians
in such appalling situations pin on us?
In our view, these initiatives today do not represent
the Council's best efforts. The responsibility of
addressing the conflict in Syria remains squarely on
our shoulders. In this regard, a number of us could
perhaps coalesce around a middle ground with the
hope of finding a way out of the current stalemate and
move closer to a common understanding on ending
hostilities and conflict. We will certainly work to this
end alongside interested Council members and other
partners. We must never give up hope. We must not let
eastern Aleppo end tragically.

