Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).At the outset, I would like to convey
the Movement's appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on the situation in
the Middle East, including the question of Palestine.
I also avail myself of this opportunity to express my
appreciation to Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his briefing to the
Council today.

The Non-Aligned Movement remains seriously
concerned about the situation in Palestine as a result of
the illegal policies that continue to be pursued by Israel,
the occupying Power, against the Palestinian people and
their land. Over the past months, while the international
community has been awaiting tangible progress in the
resumed negotiations between the two sides and has
articulated its full support for that process on the basis
of the long-standing parameters rooted in the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map,
the occupying Power has, regrettably, continued to
behave in a manner contradictory to those parameters,
to the good faith required for the negotiations and
to the overarching objectives of the peace process.
Tensions have thus continued to rise, widening the
gap between the hopes and expectations for the
political process and the reality on the ground. Israeli
settlement activities, the blockade of the Gaza Strip,
military raids and constant provocations, including
incitement to religious conflict by extremist Israeli
settlers, are exacerbating the conditions on the ground
and reinforcing doubts regarding Israel's desire for, or
commitment to, the peace that the State of Palestine,
with the strong support of the international community,
including NAM. countries, has been earnestly seeking
and remains committed to achieving.

NAM. is extremely alarmed in particular by the
escalation of acts of aggression in occupied East
Jerusalem, especially in and around Al-Haram
Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa Mosque, which continue
to be the result of provocations by Israeli extremists,
including settlers and Government officials. The
blatant disrespect for that holy site and its worshippers
and the continued threats of further incursions are
tantamount to grave acts of incitement that are stoking
religious sensitivities and aggravating already elevated
tensions. Israeli officials continue to recklessly fuel
religious tensions by encouraging extremists to acts of
provocation that threaten to ignite a religious conflict,
with far-reaching and dangerous consequences for the
region and beyond. NAM. therefore once again draws
the Security Council's attention to that serious matter,
which constitutes a threat to international peace and
security, and calls for actions to halt all such Israeli
incitement and for respect for the sanctity of religious
sites.

NAM. also reiterates its serious concern regarding
the continued and systematic Israeli violence and
human rights violations against the Palestinian people,
including the killing and injury of civilians in violent
military raids, the excessive use of force against civilian
protesters, the forced displacement of civilians and
the arrest and detention of more Palestinians. Israel's
settlement activities and construction of the wall
have also continued in the recent period throughout
the Palestinian land through myriad illegal means
and measures, in grave breach of the Fourth Geneva
Convention and numerous United Nations resolutions.

The illegal blockade on the Gaza Strip also remains
of serious concern, as it continues to inflict grave
socioeconomic losses and humanitarian hardship on
the Palestinian people besieged there. NAM. condemns
those violations and urges the international community
to persist with its calls on Israel, the occupying Power,
to respect its obligations under international law and to
cease all such illegal actions and violence against the
Palestinian people under its occupation.

The ministers of the Non-Aligned Movement
Committee on Palestine met on 26 September in New
York, reviewed the recent developments on the political
track and on the ground in Palestine and reaffirmed their
solidarity with the Palestinian people and their support
for their just cause to realize their inalienable right to
self-determination and freedom in their independent
State of Palestine and to achieve a just solution to the
question of Palestine in all its aspects. They expressed
hope that the current negotiations would succeed within
the specified time frame and result in the achievement
of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace that would
bring an end to the Israeli military occupation of the
Palestinian and other occupied Arab lands.

The Non-Aligned Movement therefore renews
its calls, at this most critical juncture, for continued
support and assistance to the Palestinian people in their
legitimate historic struggle for justice, dignity, peace
and the exercise of their right to self-determination.
NAM. calls further for a redoubling of international
efforts, including by the Security Council and in line
with our political, legal and moral obligations, towards
the realization of these noble objectives, so are to usher
in a new era of peace and stability in the Middle East.

Lebanon has suffered from consecutive Israeli
attacks against its territory, with a heavy human and
material toll, followed by subsequent years of occupation
and aggression. Unfortunately, Israel still continues
to violate Lebanese airspace, while intensifying its
incursions over Lebanon. Such activities are a blatant
violation of Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant
international resolutions, in particular resolution
1701 (2006). The provisions of that resolution should
be implemented in a manner that guarantees the
consolidation of the foundations of stability and security
in Lebanon and prevents Israel from undertaking its
daily violations of Lebanese sovereignty.

With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement condemns all the measures taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status ofthe occupied Syrian Golan, which
have intensified after the outbreak of Syrian crisis. The
Non-Aligned Movement demands once again that Israel
abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully from
the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June
1967, in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).

In my national capacity, with regard to the statement
made today by the representative of the Israeli regime
against my country, it will be enough to quote a Persian
saying: "The rage and anger of your criminal and
aggressor enemy is a good indication that you are on
the right track."

