The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of India.

I too would like to join others in thanking the
Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing today.
Let me state at the outset that India is not party to the
Rome Statute, for reasons that are well known and need
not be reiterated here. However, we support the rights
and obligations of the States that are members of the
International Criminal Court (ICC).

India strongly condemns all acts of violence
committed against civilians. We believe that the right
to life is one of the fundamental rights and should be
the foundation of any social order. It is the obligation
of all States to take appropriate measures to protect the
lives of their citizens while maintaining social order.
The States concerned must also bring to justice those
responsible for violations of that right. During the
conflict in Libya there were deaths and destruction on
a massive scale committed by parties to the conflict.

In the post-conflict scenario the proliferation
of weapons has emerged as a major problem, posing
a threat to stability in Libya and in the larger region.
The Libyan Government has to confront that challenge
by undertaking an inclusive political process aimed at
achieving national reconciliation, peace, security and
stability in the country. In that connection, we welcome
the progress achieved towards establishing democracy
in Libya, and we commend the people and Government
of Libya for holding elections to the National Congress.
We hope that peace, stability and socioeconomic
development will soon return to Libya.

The international community, including the
Security Council and the ICC, should fully assist the
Libyan authorities in that process. Such an inclusive
approach to national reconciliation, anchored in State
sovereignty, is the only way to overcome the problems
that Libya is currently facing. We have noted the
Prosecutor's comments today, and we expect that she
will carry out a thorough and impartial investigation of
the situation in Libya in an impartial and transparent
manner. The Council referred the situation in
resolution 1970 (2011), and a report on the investigation
of the situation is important. All those responsible for
committing crimes should be held accountable. Political
or other non-judicial considerations should not exempt
anyone from prosecution for crimes committed.

Last but not least, it is also important to ensure that
all actions by the ICC Prosecutor fall strictly within
the ambit of resolution 1970 (2011), particularly its
paragraph 6, which concerns the States that are not
parties to the Rome Statute.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Libya.

