Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We are grateful to the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, for his
fifteenth report to the Security Council and for his
briefing today. As he is the first ICC Prosecutor and he
is preparing to step down, we would like to recognize
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo's work in that post and to wish
him every success in his future endeavours.

Russia supports the work of the ICC in ensuring the
irreversibility of sanctions for the most grievous crimes
that trouble the whole of the international community.
We believe that in order to strengthen the authority
of the ICC it is critical that ongoing investigations
objectively assess foul play committed by all sides in
any given situation, while avoiding politicization in the
work of the Court.

Since the adoption by the Council of resolution
1593 (2005), almost seven years ago, the ICC has
made significant progress in investigating Sudanese
crimes - so much so that further progress is impossible
without those indicted being tried in The Hague. Many
attribute that state of affairs to the unsatisfactory level
of cooperation on the part of States with the Court,
especially the Sudan itself.

Of course, the situation requires analysis and a
search for new approaches to the problem of combating
impunity. However, we would like to stress that, in that
context, invoking enforcement capacities under Chapter

VII of the Charter with a view to carrying our arrest
warrants for Sudanese officials is unlikely to solve
problems arising for the ICC in the Sudan. We continue
to closely track efforts to bring to justice those guilty of
the attack on African Union peacekeepers in Haskanita.
We note yet again that that 2007 attack was not the only
episode of destructive acts by rebel groups that merit the
attention of the Prosecutor.

Russia continues to believe that the administration
of justice should take place within a general framework
for a settlement to the problems in Darfur. In supporting
the decision of the Security Council to refer the situation
in Darfur to the ICC Prosecutor, in accordance with
the Rome Statute, we continue to believe that work in
that area should not stand in the way of the process of
restoring peace and post-conflict normalization.

