Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): My
Government heartily welcomes this discussion of
sanctions policy. Our shared objective should be the
design and implementation of effective sanctions regimes
that promote desired results. It is our hope that the
informal working group on sanctions, which we are
establishing today, will help us go in that direction.

Sanctions effectively designed and implemented
offer an important instrument for the international
community to use to counter threats to international order.
They represent an alternative to even more coercive
instruments, including military force. We should
recognize without apology that sanctions themselves are
clearly coercive measures. Neither military intervention
nor the application of sanctions are undertaken lightly, nor
should they be.

 

Members of the Security Council have a unique
responsibility to promote peace and security. It remains an
unfortunate and tragic characteristic of our time that some
States, or elements within States, engage in activities that
must be countered promptly and aggressively to protect
those who are threatened or those who are unable to protect
themselves.

We all agree, I think, that sanctions are not an end in
themselves. They are a means, recognized in the Charter, of
expressing the will of the international community to end
unacceptable behaviour. To be effective in forcing
behavioural change, sanctions must be credible and
enforceable. Sanctions imposed for principally symbolic
reasons are unlikely to change the behaviour of the
sanctioned entity and may indeed undermine the overall
viability of sanctions as an alternative to military force.

Today's discussion and our continuing work will be
valuable if they promote agreement that can guide
subsequent efforts to design and implement sanctions
regimes that address the unique nature of specific threats to
international security as they exist in reality. Any overly
precise one-size-fits-all structure is destined to fail and will
waste valuable resources. To be effective, sanctions regimes
must be carefully tailored to the particular situation in
which they are to be applied. That said, we can certainly
identify a number of principles that will have relevance to
any potential application of sanctions.

First, we agree, is the need to anticipate and minimize
the unintended impacts of sanctions on elements of the
population of the targeted State, on neighbouring States and
even on other, far-removed, entities. The complete
elimination of unintended impact is an impossible goal and
hence not an aspiration that can be met. But the design and
implementation of effective sanctions should consider the
minimization, management and mitigation of unintended
impacts, especially on vulnerable sectors of the population,
while acknowledging that they cannot be eliminated
entirely.

Next is the need to improve the capacity of the United
Nations - especially the Security Council - and its
Member States to implement sanctions regimes once they
are imposed. The Canadian delegation, under the leadership
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Axworthy, and of
Ambassador Fowler, has stimulated innovative techniques
in this regard, and we commend them for this. The
Secretary-General and many others have made very
valuable recommendations for improving sanctions
implementation, and we look forward very much to
working with them. At the same time, the commitment of
national authorities to sanctions enforcement is obviously
critical. Action by those authorities to address activities
by sanctions violators within their borders should have
high priority.

Thirdly, as we seek improvements to effectiveness
and as we seek to minimize unintended impact, we should
keep in mind that sanctions are designed to force an end
to behaviours or policies judged to be unacceptable. The
goal is compliance, and the requirements should be clear.
To be effective, sanctions regimes must clearly enunciate
the standards by which alterations to that unacceptable
behaviour will be measured. The termination of sanctions
should be directly and transparently linked to
confirmation of the changed behaviour. In some cases, it
may be possible and appropriate to link suspension or
relaxation of elements of a sanctions regime to progress
towards changed behaviour. In all cases, however, once
sanctions have been imposed, it is essential to place the
burden of proof regarding their suspension or termination
where it properly belongs: on the demonstrated behaviour
of the sanctioned entity. Just as sanctions must never be
lightly entered into, they should not be terminated due to
a lack of resolve, a lack of will or a lack of patience. For
down that path lies a more dangerous future for many of
the countries represented in this Chamber, a future in
which the instruments available to the Council and to the
international community are fewer and less credible.

The United States is fully committed to supporting
the efforts of the Security Council's sanctions working
group, the Secretary-General and others in a serious effort
to analyse options, develop guiding principles, and
monitor and adjust ongoing sanctions efforts. As that
important process continues, we also remain firmly
committed to ensuring that the Council retains its ability
to act swiftly and with determination to counter current
and future threats. The United States will be an active and
engaged participant in a genuine effort to strengthen and
streamline sanctions policy that supports the ability of the
United Nations to meet its Charter obligations to enhance
international peace and security.

