The President: I thank the representative of
Denmark for his kind words addressed to me.

I should like to make a statement in my capacity
as representative of Brazil.

In my national capacity, I, too, wish to thank
Mr. Alan Doss for presenting the report of the
Secretary-General (8/2005/186), and I take this
opportunity to welcome the participation of the
Secretary-General in this important meeting of the
Security Council. I wish to convey my delegation's
appreciation to Deputy Foreign Minister Aziz Pahad
for sharing with the Council his assessment of the
situation in Cote d'Ivoire and for his work on behalf of
the African Union to move the peace process forward. I
further welcome the presence of Advocate Mojanku
Gumbi, President Mbeki's legal adviser.

Many relevant points have already been raised by
my colleagues. The delegation of Brazil shares their
concerns over continued violations of human rights,
the prevailing climate of impunity and the absence of
the rule of law in many parts of the country. I shall
concentrate my comments on two points: security and
the electoral process.

Regarding security, the most worrisome aspect of
the current situation in C6te d'Ivoire seems to be the
proliferation of militias. New armed groups appear to
be constantly mushrooming in C6te d'Ivoire, and the
situation cannot be dealt with from a political
perspective alone.

The trafficking of small arms has to be curtailed,
and options must be made available to the unemployed
youth of Cote d'Ivoire. Development agencies and
partners should redouble their efforts in designing
quick-impact economic projects in the communities,
with a View to generating employment and income.
There can be no peace without development. Minister
Pahad stressed the deterioration of the socio-economic
situation in the country.

Also related to security is the capacity to convey
the right messages to the population in an effective
manner. In that regard, we commend the work carried
out by the public information section of the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI), in
particular UNOCI-FM, for the expansion of its
outreach and for its increased monitoring of messages
aired by local media. The report of the Secretary-
General also refers to initiatives by Ivorian radio and
television authorities that could compromise UNOCI's
radio broadcasting - a point also raised by Mr. Doss.
The station's role and independence must be preserved.

Furthermore, it is for us a matter of great concern
that, following the positive impact of resolution 1572
(2004), the use of virulent language has recurred
recently, as stated in paragraph 52 of the report. The
Council should be able to assist UNOCI in minimizing
all security risks in the country. That includes making
good use of measures against those individuals who are
preventing the peace process from moving forward and
giving favourable consideration to the Secretary-
General's request for strengthening UNOCI's capacity
to deal with insecurity and to fully enforce the arms
embargo, as well as to his recommendation to extend
the mandate of the mission, as appropriate.

On the electoral process, it is crucial that all the
Ivorian parties understand that, without free and fair
elections, peace will remain elusive. Perhaps not all
groups and factions actually want peace. But it is the
firm belief of our delegation that the overwhelming
majority of Ivorians do. Those elections may be held
only if there is sufficient security on the ground and if
certain preconditions are met, including the adoption of
relevant legislation, in conformity with the spirit of
Linas-Marcoussis, and the disarmament of the rebels
and militias.

The continuing impasse between the major actors
in C6te d'Ivoire jeopardizes even the October elections
and, in consequence, the stability of the entire region.
West Africa cannot afford to find itself mired again in
instability and conflict, and Brazil therefore urges the
Government and the rebel forces to reach a common
vision of the future and to participate in good faith in
the plan of action laid out by President Mbeki and his
team for sustainable peace in Cote d'Ivoire. We urge
them to seize the opportunity offered by the upcoming
summit in Pretoria and to work constructively with the
mediation team.
In closing, I would like to express Brazil's
appreciation to the African Union and, in particular, to
President Obasanjo and President Mbeki, for their
tireless efforts in C6te d'Ivoire, as well as to the
Economic Community of West African States for its
many initiatives aimed at preserving stability in the
region. We have long discussed - in the Security
Council, as well as in the General Assembly - the
framework for cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations. We see it in the making in
West Africa, and it is a very positive lesson upon
which we will build. The delegation of Brazil wishes
the mediators every success and welcomes any follow-
up information they may share with us in the future.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Cote d'Ivoire, to whom I give the
floor.

