Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the Security Council for this
month. I am certain that, under your wise leadership,
the Council will achieve success.

I should like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Feltman for his exhaustive briefing.

Allow me, on behalf of the Government and people
of Libya, to express our profound condolences to the
Government of the United States and to the family of
Ambassador Stevens, as well as to the families of his
colleagues and those of other Libyan victims killed
during the attack against the American Consulate in
Benghazi. The Government and the National General
Congress have condemned that attack, which was carried
out by an extremist group acting outside the law. In that
regard, I should like to reiterate the condemnation of
Libya's authorities of the attack. I also wish to reaffirm
the intention of the Libyan Government to pursue the
perpetrators and bring them to justice. The attack in no
way serves the interests of Libya's people or authorities.
It also cannot be considered to have been in defence of
Islam; it does great damage to the image of Islam.

I am deeply saddened by the tragic death of
Ambassador Stevens. Ambassador Stevens was a
marvelous diplomat known for his openness to the
Libyan people, whom he held in the highest regard. His
death is a great loss for the Libyan people, as it is for
his family and for the United States. He was a friend of
Libya who always stood shoulder-to-shoulder with us
when we faced murder and destruction during the reign
of the despot. He genuinely tried to promote relations
between our two countries and to help Libyans to
move from revolution towards a new State. It is for that
reason that Libyans will always remember Ambassador
Stevens as one of Libya's greatest friends who, through
his actions and position, helped it to once again assume
its place in the international community.

No one can doubt that we in Libya face enormous
challenges - including those associated with the State
being able to extend its authority throughout its territory
and to be able to control all groups. However, this is
an interim period. The Libyan people are determined
to extend the State's authority throughout the entire
country and to form a strong Government that is able
to manage the country and bring it from revolution to
statehood.

I will not speak at greater length about the attack in
Benghazi. An investigation is under way and we will be
looking into all the factors that led to this crime. Libyan
authorities will announce the results of the investigation
and will ensure that anyone responsible for negligence
contributing to the attack will be brought to justice.
The perpetrators of this heinous crime will be brought
to justice.

Libya is party to the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations. We assume our full responsibility
in connection with the protection of diplomatic missions
operating in Libya, including the protection of their
staff and that of all non-Libyan nationals on Libyan
territory. Libyan authorities will not allow any of these
outlaws to jeopardize the stability of the country.
