Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
Central and Eastern European countries associated with
the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and
Slovakia - and the associated country Cyprus, as well as
the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) countries
members of the European Economic Area, Iceland and
Norway, align themselves with this statement.

The European Union welcomes the agreement by
both parties on a timetable which foresees the completion
of the outstanding provisions of the Lusaka Protocol by
the end of February. We urge both the Government of
Angola and UNITA to complete their tasks according to
the agreed timetable.

We welcome the conclusion of the registration and
disarmament of residual UNITA military personnel.
UNITA must now declare itself completely demilitarized.
This will open the way for its formal transition to a
political party and allow it to participate fully and
constructively in the democratic process and in the future
development of Angola.

We note the progress made in extending State
administration. We call upon UNITA to cooperate fully
and to avoid further delays. In particular, we urge the
early extension of State administration to Bailundo and
Andulo as a demonstration of UNITA's commitment to
national reconciliation.

We look forward to the completion of Radio
Vorgan's transformation to "Radio Despertar". Non-
partisan stations can play a positive role in increasing the
flow of information throughout the country and in
building confidence, as my colleague the Permanent
Representative of Mozambique has just indicated.

The European Union places the utmost importance
on respect for human rights. We are concerned that
human rights observers are present in only 7 of Angola's
18 provinces. We support the Secretary-General's
intention to increase the number of observers to the
mandated strength, and international efforts to increase
respect for human rights and improve the free movement
of people and goods in Angola. We underline the
importance of the work of United Nations civilian police

 

in promoting respect for human rights and in building a
climate of trust in Angola.

The European Union has invested heavily in the
Angolan peace process and will continue to do so. We are
the largest contributor to Angola's rehabilitation and a
leading provider of humanitarian assistance. We provide
critical assistance for the health sector, for agriculture and
for rural development. And we will continue to assist the
Angolan authorities to remove the scourge of mines in their
country. But Angola's recovery depends not only on
continued international assistance, but also on the
willingness of both parties to bring the peace process to a
successful conclusion.

The European Union is encouraged by reports that a
meeting between President dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi is
being prepared. This should take place in Angola as soon
as possible. International and grass-roots efforts to promote
national reconciliation can succeed only if there is a firm
and unequivocal commitment at the highest political level.

The European Union recognizes the difficulties which
still lie ahead. We believe that the United Nations has a
valuable role to play in overcoming those difficulties and in
fostering an atmosphere of stability and national
reconciliation. We welcome the decision to extend for a
further three months the presence in Angola of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA). We pay
tribute to the men and women of MONUA and to the
Secretary-General' s Special Representative, Maitre Blondin
Beye, who are doing a difficult job in trying and often
dangerous circumstances. We welcome and appreciate the
efforts of the three observer States: Portugal, the United
States and the Russian Federation.

After so many years of conflict, Angola is now closer
than at any other time since independence to establishing a
lasting peace. We admire the strength and courage shown
by the Angolan people in times of great difficulty. It is
essential now to ensure that the last remaining hurdles are
successfully overcome so that Angolans now and in the
future can experience the peace and stability they so clearly
deserve.

