Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom very much welcomes the developing practice of
open debates on issues of urgent concern such as we are
discussing today. The large number of speakers and
participants, particularly from African delegations, is a good
sign of the Vitality of this procedure and should in itself
send a message to the Somali people that they are not
forgotten. It should also express to the Somali leaders that,
while the international community stands ready to help, it
is equally frustrated at their failure to make peace and
establish a representative and functioning government.

Earlier this morning we attended, in the Economic and
Social Council Chamber, the inauguration of the United
Nations System-wide Special Initiative on Africa. Somalia
seems to be a blot on that otherwise brightening scene. At
one time, there were over 28,000 peace-keepers serving
with the United Nations Operation in Somalia, and 209 of
them lost their lives. The United Nations spent $164 billion
on peace-keeping in Somalia, and donors have disbursed
over $500 million in humanitarian and other assistance. My
own Government has given $80 million since 1991 for
relief work in Somalia. Had the Somali leaders decided
otherwise at the end of 1994, we would probably still be
there in a much bigger way.

The continuing need for humanitarian assistance in
Somalia is obvious, but humanitarian activity requires a
minimum of cooperation from the parties on the ground.
The problem is not so much a lack of food and medicine
as an inability to deliver it to those most in need.

In much of Somalia - the north is to some extent
an exception - that cooperation is not forthcoming, and
international personnel are subject to harassment and
attacks which the Security Council has many times
condemned in the most forthright way. Like others, we
pay a tribute to the efforts of the non-governmental
organizations and individuals who persevere despite these
dangers.

United Nations and regional organizations should do
all that they can to rekindle efforts to achieve a peaceful
settlement and national reconciliation in Somalia. We
welcome the continuing efforts of the Organization of
African Unity.

In the final analysis, a peaceful settlement in
Somalia and the establishment of Viable national
institutions can be achieved only by agreement between
the Somalis themselves. The Security Council last set out
its views on the situation in its presidential statement of
24 January this year (S/PRST/1996/4). this remains our
clear message, and we must hope that it will be carried
through the international media to the Somali people and
produce a rethinking by the leaders concerned of their
responsibilities towards their people.

