Mr. Moriko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this meeting
and would like to thank Mr. Michel Kafando, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi, for his
detailed briefing on developments in Burundi. We also
thank Ambassador Jurg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
his briefing.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the generally stable
sociopolitical environment prevailing in Burundi and
the progress that has been made in the preparations for
elections, including the Independent National Electoral
Commission's publication on 28 June of the electoral
timetable, which sets the date of the general elections
for 20 May 2020.

We believe that only a calm sociopolitical
environment and an inclusive process in a more open
political space can guarantee the credibility of the
election. In that connection, we welcome the efforts
made by the Burundian authorities to raise awareness
among the relevant stakeholders on best practices
to be observed during the 2020 general elections, as
evidenced by the meeting on 21 August organized
jointly by the First Vice-President of Burundi and the
Minister of the Interior, for the benefit of political
party leaders, local authorities and representatives of
the defence and security forces. We also encourage
all stakeholders to throw themselves into supporting
this positive momentum and urge them to join in the
inter-Burundian political dialogue once again in the
spirit of the Arusha Agreement. In that regard, my
country calls on the United Nations and the African
Union to continue to support the initiatives of the
East African Community with a View to revitalizing
the dialogue.
The issue of the voluntary repatriation of refugees
and the return of internally displaced persons to
their areas of origin is still one of the international
community's core concerns. The fact is that despite
the combined efforts of the Burundian authorities, the
various humanitarian agencies and Burundi's partners,
the number of refugees in neighbouring countries
remains high at 325,671, according to estimates by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) published on 30 September. My
delegation therefore welcomes the tripartite Burundi-
Tanzania-UNHCR agreement, which according to
UNHCR has facilitated the voluntary repatriation from
Tanzania of at least 75,000 Burundian refugees since
its signing in 2017, and we urge donors to support the
initiative. We also reiterate our call for constructive
dialogue between the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Burundian
authorities with a view to a lasting resolution of
their disagreements.

In conclusion, C6te d'Ivoire appreciates the
significant contribution that Mr. Kafando has made to
the implementation of the political process for stability
in Burundi and thanks him for his personal commitment
and for all his efforts over the past two years.

