Mr. Nteturuye (Burundi) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Burundi is gratified and proud to see you,
Sir, presiding over the Council today. Cameroon is a
fraternal country committed to the achievement of the
goals of the United Nations and dedicated to the ideals
of peace and security in Central Africa.

I should like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Bulgaria on the leadership demonstrated
during its presidency of the Council last month.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made this morning by Minister Rodolphe Adada, of the
Republic of the Congo, on behalf of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS).

Central Africa needs peace and security. The
Security Council, more than any other body in the
United Nations system, is witness to that fact, since it
regularly takes up the issue of the conflicts confronting
almost all the countries of the subregion.

The Secretary-General, responding to the wishes
of the States members of ECCAS and pursuant to
General Assembly resolution 46/37 B, established, on
28 May 1992, the United Nations Advisory Committee
on Central Africa Security Questions. This is additional
to the Offices of the representatives of the Secretary-
General in our countries, to the United Nations
Development Programme and other programmes and
agencies of the United Nations system and to the
special envoys and special representatives of the
Secretary-General. The main goal of the Advisory
Committee is to promote peace, security and
development in Central Africa through confidence-
building measures and restrictions on weapons.

That Committee has proved invaluable for our
countries, particularly because it provides a focal point
for meetings and discussions among authorities and
experts from the subregion aimed at finding ways and
means to stabilize our States through cooperation, not
just in the area of peace and security, but also with
regard to human rights, democratization and good
governance.

Without the services of the Secretariat and the
variety of support that the Advisory Committee has
made available to Member States, it would not have
been possible to participate in the seminars and
conferences in pursuit of the goals of ECCAS as
outlined by the Government of the Republic of
Cameroon on behalf of ECCAS at the forty-first
session of the General Assembly.

I do not want to review the conclusions of the
various conferences and seminars organized since the
establishment of the Advisory Committee, but I would
like to refer to the major decisions adopted under its
auspices, the effective implementation of which
presents a challenge to our subregion, if we truly want
to build and restore peace in Central Africa.

These include the adoption and signing in 1996 of
the Non-Aggression Pact between the nine countries of
ECCAS; the creation of the Central African early-
warning system; the establishment, on 25 February
1999 in Yaounde, of the Council for Peace and Security
in Central Africa, for which an agreement was signed
at Malabo, Equatorial Guinea, on 25 June 2000, by the
heads of State or Government of ECCAS; the creation
of a subregional human rights and democracy centre in
Central Africa; and the establishment of a subregional
parliament in Central Africa.

The legal instruments of the United Nations
system, as well as the relevant bodies of ECCAS and
the outcomes of various conferences and seminars,
should now enable us to obtain tangible results on the
ground.

For my delegation, the areas of concern that
require special attention from our States and support
from the United Nations at a time when encouraging
peace processes are under way in various countries
confronted by conflict in Central Africa can be
summarized under three headings: combating the
traffic in small arms and light weapons in Central
Africa; the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) of former combatants; and the
restoration of confidence among the countries of the
subregion.

The question of the fight against the trade in
small arms in Central Africa has been treated in two
subregional seminars: the high-level subregional
seminar on the examination and implementation of the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General (A/52/87l) on the causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa, held in Yaounde from 19 to 21
July 1999, and the Subregional Conference on the
Proliferation and Illicit Traffic in Small Arms in
Central Africa, held in N'Djamena from 25 to 27
October 1999. In its programme of work for the period
2002 to 2006, the Standing Advisory Committee is
planning a seminar on the implementation of the
Programme of Action of the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held in New York in
July 2001, and a workshop on the United Nations
Register of Conventional Arms and the instrument for
reporting military expenditures. Burundi is ready to
make its contribution during that seminar.

The arms circulating in our region - due to
entire roving armies, rebellions and the presence of
uncontrolled armed groups, including sometimes in the
refugee camps - contribute to fuelling conflicts and to
subjecting the civilian population to indiscriminate acts
of terrorism and economic and social destabilization in
the countryside. Likewise, the destruction caused by
anti-personnel mines in Central Africa is a constant
source of concern. Our countries must accede to the
Ottawa Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction.

Secondly, with respect to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of former
combatants, all peace processes under way in the
countries of Central Africa include a DDR programme,
which is one of the most sensitive components of such
processes. Whether it be in Angola, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burundi, the Republic of the
Congo, the Central African Republic, Rwanda or Chad,
the transition from armed confrontation to peace-
building requires great clear-mindedness and a
leadership that is truly committed to peace and which
possesses a vision for the future of our States and our
peoples. Political and technical support from the
Security Council and from the entire international
community is crucial at this stage. The case of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where tens of
thousands of members of armed groups and militias are
contending with tens of thousands of State troops, will
put this to the test. Fortunately, everything indicates
that the withdrawal of foreign troops from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo currently under way
will lead to the neutralization of those armed groups in
conformity with the provisions of the Lusaka
Agreement.
To that end, I welcome the existence of the Multi-
Country Demobilization and Reintegration Programme,
which the World Bank and the European Union plan to
fund to the amount of $500 million between 2002 and
2006 for the benefit of Central Africa. I take this
occasion to welcome the presence among us of
Mr. Emmanuel Mbi, and to welcome through him the
very positive role played by the World Bank in our
subregion, and in Burundi in particular, where Mr. Mbi
is considered a messenger of peace, alongside the
mediators working for peace in Burundi.

Thirdly, with respect to the restoration of
confidence among countries of the subregion, if I can
make a kind of public confession, I would say that the
countries of Central Africa have marginalized
themselves through their mutual distrust and through
the slowness of certain political leaders to realize that
the people deserve respect. As a result of the lack of
respect for the citizens, the region has witnessed one of
the worst genocides of the century and the cruellest
dictators of the history of the African continent.

Our States have to change with the times. The
process of normalization under way in the subregion
should result in domestic reconciliation within each
country, peace at the borders, the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons to their homes, and the
integrated development of our economies, including
the sound and transparent use of the enormous natural
resources of Central Africa, for the well-being of our
peoples. That is why the Government of Burundi
believes that perhaps it is time to begin the necessary
consultations in preparation for an international
conference on peace, stability and development in the
Great Lakes region.

We ask the United Nations to help in the efforts
to reinvigorate and stabilize the political, social and
economic life of this part of Africa by implementing an
effective system of preventive diplomacy and an early
warning mechanism so that the tragedies that have
marked our subregion will not be repeated. Perhaps we
should finally think about establishing a regional
observatory against genocide in Central Africa.

All these ideas will be fleshed out once the guns
have fallen silent, once there is implementation of the
decisions of the conferences and summits within the
framework of the Standing Advisory Committee and
the Economic Community of Central African States,
and once the domestic peace and reconciliation
agreements, the bilateral agreements for the
normalization of diplomatic relations and the
subregional agreements for economic cooperation and
reintegration are revitalized, reworked, implemented
and truly respected by all the signatories, for the
benefit of our peoples and our States.

To better understand the prevailing climate in the
regions, we encourage visits like those made by the
Security Council to the Great Lakes region in May
2001 and May 2002.

