Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to convey the
gratitude of my delegation to you, Mr. President, for
having convened this meeting on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We would also like to thank
all the speakers at the morning portion of the meeting.

We believe that this important topic cannot be
approached in a selective or biased way. For that
reason, we believe, together with the entire
international community, that protection of the
Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese civilians living under
Israeli occupation is a crucial part of the international
effort.

While the Council has discussed that important
issue for decades, we appreciate it all the more at a
time when serious violations affecting the Syrian
citizens in the occupied Golan and the Palestinian
populations in the West Bank, Jerusalem and the Gaza
Strip persist, owing to the barbaric Israeli aggression.
That aggression includes continuing the settlements,
aggression against civilians, imposition of the
blockade, prohibition of civilian access to humanitarian
aid, and attacks on the humanitarian assistance flotillas
and the international peace activists aboard them.

Among the extraordinary paradoxes that have
confronted the international community for decades,
since the development of the concepts of international
law and international humanitarian law, the suffering of
civilians in armed conflict continues, despite the
increased frequency of Security Council meetings
devoted to such issues. The international community
has made exceptional progress in international

humanitarian law over the past centuries, but that law
must not be implemented by applying it to the weak
but not to the strong, nor by exonerating authorities of
foreign occupation from the consequences of violating
the rule and principles of international law.

Israel has committed crimes for decades and has
violated the most basic principles of international
humanitarian law. It is not held accountable for its
activities and its barbarous occupation and military and
political leadership. The international community is
reluctant to address Israel's violations and to put an
end to them and is powerlessness to tackle Israel's
practices and violations because of its impunity or
exemption from implementing some international
resolutions. All those factors have enabled the Israeli
occupying forces to continue to disregard international
law and to persist in settling the territory, imposing the
blockade on Gaza, stealing land and preventing
humanitarian aid from reaching the besieged people of
Gaza.

Amid its aggression in international waters
against the Turkish freedom flotilla - which was
bringing humanitarian assistance to the people of Gaza,
besieged for four years - the bombing of the United
Nations headquarters and the death of civilians
sheltered there, today Israel openly states its rejection
of all humanitarian principles of international
humanitarian law and conducts its feverish quest to try
to reverse humanitarian and legal advances by talking
of the need for Judaism in that racist State so as to be
able to continue its purging, racist policies of collective
punishment, which, moreover, are punishable by law. It
seems that there are different laws for those who are in
favour of double standards, double standards that
exempt Israel from being brought to account for its
behaviour.

Israel's aggressive behaviour means that this
country is able to achieve what no other country or
usurper in history has ever achieved. This aggressive
behaviour violates the legal legacy and heritage of all
humankind, straightforwardly without exception, and
enjoys, despite all that, some sort of protection.

The occupation of the Syrian Golan is similar to
the picture that I have just drawn. Israel refuses to
restore the occupied Syrian Golan to its motherland,
Syria, and refuses to accept international resolutions,
including resolution 497 (1981). In this context, we
call upon the international community, in particular the
General Assembly and the Security Council, to
shoulder their responsibility to prevent Israel from
continuing its violations, such as pillaging natural
resources in occupied Arab lands, including the Golan.

In conclusion, we simply do not know how long
eyes will be averted from the Israeli occupation of
Arab territories and its anti-humanitarian actions there.
We simply do not know when the positions that are
regularly expressed will be made real on the ground.
Will the Security Council progress from debates and
statements to actual implementation of its obligations
and resolutions? That is the only question to which we
must respond, for that is what is at stake when we talk
about the defence and protection of civilians. It is an
extremely important question.

