The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of May, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Antonio Monteiro,
Permanent Representative of Portugal to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security Council
for the month of April 1997. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Security Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Monteiro for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Georgia

Report of the Secretary-General concerning the
situation in Abkhazia, Georgia (S/1997/340)

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Georgia, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Chkheidze
(Georgia) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, document S/ 1997/340.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/ 1997/268,
letter dated 1 April 1997 from the Permanent
 

Representative of the Russian Federation to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General; S/ 1997/339,
letter dated 28 April 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of Georgia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council; and
S/1997/345, letter dated 30 April 1997 from the
Permanent Representatives of Azerbaijan and Georgia to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, of 25 April 1997 (S/l997/340).
It has also taken note of the letter of the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the
Secretary-General of 1 April 1997 (S/ 1997/268) and
of the letter of the Permanent Representative of
Georgia to the President of the Security Council of
28 April 1997 (S/l997/339).

"The Security Council reiterates its full support
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Georgia within its internationally recognized borders.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full support
for a more active role for the United Nations, with
the assistance of the Russian Federation as
facilitator, aimed at achieving a comprehensive
political settlement.

"The Security Council acknowledges the efforts
in support of the peace process of the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy, with the
assistance of the Russian Federation as facilitator,
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and the Group of Friends of the
Secretary-General on Georgia as mentioned in the
report of the Secretary-General of 25 April 1997.

"In this context, the Security Council fully
supports the proposals made by the
Secretary-General in his report of 25 April 1997 to
strengthen the involvement of the United Nations in
the peacemaking process. It fully supports, in
particular, the intention of the Secretary-General to
convene a meeting with both sides to map out the
areas where concrete political progress can be made.
The Council encourages the Secretary-General to
explore the idea of revitalizing the Coordinating

 
Commission and establishing expert groups on
questions of mutual interest.

"The Security Council welcomes the intention of
the Secretary-General to appoint a resident Special
Representative, as a successor to his current Special
Envoy for Georgia, and to strengthen the political
element of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia (UNOMIG).

"The Security Council further encourages the
Secretary-General to take such steps as are necessary,
in cooperation with the parties, in order to ensure a
prompt and safe return of the refugees and displaced
persons to their homes, with the assistance of all
relevant international organizations. The Council takes
note of the initiation of activities by the United
Nations Human Rights Office in Abkhazia, Georgia.

"The Security Council continues to stress that the
primary responsibility for reinvigorating the peace
process rests upon the parties themselves. It welcomes
the continuation of direct dialogue between the parties.
The Council calls upon them, in particular the Abkhaz
side, to intensify the search for a peaceful solution by
further expanding their contacts, and requests the
Secretary-General to make available all appropriate
support if so requested by the parties. The Council
notes the appeal of the Secretary-General to both
parties to pursue the current discussions on the
implementation of the decisions of 28 March 1997
adopted by the Council of Heads of State of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
(S/ 1997/268, annexes I and II).

"The Security Council remains deeply concerned
at the continued deterioration of the security
conditions in the Gali region, including acts of
violence by armed groups, indiscriminate laying of
mines and armed robbery, and the resulting
deterioration of the safety and security of the local
populations, of the refugees and displaced persons
returning to the region, and of the personnel of
UNOMIG and the Collective Peacekeeping Forces of

 

the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS peacekeeping force). The Council condemns
the acts of violence which have led to the loss of
life of members of the CIS peacekeeping force. It
welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to
continue to make every effort to build upon the
positive results recently achieved in order to improve
the safety of the military observers and the
operational effectiveness of UNOMIG.

"The Security Council reminds the parties of
their obligation to ensure the safety and freedom of
movement of UNOMIG and the CIS peacekeeping
force, and, in particular, to prevent the laying of
mines.

"The Security Council welcomes the good
cooperation between UNOMIG and the CIS
peacekeeping force and their efforts to promote
stabilization of the situation in the zone of conflict.

"The Security Council also welcomes the
continued efforts by the United Nations agencies and
humanitarian organizations to address the urgent
needs of those suffering most from the consequences
of the conflict in Abkhazia, Georgia, in particular
internally displaced persons, and encourages further
contributions to that end. It also reiterates its
encouragement to States to contribute to the
voluntary fund in support of the implementation of
the Agreement on a Cease-fire and Separation of
Forces (S/ 1994/583, annex I) and/or for
humanitarian aspects, including demining, as
specified by donors.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to continue to keep it closely

informed of the situation."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/25.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1 pm.

