Mr. Nl'ifiez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation endorses the statement made this
morning by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

Unfortunately, since the last time that the
Security Council met to discuss these items, exactly
three months ago (see S/PV.6636), the situation in the
Middle East has not changed in any significant way.
Cuba reiterates its support for the application made by
the President of the Palestinian Authority for
recognition of Palestine as a full State Member of the
United Nations.

As we all know, however, powerful interests
oppose that application, and it is those same interests
that have withdrawn their support for UNESCO for
having accepted Palestine into full membership in that
organization, as is only just. The rounds of negotiations
by the Quartet with representatives of Israel and
Palestine separately over the past three months have
led to no reduction in provocations or produced any
concrete proposals on matters such as the delimitation
of borders and security mechanisms in the region,
despite the fact that the parties had stated their
readiness to assess in a constructive way reciprocal
actions that might help to reduce tensions and the
Quartet had set a deadline of 26 January for the
submission of proposals by the parties.

There must be a resumption of the negotiation
process, which was interrupted by Israel's
intransigence and its decision to continue to build
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Israel, as we all know, continues to vandalize
Palestinian assets, including in Jerusalem. The Israeli
authorities are identifying areas in East Jerusalem in
which to establish national parks, with the clear
intention of continuing to hamper the development of
Palestinian neighbourhoods and districts.

Violence by Israeli settlers against Palestinians
and their assets has become systematic. Suffice it to
say that the average weekly number of attacks by
settlers increased by 40 per cent in 2011 compared to
the previous year, and by 165 per cent in comparison to
2009. The abuse and harassment of Palestinian
prisoners continues in Israeli prisons.

We reiterate our profound concern regarding the
critical humanitarian situation in Gaza, which has been
compounded by the ongoing imposition of the total
blockade by Israel, preventing access to humanitarian
aid, goods and supplies and freedom of movement into
and out of the Gaza Strip. That situation must be
resolved without further delay.

The Security Council cannot stand by and merely
engage in meetings and thematic debates every three
months on these matters. It is essential that the
Security Council play its proper role in defending
international peace and security, and that it adopt
concrete, practical measures to ensure that Israel ends
its deliberate policies, which flout international law.
The Powers that hold the anachronistic veto power
must not be allowed to perpetuate their complicity in
this state of affairs or to continue to manipulate the
Security Council in pursuit of their own private
interests, as occurred with the imposition and
reinterpretation of resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973
(2011).

Today we are aware that deployment has begun
on bases for unmanned drone aircraft, which cause
further uncertainty; that natural resources are being
exploited to the benefit of outside interests; and that
insecurity is increasing in areas of the Middle East that
supposedly were to be defended through those
resolutions. Cuba reaffirms yet again that all those
measures and actions, including illegal construction
and expansion of Israeli settlements in the Syrian
Golan since 1967, are breaches of international law,
international agreements, and of resolutions and the
Charter of the United Nations.

It is not by chance that attempts are being made
to paint for Syria the same scenario of manipulation
and pressure that was embodied in resolutions 1970
(2011) and 1973 (2011). That is precisely what is being
sought by certain major Powers and their allies so as to
bring the Syrian Government into conflict with its
brothers in the League of Arab States. The people of
Syria have the ability and the wisdom to resolve their
issues without outside interference or pressure of any
kind.

Cuba reaffirms its position in favour of a just and
lasting peace for all peoples of the Middle East that
will put an end to the occupation of all territories
occupied by Israel since 1967 and guarantee the
exercise of all rights, including the right to self-
determination of the Palestinian people through the
establishment of the independent State of Palestine
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

