Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for yet another
deeply sobering briefing.

One hundred and thirty-nine days have now passed
since the last United Nations-Syrian Arab Red Crescent
humanitarian assistance convoy arrived in Rukban in
early February, that is, 139 days in which no heed has
been paid to the call of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs to ease the suffering. Since
February, the Al-Assad regime has failed to approve
multiple requests from the United Nations to make a
third humanitarian aid delivery to Rukban, where
reports of dwindling food supplies are growing
increasingly dire. It is unacceptable for the regime to
withhold humanitarian aid deliveries as a means of
forcing civilians to flee the encampment and furthering
its claims that the humanitarian conditions in Syria
are stabilizing. Under-Secretary-General Lowcock's
briefing today demonstrates that nothing could be
further from the truth.

The United States renews its call to the Al-Assad
regime to approve the United Nations request for a
third convoy to Rukban immediately. It must also
allow unfettered regular humanitarian assistance to
Rukban as long as there are displaced people in the
encampment. Furthermore, the United States calls on
the Russian Federation to secure the Al-Assad regime's
compliance with the requests of the United Nations
for a third convoy, as well as to lift the Russian and

Syrian military blockade of commercial access to the
Rukban camp.

The United States supports the United Nations
efforts to facilitate voluntary, safe, dignified and
informed departures from Rukban in combination with
additional aid delivered to the camp. We stand ready
to provide security assurances for United Nations
humanitarian convoys to Rukban. Any accusation
that the United States is responsible for blocking
humanitarian aid deliveries to Rukban is absolutely
false. Although thousands of civilians have already left
Rukban for relocation centres in Homs owing to the
dire humanitarian conditions, the United States does
not consider returns voluntary if people are leaving the
camp because they are not receiving the food, water,
medicine and shelter that they need to survive. We
strongly encourage the Al-Assad regime to allow the
United Nations unfettered access to Rukban residents
from the time they depart Rukban until they reach their
home or destination of their choice.

The Security Council must support the continued
authorization of cross-border aid deliveries under
resolution 2449 (2018). The United States calls on
every Council member, and our regional partners, to
ensure that the United Nations can freely implement
cross-border aid deliveries through all agreed border
crossings, including from Jordan, and in accordance
with resolution 2449 (2018). There is no substitute for
the United Nations cross-border operations, which
are the most transparent, effective and essential way
to deliver humanitarian assistance to those who need
it most - people like the 3 million civilians in Idlib
who, according to Mr. Lowcock, are completely reliant
on United Nations cross-border aid deliveries under
resolution 2449 (2018).

Turning to the situation in Idlib, the United States
is alarmed at yet another deliberate escalation of air
strikes in north-west Syria by Syrian forces over the
past week, despite repeated calls by Council members,
as well as the Secretary-General and other senior United
Nations officials, for an immediate de-escalation. The
United States remains gravely concerned about the
possibility that without an immediate and full return by
all parties to the 2018 Sochi agreement ceasefire line
and the restoration of the de-escalation agreements, the
humanitarian conditions in Idlib and north-west Syria
could soon be beyond the ability of the United Nations
to mount a humanitarian response. The United States
takes the Under-Secretary-General's remarks on the
status of the de-confliction mechanism very seriously.
Any attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure as
such, including schools and medical facilities, are off
limits, regardless of whether they are part of the United
Nations de-confliction mechanism.

This should not even need to be said, let alone
repeated meeting after meeting. When it comes to
north-west Syria, it is clear who has control of the
airspace and is therefore responsible for the attacks
on the de-conflicted sites. The United States therefore
urges Russia to assure the United Nations and the
Council that it will abide by all of its commitments
to the de-confliction mechanism and ensure that
Syrian forces also act in full compliance with the
de-confliction arrangements.

The Russian Federation can - and must - do better
to restore peace and bring about a political solution to
the conflict. Unfortunately, the Russian Federation and
the track record of the Russian Reconciliation Centre
for Syria on de-escalation and reconciliation speaks for
itself - another Russian-brokered agreement made,
another Russian-brokered agreement tossed aside for
military and political expediency.

The situation in Idlib is escalating. Thousands
were killed last year during the regime and Russian
joint offensive in eastern Ghouta - a former Astana-
protected de-escalation zone - and the situation in
south-west Syria is deteriorating despite a Russian-
brokered reconciliation agreement there with local
communities. The United States is concerned that,
despite the regime's recapture - with Russian
assistance by brute military force - of areas such
as eastern Ghouta and south-west Syria, the United
Nations and humanitarian actors continue to struggle
for access to those locations. Meanwhile, civilians'
access to electricity and safe drinking water in those
areas remains intermittent.

Eastern Ghouta and south-west Syria have become
black holes of information due to residents' fear of
sharing information and ending up in the custody of
the regime. However, the United States is aware of
reports that the Al-Assad regime is deploying a vast
network of intelligence checkpoints where regime
forces regularly arrest civilians and force them into
conscription, in violation of the Russian-brokered
reconciliation agreements.

The United States is also concerned about
increasing indications that the regime plans to take
full control of the region and about growing frustration
among communities in Dara'a and Quneitra, as regime
intelligence forces expand their control across the
area and establish checkpoints into Dara'a. Reports of
assassinations, kidnappings, poor provision of essential
services and forced conscription all call into question
Russia's role as a trustworthy broker between the Syrian
people and the regime forces for improved security and
living conditions in the south.

Finally, the United States would like to thank David
Lillie, Executive Director of the Syrian American
Medical Society, for being with us today and for his
important and troubling briefing to the Council. The
Syrian American Medical Society's network of medical
professionals and health facilities are real lifelines
to millions of people in north-west Syria. We on the
Council must protect them, civil society and civilian
populations from any further attacks by the Al-Assad
regime and its allies.

