Mr. Ja'afari (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): I apologize
for requesting the floor once again, but I will be brief.

In my statement, I pointed out the political flaws of
the small group on Syria and its construction. However,
I would like now to draw attention to its moral flaw,
namely, the presence therein of the Saudi regime,
which is underdeveloped in terms of civilization and
mentality. In that regard, I would like to shed light on
some points that were raised in the statement of the
Saudi Ambassador.

First, in his statement he called for drafting a new
constitution for my country. There is an Arab saying
that if you are riddled with flaws, you must hide them.
Members know that Saudi Arabia has no constitution
and no Parliament. The country does not even have a
name. Instead, its name belongs to the ruling family.
Thus when someone says "the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia", it is as ifthat person were saying "the Republic
of Macron" for France, or "the Kingdom of Theresa
May" for Britain, or the "United States of Trump". That
is the case now. That country has no name.

Secondly, a regime that kidnaps and holds the Prime
Minister of another State and imprisons its own princes
and businessmen until they pay ransom is unworthy
of respect. It is a regime that is concealing one of
its opponents, who was basically a member of Saudi
intelligence and worked in Washington, DC, for many
years, and was a right-hand man of the current Saudi
Minister for Foreign Affairs. It is a regime that kidnaps
a Saudi opponent, Mr. Khashoggi - although I am sure
those present have not heard his name before - and
holds him in his country's consulate in Istanbul. No one
knows what has become of him. That is a regime that
cannot speak of law and the pain of others because it is
surrounded by the stench of such actions.

Thirdly, the Saudi Ambassador spoke of the desire
of his country's regime to help the Syrian people,
ignoring the fact that the Saudi regime is primarily
responsible for spreading takfiri and Wahhabi terrorism
in Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Egypt,
Libya, Nigeria and South-East Asia.

Fourthly, a regime that sheds blood in Yemen,
creates alliances with Israel to bury the Palestinian
question and pays generously to buy the conscience of
those who defend it is not worthy of being allowed to
speak in the Council about humanitarian and political
issues pertaining to other countries. The list goes on,
but I will stop at this point.
