Mr. Oshima (Japan): First, we welcome High
Commissioner Antonio Guterres to the Security
Council. We would like to express our great
appreciation for his insightful presentation on the work
of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and on its link
to the work of the Security Council.

The decreasing trend in the overall number of
refugees worldwide is itself a most welcome
development. But, at the same time, we remain deeply
concerned that, in a number of refugee situations,
particularly in Africa, heavy refugee case loads persist,
with millions of refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs) continuing to suffer due to protracted
conflict, without prospects for a better future. In those
situations the United Nations and the international
community must ensure that adequate life-saving
assistance and protection are provided for them and
that the security of people in refugee camps is ensured.
In that connection, I commend UNHCR for its
dedication and hard work.

In order to provide such assistance and security,
practical cooperation on the ground between refugee
agencies, other humanitarian actors, peacekeeping
operations and troops from regional organizations
where such forces are deployed is sometimes critically
important. In that connection, I have a question to ask
of the High Commissioner. In UNHCR's recent
experience on the ground, has the agency encountered
difficulties in that regard? How does the High
Commissioner for Refugees assess the level and
quality of cooperation between humanitarian agencies
such as UNHCR and military actors on the ground: the
peacekeepers involved?

Secondly, assisting communities hosting large
numbers of refugees should not be forgotten. The High
Commissioner made a reference to Tanzania's laudable
efforts in that regard. Local communities in Chad bear
a considerable burden as a result of having received
many refugees from the Darfur region. There are many
other similar examples. The international community
should assist refugee-hosting communities, in the spirit
of burden-sharing, in order that the flow of refugees
does not lead to the destabilization of a region. In that
regard, it is important to recall that the principle of
solidarity and burden-sharing was reaffirmed in the
outcome document of the September summit (General Assembly resolution 60/1). The donor community must
renew its resolve to support nations in assisting refugee
populations and their host communities.

Whenever the prerequisites for the return of
refugees are met, it is important to ensure the
sustainable voluntary return and integration of refugees
and the resumption of normal life. This year we expect
that a large number of refugees are likely to return,
especially in southern Sudan. The international
community should assist with a seamless transition
from emergency relief to reconstruction in the Sudan
and elsewhere.

In that connection, the High Commissioner
emphasized the importance of the link between refugee
returns and sustainability. We agree. In his statement
this morning, the High Commissioner said that

"refugees must not be seen as uninvolved
beneficiaries of a peace and recovery process, or
simply as an afterthought. Refugees return with
schooling and new skills, and this in itself is a
critical factor in any post-conflict situation".
(Supra)

In that regard, we have argued that the notion of
human security should play an important role. Under
the concept of human security, refugees are not and
should not be regarded as a burden on the communities
to which they return, but should be seen as potential
contributors to enhancing the welfare of the
communities they belong to. Based on that idea, Japan
has taken the initiative on the sustainable return of
refugees in Afghanistan and elsewhere. We also expect
the newly established Peacebuilding Commission to
make a contribution to that end.

While there has been a global decline in refugee
populations, the number of internally displaced persons
continues to rise, reaching more than twice the number
of refugees. The plight of IDPs, as observed in many
parts of the world, including in northern Uganda, is
disturbing. It is nonetheless a welcome development
that the September 2005 summit outcome document
(General Assembly resolution 60/ 1) recognized the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement as an
important international framework. The United Nations
needs to strengthen its capacity to protect and assist
IDPs as a priority on its humanitarian agenda. We
therefore follow with interest the ongoing discussion in
the Inter-Agency Standing Committee on this matter,
including the cluster approach. We hope that interested
States will engage in active debate to that end.

In Geneva, Ambassador Fujisaki of Japan now
chairs the UNHCR Executive Committee. Let me
express our expectation that the close cooperation
between the Executive Committee and High
Commissioner Guterres will lead to even more
effective implementation of the UNHCR mandate.

I wish to conclude by expressing to Mr. Guterres
Japan's great respect for his leadership. We wish him
well. I wish also to congratulate Ms. Judy Cheng-
Hopkins on her appointment as Assistant High
Commissioner and to wish her much good luck.

