Mr. Maurer: I thank the Council for giving me
the opportunity to address it again in this important
debate today.

War equals destruction - the destruction of the
enemy, of military targets, of assets and of infrastructure.
It might be regrettable, but it is not prohibited under
international humanitarian law and therefore has to
be accepted. What we cannot accept - what we must
not accept - is that war destroys the lives of countless
civilians. The protection of civilians lies at the heart
of international humanitarian law and at the heart
of the missions of both the United Nations and the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).

Peacekeepers are often deployed on the front lines
of armed conflict with increasingly robust mandates.
We know this because in many places, from South
Sudan to Mali and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the ICRC works right alongside them. Since the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone in 1999, the
Organization's mandates have increasingly included
the protection of civilians, and I commend the Council
for its commitment to using the resources at its disposal
to ensure that people affected by conflict are spared
whenever and however possible.

The deployment of peace missions in Violent
environments, with robust mandates, inevitably raises
the question of when and under which conditions
international humanitarian law applies to them. I
believe that this legal discussion of a technical nature
should not preclude anyone from aiming for the highest
standards, at all times, and that means impeccable
respect for international humanitarian law.

The more than 120,000 members of the United
Nations forces form, in theory, the world's third largest
army, and they are standard setters. Their exposure to
some of the worst atrocities in human history, from
Rwanda to Bosnia, from South Sudan to the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo or Somalia today, means that their actions can
make a difference in the most difficult situations. They
are held to the highest of standards, and where they
fail, for whatever reason, the Council, as the organ
responsible for establishing peacekeeping missions,
must draw the appropriate conclusions and act on them
in cooperation with the troop-contributing countries
concerned, including on allegations of sexual violence
against children and the murder of civilians, which
have recently received media attention.

All delegations know that the ICRC works on the
front lines of armed conflicts around the world, and
my organization is often among the last international
humanitarian actors staying on the ground, close
to the people. What we know from being close to
people, in over 80 countries, is that communities
possess tremendous strengths, particularly in times
of fragility and emergency. Neither humanitarians nor
peacekeepers must limit or prevent the empowerment
of people. After all, it is the people in the communities
who know their environment and the changing
dynamics best. I have myself seen remarkable
examples of local men and women negotiating access
for humanitarian organizations, for instance. There is
a role for peacekeepers in community engagement, as
the Secretary-General also highlighted ahead oftoday's
meeting. Peacekeepers must create and support those
spaces in which locals can negotiate.

As close as peacekeepers and humanitarians
are to each other geographically in the field, it is of
vital importance for the ICRC to be perceived and
understood as the strictly neutral, independent and
impartial humanitarian organization that it is. Any
kind of confusion or blurring between the political
mandate of peacekeeping missions and the Red
Cross and Red Crescent Movement's principles can
potentiallyjeopardize our access to people in need and
risk the lives of my colleagues. We will continue to
protect our distinctiveness so as to ensure that we can
deliver to the best of our abilities to people suffering
in wars, and we ask peacekeepers and the Council
to do the same. We will continue to rely on our own
security protocols, which are not based on weaponized
security, but on engagement with and consensus among
all those bearing arms, and transparency about our
strictly needs-based action. We also want to continue
to work with peacekeeping missions, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the United Nations
Secretariat to further build on the fruitful cooperation
that we have established over decades.

We are ready to increase in volume and depth our
training programmes on international humanitarian
law and the protection of civilians for peacekeepers,
ahead of deployment and in theatre, and to strengthen
our protection dialogue with all parties. We are ready
to engage on the front lines of conflict and with all
those bearing arms to find arrangements through which
civilians are protected and international humanitarian
law is respected. Often the first step towards better
protection is by rebuilding minimal trust among
belligerents across contact lines.

Through our substantial experience in the area of
detention, we can assist the Council in preparing for
those moments when peacekeepers will likely have
to arrest and detain persons. We have seen in the past
that preparation is more fruitful than scrambling in
an emergency. We need the necessary protocols and
procedures on detention, transfer and access for ICRC
to be in place before operations start.

There are other active measures that the Council
can take for the effective protection of civilians. The
Council can scale up peacekeepers' presence where
necessary, so as to effectively deter violence and
adequately train, equip and resource peacekeepers
so they can do their job; develop model operating
procedures for mixed peacekeeping missions; ensure
the highest standards of behaviour; and lastly, as
stated in the Geneva Conventions, respect and ensure
respect for international humanitarian law, at all
times, including neutral, independent and impartial
humanitarian action.

