Mr. Martini Herrera (Guatemala) (interpretation from Spanish): With the signing of the final agreement
last 29 December, Guatemala has successfully concluded
a process of peace negotiations which merely requires
verification by means of a peacekeeping force, as
requested by the Secretary-General in his reports of 17
and 30 December 1996.

 

Over the past several years, the international
community has followed with great interest and supported
the Guatemalan process, and it has expressed its great
appreciation at the signing of the peace agreement. Now it
awaits eagerly the Council's decision to send a
peacekeeping mission which will allow the Guatemalan
people to consolidate the peace process and reunite the
nation. It will also aid in the fulfilment of the agreements
entered into as regards the ceasefire and the disarmament
and demobilization of the combatants.

The process of peace negotiations in Guatemala was
complex and difficult, requiring enormous internal and
external efforts, and it will lead not only to reconciliation
and the establishment of peaceful coexistence, but also to
significant changes in the country. The United Nations has
supported this process in a resolute and consistent fashion,
and its involvement has been crucial and profound. The
General Assembly has given firm support during the past
few years which these negotiation have taken. It has
authorized the United Nations Mission for the Verification
of Human Rights and of Compliance with the
Commitments of the Comprehensive Agreement on Human
Rights in Guatemala (MIN UGUA). The Secretariat has had
central responsibility in conducting intelligent and creative
mediation. And Guatemala has also had the support of the
Group of Friends of the Guatemalan Peace Process which
has promoted this broad effort for the United Nations. To
all of them, on behalf of the people and of the Government
of Guatemala, we reiterate our appreciation and gratitude.

All of this valuable effort has a logical extension.
After the conclusion of the negotiations and the signing of
the Agreement on a Firm and Lasting Peace, we come to
the stage of application and implementation. Toward this
end there is a need for international verification of the
measures related to the agreement on the ceasefire through
the authorization of a military component, which has been
proposed by the Secretary-General upon the request of the
parties, and on which the Security Council must take a
decision.

We fully believe that the majority of Security Council
members will agree to authorize this mission. And of
course we know full well that all the members of the
Council have a proper understanding of their responsibilities
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. The
case that you have before you is clear. It consists simply in
facilitating the verification of an agreement between the
parties which have been in conflict. We therefore trust that
the distinguished members of the Council will favourably
resolve the request that has been put before them by the
Secretary-General.

No one is unaware of the problem of a bilateral
nature which has been raised by one of the permanent
members of the Council in connection with this subject.
In spite of how unusual this situation is, Guatemala has
seen fit to conduct consultations with the delegation of
that country on certain issues of a bilateral nature with the
best of intentions and with the flexibility required to
overcome the existing difficulty. In this connection I wish
to emphasize my Government's willingness to contribute
constructively to friendly relations among countries, and
I would like to give assurances that it has never been our
intention to interfere in the internal affairs of any other
State. I also wish to reiterate that our international
conduct is guided by respect for the principles contained
in the United Nations Charter as regards refraining from
taking actions that could affect the territorial integrity or
political independence of other States.

Recognizing the gravity of the situation, in addition
to the important bilateral consultations in which there
have been constructive exchanges and substantial
advances, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of my country
has sent a letter to the President of the Council explaining
the scope of these consultations. All of this represents
palpable evidence of the goodwill of my Government and
of its great desire to do its part to resolve this situation
and to attain a favourable decision from the Council.

We believe that it must be borne in mind that the
members of the Council, in fulfilment of their
responsibilities in accordance with the Charter, must not
allow bilateral issues unrelated to matters under their
consideration to hinder their decisions. The fulfilment of
the obligations of members of the Council requires
prudence, equanimity and a sense of justice.

May I observe that abuse of the status of a
permanent member through misuse of the veto is
unacceptable. If this were to occur, the General Assembly
would have to take note of it.

This matter is in the Council's hands. It means
giving an opportunity to a country that has achieved
peace following many sacrifices. The international
community and all the Guatemalan people await your
decision, which we hope will be favourable.
 

