Mr. Wang Xuexian (China)(interpretation from Chinese): First of all, I should like, on behalf of the
Chinese Government, to express our profound sympathy in
connection with the severe casualties and damage caused by
the strong earthquakes in the western part of our
neighbouring country Japan. I would ask the Japanese
Mission to the United Nations to convey our condolences
to the Japanese Government and people.

The Chinese delegation has made a preliminary study
of the Secretary-General's report entitled 'Supplement to
An Agenda for Peace', which is an important follow-up
report to his Agenda for Peace concerning United Nations
peace-keeping operations and activities in related areas. The
report has provided us with some new and
thought-provoking views and ideas which deserve our
in-depth consideration and extensive discussion.

The world has undergone profound changes since the
Security Council summit meeting in early 1992 and the
transition toward multipolarity has accelerated. Relaxation
of tension has become the main trend today, and yet the
world is not tranquil at all. Hegemonism and power
politics continue to exist. Regional hot spots flare up
intermittently, and various destabilizing elements are
increasing. All this poses a serious threat to international
peace and stability. Meanwhile, international economic
competition has intensified; and the gap between the rich
and the poor continues to widen. The maintenance of
peace, the strengthening of cooperation and the promotion
of development remain the major challenges facing the
world and the United Nations today. There would be no
development without peace and hardly any lasting peace
without development, whereas both peace and
development require international cooperation.

The world is now much preoccupied with how to
eliminate regional hot spots and settle international
disputes properly. In this connection, great expectations
have been placed on the United Nations, which since the
end of the cold war has made considerable efforts in
promoting the settlement of regional hot spots and
maintaining international peace and security, both with
successes and with setbacks. The report submitted by the
Secretary-General on the occasion of the fiftieth
anniversary of the United Nations is therefore of great
practical significance.

As an old Chinese saying goes, 'Cognizance of
one's divine mandate comes at the age of 50'. The United
Nations is now almost 50 years old. We hope that it will
reach this stage of sublime cognizance by summarizing
the past and looking to the future, thus being better able
to fulfil the responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security entrusted to it by the
Charter in the transit to the next century. This is not only
the ardent expectation of the international community on
the United Nations, but also a major test for this
Organization.

We maintain that in fulfilling their responsibilities
for maintaining international peace and stability the
United Nations and the Security Council in particular
must strictly abide by the purposes and principles of the
Charter when engaged in preventive diplomacy,
peacemaking, peace-keeping or other activities in related
areas. Particular attention should be given to the following
principles:

 

First, the principle of respect for State sovereignty and
non-interference in a country's internal affairs must always
be observed. The United Nations is an intergovernmental
organization composed of sovereign States rather than a
world government. I wish to emphasize that the United
Nations is not a world government. Matters concerning a
country should, in the final analysis, be settled by its own
people, and those concerning a region by the countries in
the region through consultations, in which the international
community, including the United Nations, can play only a
supplementary and promotive role.

Secondly, disputes should be settled by resorting
unswervingly to such peaceful means as good offices,
mediation and negotiation. As there are profound and
complicated historical and social causes for the conflicts
and disputes in the world today involving religion,
ethnicity, culture or territory, it might be time-consuming
and difficult to seek a peaceful solution. But this is the only
effective way to peace in the long run. To wish for a rapid
solution through military actions or other enforcement
measures not only is politically undesirable, but will also
sharpen contradictions, cause serious consequences and
bring long-term damage to peace. There have already been
quite a few lessons of this in recent years.

Thirdly, as the maintenance of international peace and
security involves the work of the United Nations in various
areas, the major United Nations agencies are required to
carry out their respective mandates in accordance with the
Charter and play their respective roles in a balanced and
harmonious manner while strengthening their mutual
coordination and cooperation. We support a more active
and effective role for the General Assembly in the
maintenance of international peace and security and other
related areas. We highly appreciate the unremitting efforts
by the Secretary-General in mediating regional conflicts or
disputes and support him in playing his role in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter as well as the
mandates of the Security Council and the General
Assembly.

Fourthly, the Security Council is entrusted by the
Charter with the primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. In fulfilling this
responsibility, it acts on behalf of all Member States. We
have consistently held that all Members, irrespective of
their size, strength and wealth, are entitled to participate in
the discussion and resolution of major United Nations
issues on an equal footing. Therefore, the Security Council
should hear their views extensively before making
important decisions. Its resolutions and decisions must
reflect their common will and conform to their interests.
This is also an important expression of the
democratization of international relations.

Those principles are easier stated than truly
implemented. However, the United Nations has no
alternative but to adhere to them in order to maintain
international peace and security in an effective manner.

The United Nations has encountered many new
problems in fulfilling its responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security under the changed
circumstances. Contradictions and defects which were
inconspicuous have gradually come to the fore. This calls
for the formulation, through careful consideration, of a
whole set of practical policy measures and mechanisms to
ensure the success of United Nations activities. We
believe that the following questions deserve our particular
attention:

In recent years we have witnessed the conditional
involvement of the United Nations in the settlement of
internal conflicts in some countries at the request of the
Governments or factions of these countries, or that of
other countries or parties in a few exceptional cases
where there is an absence of a government in a country.

This is a new and highly sensitive issue, which, if
handled improperly, will make the United Nations a party
to the conflict or even make it become an instrument of
a few countries in interfering in other countries' internal
affairs, thus throwing United Nations operations into
difficulties and failure. We therefore deem it imperative
to establish certain principles to govern appropriate
involvement by the United Nations in this regard, which
should include the following: conflicts or disputes pose a
real threat to international or regional peace; United
Nations operations must be at the request, and obtain the
consent, of the parties concerned; the United Nations role
should be confined to assisting in the settlement of
conflicts or disputes by peaceful means; and full play
should be given to the role of neighbouring countries and
the relevant regional organizations.

United Nations peace-keeping operations are faced
with new challenges as they are undergoing both
significant quantitative and qualitative changes in recent
years, according to the report of the Secretary-General.
We are of the view that in the new situation the United
Nations should stick to the practices proved effective
when engaged in peace-keeping operations - namely, the
three principles as emphasized by the Secretary-General

 

in his report: the consent of the parties; impartiality; and the
non-use of force, except in self-defence. A clear distinction
should also be made between peace-keeping operations and
peace enforcement actions. The United Nations is under
unprecedented pressure in terms of human, financial and
material resources, with the increasing expansion of the
number and scale of peace-keeping operations and the
scope of their mandates. How to address this problem
appropriately also has a direct bearing on the success of the
operations. We believe that the United Nations should act
within the limits of its means and work to improve the
effectiveness of the operations. Member States should fulfil
in earnest the financial obligations set forth in the Charter
to ensure a stable and sound financial basis for the
operations. At the same time, such questions as the
command and control of peace-keeping operations and the
training of peace-keeping personnel should be properly
addressed.

It is believed that United Nations activities in
preventive diplomacy and post-conflict peace-building, if
carried out properly, can play a positive role in eliminating
and defusing disputes. However, in playing this role, the
United Nations must respect the will of the Governments
and peoples of the countries concerned instead of imposing
its views on them. It should especially be prudent on
questions, such as early warning, that involve a country's
sovereignty. It should obtain prior consent of the countries
concerned before sending fact-finding or other missions,
and major issues in this regard should be decided upon by
the Security Council. More play should be given to the role
of other United Nations agencies in post-conflict
rehabilitation, reconstruction and other follow-up activities
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter.
The Security Council should not take over their
responsibilities and get involved in what is beyond its terms
of reference.

Since the end of the cold war there has been an
increase in cases in which the Security Council, invoking
Chapter VII of the Charter on flimsy grounds, resorts to, or
authorizes a few countries to take, enforcement actions. We
have never endorsed such peace enforcement actions. We
maintain that enforcement actions as set forth in Chapter
VII of the Charter should only be used against acts of
aggression that endanger and undermine peace. In case of
necessity, they should have a clear-cut mandate as well as
the political guidance of the Security Council and the
unified command of the United Nations. Indiscriminate use
of mandatory means will not help resolve problems. It will,
rather, sharpen contradictions, aggravate conflicts and
impair the reputation of the United Nations. It should be
pointed out that in the history of the United Nations there
were a few cases of forced intervention in a country's
internal affairs by a few big Powers, using the Security
Council's mandate, with adverse consequences. These
historical lessons should not be forgotten.

Sanctions are also included in United Nations
mandatory means. Recent years have also seen an
increase in cases of application of sanctions by the
Security Council. We are not in favour of using sanctions
to exert pressure, for, instead of helping resolve
international disputes, it will only bring suffering to the
people of the target countries and cause economic
difficulties and losses to third countries, particularly the
neighbouring ones that implement the sanctions. We
appreciate the Secretary-General's proposal that practical
and effective measures be taken to reduce the adverse
impact produced by sanctions. In some absolute cases
when sanctions have to be used, their objectives, scope
and time- limit should be clearly defined. No sanctions
should be used as a punitive means. At the same time,
appropriate mechanisms should be established by taking
humanitarian factors into full consideration to reduce the
suffering of the people of the countries concerned and to
resolve, in accordance with Article 50 of the Charter, the
problems brought to third countries by sanctions. The
Security Council should carefully consider these factors
in its future work and review the various existing
sanctions regimes in the same fashion, with a view to
gradually easing these sanctions as appropriate until they
are completely lifted.

In recent years United Nations activities in
maintaining international peace and security tend to be
increasingly mixed up with those in the economic, social,
development, humanitarian assistance and other areas.
However, the absence of clear guidelines has resulted in
confusion of concept and differences in interpretation of
these activities. It is therefore necessary to define, on the
basis of extensive discussions and under the guidance of
the Charter, the concept and scope of these activities and
their mutual relationship, so as to provide them with a
solid legal base.

The Secretary-General's report covers a wide range
of elements which touch upon the work of all the relevant
departments of the United Nations and have a direct
bearing on the interests of the entire membership. We are
in favour of comprehensive, in-depth and full-range
discussion and consideration in various forms of the
report by the General Assembly, the Security Council and
other United Nations agencies. The Chinese delegation

 

will take an active part in this process and continue to make
contributions to United Nations activities in peace-keeping
and other areas.

