Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): The
United States deeply regrets the outcome of today's
vote on the draft resolution to extend the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG). The
draft resolution would have given the Council time to
reach agreement on a new mandate for the United
Nations presence on the basis of the Secretary-
General's recommendations - recommendations that
most Council members have supported. Extending the
mandate would have allowed the United Nations to
continue to carry out its role in monitoring the
ceasefire, addressing security and humanitarian
concerns on the ground and helping create conditions
for the return of refugees and displaced persons.

We believe that a United Nations presence in
Georgia is important. For that reason, the United
States, along with other members of the Group of
Friends of the Secretary-General for Georgia, have
tried over the past two weeks to engage in good faith
negotiations. Regrettably, the Russian Federation could
not agree to language in this technical rollover -
language that reflects a well-balanced compromise that
the Council had reached in its two previous resolutions
on the issue. That language served to bridge the
differing views among us on the situation in Georgia.

Despite our good-faith efforts, UNOMIG's
mandate expires today. We will now need to consider
measures to address a Georgia without a United
Nations presence. We will continue to work closely
with the leadership of the European Union monitoring
mission and with the co-Chairs of the Geneva talks. In
the meantime, it is the civilian population that suffers
by facing a tenuous security environment without an
international presence in Abkhazia, Georgia.

The United States would like to reaffirm once
again in this Chamber its commitment to the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Georgia within its
internationally recognized borders. Today's vote
demonstrates that the majority of Council members
agree. The United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia has accomplished a great deal since its
deployment in l993. We thank the many members of
the Mission over the years for their hard work. We also
thank the Secretary-General, the Secretariat and Johan
Verbeke, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for all their efforts to help resolve the conflict
in Georgia.

Finally, we believe that the Council should
remain seized of the matter and in this regard we look
forward to working with other members of the Council
in the future.

