Mr. Meron: It is a great honour for me to address
this distinguished Council to present the tenth annual
report of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. Let me first express my profound
appreciation to the Council for the support it has always
afforded the Tribunal. If I may speak in a personal
capacity, I am particularly pleased to address the Council
under the presidency of Ambassador Negroponte.

Let me also pay tribute to the wisdom and
dedication of my predecessor as President of the
Tribunal, Judge Claude Jorda of France. Judge Jorda
served as President of the Tribunal during much of the
period upon which I report to you today.

In Security Council resolution 1503 (2003) of
28 August 2003, the Council expressly called on the
Presidents of the ICTY and ICTR to use their annual
reports to explain their plans for implementation of the
Tribunals' completion strategy. Heeding that instruction,
I will devote much of my statement today to the ICTY
completion strategy.

But before turning to those questions I would like
to review briefly some of the Tribunal's activities
during the last year, and, as we have reached its tenth
anniversary, I would like to place those activities in the
context of the Tribunal's accomplishments during its
entire decade of life.

Ten years ago, in resolution 827 (1993), the
Security Council brought the Tribunal into being. It did
so in the hope that the Tribunal would do more than
simply mete out justice to individual wrongdoers. It
would also help to create an impartial record of
atrocities committed during the Yugoslav conflict. It
would offer victims a sense that their suffering had
been recognized. And, by doing all of those things, it
would contribute to reconciliation and reconstruction in
the republics of the former Yugoslavia.

It has been our task, to use a phrase of Justice
Robert Jackson, the United States Chief Prosecutor at
Nuremberg, to "patiently and temperately disclose" the
record of the crimes that scarred the Balkans in the
19905 and devastated hundreds of thousands of lives.
The vast scale of those crimes - the murders, rapes
and deportations and the acts of torture, destruction and
cruelty - would dwarf the capacity of any single court
to bring about more than a very partial reckoning. But,
if with painful slowness at first, with growing confidence
and efficiency the Tribunal has helped bring to account a
considerable number of accused of high rank.

The Tribunal represents an enormous experiment
in international cooperation and institution-building. It
has 16 permanent judges from 16 countries and nine ad
litem judges from a further eight nations. The judges
sit in three Trial Chambers, with a total of nine three-
judge benches, and one Appeals Chamber. The
Tribunal has held, or is holding, 28 trials involving 44
defendants, with another 31 defendants currently in
pre-trial proceedings. A further 16 defendants - 16 as
of yesterday - have pleaded guilty. After nearly 10
years in operation, the Tribunal's Chambers have
handed down hundreds of decisions.

Of the 44 defendants tried, five, from three
different trials, have been acquitted. As important as
the Tribunal's ability to reach careful judgements of
guilt for the terrible crimes within its jurisdiction, one
of the essential tests of its fairness and legitimacy has
been its insistence on acquitting defendants when the
prosecution has failed to meet its burden of proof.
This past year the pace of our activities has
reached an all-time high. The Tribunal continues to
honour the commitments it made to the Security
Council. With morning and afternoon sessions in its
three courtrooms, its Trial Chambers conduct between
four and six trials at a time. During the year under
review, the Chambers examined 29 merits cases, as
well as three cases of contempt, and rendered four final
judgements on the merits or sentencing judgements.

The trial of Slobodan Milosevic, former Head of
State of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, continued
before Trial Chamber III. The defendant's health has
led to a great number of delays, and it is an extremely
complex case. It brings together what had been three
separate indictments - for Kosovo, Croatia and
Bosnia - with 66 counts, hundreds of witnesses and tens
of thousands of pages of documents, most of which
must be translated from Serbo-Croatian into English and
French, the Tribunal's working languages. But the
prosecution's case is coming to a close soon, and the
timetable for the defence case has begun to be established.

The Appeals Chamber, too, has disposed of a
greater number of appeals than in years past. During
the period under consideration, it disposed of 36
interlocutory appeals, two requests for review and two
contempt proceedings, and handed down one appeal
from judgement.

The Trial Chambers also received an increasing
number of guilty pleas resulting from plea agreements,
including from Biljana Plavsic, former Co-President of
the Republika Srpska. A total of 16 defendants have
now pleaded guilty at the Tribunal.

I recognize that because of the egregious nature of
the crimes charged before it, and because the Tribunal's
roles include providing some vindication for victims and
contributing to the creation of an accurate record of
terrible atrocities, some are hesitant about a too frequent
resort to plea agreements. These concerns are legitimate.
But I believe that, with properly detailed
acknowledgement by defendants of their participation in
the crimes for which they acknowledge guilt and with
genuine expressions of remorse, plea agreements can play
a constructive role. In some cases, a forthright and
specific acknowledgement of guilt may offer victims as
much consolation as, or even more than would a
conviction following repeated protestations of innocence.

Moreover, as a practical matter, the cooperation
secured through plea agreements plays an important
role in securing convictions of more important
participants in large-scale crimes. The time and
resources saved by avoiding trials in some cases both
contributes significantly to the Tribunal's ability to
meet the deadlines indicated by the Security Council
for the completion of its work and enables those in
detention to have their cases heard more quickly.
Guilty pleas could also bring to the Victims a faster
sense of the Vindication ofjustice.

With those deadlines in mind, let me turn to
addressing the Tribunal's completion strategy.

First, I can report that during the past year we
have made major strides in carrying out that strategy.
Internally, we have undertaken a series of judicially
initiated reforms designed to improve the efficiency of
our proceedings. The most important was the removal
of the ban on ad litem judges adjudicating in pre-trial
proceedings. At my urging, and in accord with an
earlier recommendation by my predecessor, Judge
Claude Jorda, on 19 May 2003 the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1481 (2003),
amending the Tribunal's Statute to permit ad litem
judges to undertake pre-trial work. That reform enables
ad litem judges to make even more efficient use of
their time and to enhance their already important
contribution to the work of the Tribunal, thus helping it
to try cases to completion more expeditiously.

At plenary meetings in December 2002 and July
2003, the Tribunal's judges adopted a number of
amendments to its rules of procedure designed to
improve efficiency. One revises the methods for
permitting the continuation of trials when one of the
judges hearing the case is unable to continue, thereby
reducing the likelihood of mistrials and retrials.
Another gives the Trial Chambers enhanced authority
to restrict the scope of the prosecution's case by, for
example, limiting the time and the number of witnesses
and the number of crime sites, thus avoiding the
presentation of duplicative and unnecessarily time-
consuming evidence.

Externally, the past year has seen a major advance
for the completion strategy through the advancement of
a plan to create a special war crimes chamber in the
State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. As I noted in
addressing the Council yesterday with Lord Ashdown,
the establishment of the war crimes chamber in
Sarajevo will provide a forum to which the Tribunal
may transfer a number of cases of lower- and mid-level
accused. In anticipation of the Chamber's creation, the
ICTY judges amended rule 11 bis at a special plenary
in September 2002 to set out the criteria that must be
satisfied before a case may be referred to a domestic
court once an indictment has been confirmed.

I would also note that, during my first official
visit - the first official visit of the Tribunal's
President - to Belgrade in September, I visited the
premises and met with the judges and the prosecutor of
the new war crimes chamber established in Serbia. As
the region moves towards normality, State courts
should assume a major role in bringing offenders to
account, but they can do so only if they are not used for
political ends and if they meet international standards
of due process and fair trial.

I can report that we are continuing to search for
ways to streamline our procedures. I have revitalized a
committee of judges called the Judicial Practices
Working Group, giving it a mandate to develop and
analyse proposals to shorten trials and speed the
hearing of appeals. The Prosecutor has recently
circulated a group of proposals with the same goal in
mind and the judges are actively considering and
reshaping a number of them. The Rules Committee of
the judges has some of these proposals under active
consideration. The Committee will recommend a
package of reforms aimed at improving the rules of
disclosure, pretrial management and presentation of
evidence to the judges' regular plenary meeting in
December. The purpose is to balance the interests of
the Prosecutor and the accused so that the task of the
former is manageable while the rights of the latter to a
fair trial remain protected.

I must report that, while we are striving in every
way possible to meet the goal of completing all trials
by the end of 2008 and all appeals by the end of 2010,
one cannot predict the completion date of judicial
proceedings with scientific accuracy. Many factors may
affect the outcome. Some of those influences are within
the control of the Tribunal, others not; of the former,
some are within the control of the judges and others
within the power of the Prosecutor.

Shortly after I became President of the Tribunal, I
formed a working group composed of representatives
from the Chambers, the Registry and the Prosecution in
order to improve the efficiency with which trials are
scheduled. I have also asked this group to make careful
projections of the time required to complete our trials,
based on a range of assumptions. Let me now give the
Council a summary of those estimates, as of today.
I am pleased to report that we should be able to
complete the trials of all individuals currently in the
custody of the Tribunal, including those on provisional
release - both individuals whose trials have already
begun and individuals who are in pre-trial proceedings -
within the 2008 deadline. There are 22 cases in these
categories.

Already confirmed indictments cover an
additional 17 individuals who are at large. It will take
11 trials to handle the cases of these fugitives. It may
be possible to complete the cases of two of the three
fugitives whom the Council has identified as being of
the highest priority - Karadzic and Mladic - within
the 2008 deadline, assuming that they are tried together
and brought into custody early enough to allow time
for such long trials to be held within the target dates set
by the Security Council. If there is an unexpected surge
in guilty pleas, it may even be possible to complete the
trials of some of the other indicted fugitives within the
2008 goal, but it will not be possible to complete all of
them by that time. Trying the cases of all the fugitives
without additional guilty pleas would probably require
trials at least through 2009.

Our estimate on this count depends on predictions
not only about the likely length of the various trials,
but also about the timing of the arrest and transfer of
these fugitives to The Hague, the number of guilty
pleas received and the number of cases to be
transferred to the new war crimes chamber in Sarajevo.
The sooner fugitives arrive, the better are the chances
of joining their cases to those of individuals already at
The Hague, thus avoiding the greater time and expense
that separate trials would require. How many of the 17
fugitives from justice, and how many of those already
in the Tribunal's custody, will plead guilty cannot, of
course, be predicted. A large number of guilty pleas
could attenuate our present estimates. In short, the
sooner fugitives are turned in, the greater the number
of guilty pleas received, or the greater the number of
cases that can be transferred to Sarajevo, the sooner we
will be able to finish the trials of these cases.

The first of these considerations - the handing
over of fugitives - is, of course, outside the Tribunal's
control. It depends above all on the cooperation of the
States of the former Yugoslavia. Ijoin my predecessors
in urging this Council to press all Member States to
cooperate fully and promptly with the Tribunal's work.
During my recent visit to Belgrade, I was encouraged
by an emerging understanding that cooperation with
the Tribunal is both necessary and desirable, but much
remains to be done on arrests of fugitives, access to
evidence, and facilitation of witness testimony,
especially by present and former officials.

The Prosecutor has some role to play in the
second of these considerations - the number of guilty
pleas. The third - the number of cases transferred to
the Sarajevo war crimes chamber - depends on how
quickly the Chamber becomes operational.

I have recently learned from the Prosecutor that
she intends to submit approximately 14 additional
indictments covering approximately a further 30
individuals. While four or five of the new indictments
will involve individuals whose cases can be joined to
existing ones, eight or nine of these indictments will
require separate trials.

Here is the problem. By setting 2004 as the end
of the Prosecutor's mandate to investigate, the Security
Council clearly expected her to produce some results,
including new indictments. It may well be that future
indictments will in fact target persons more senior and
more responsible than persons who have been indicted
in the past. But, as I appear before the Council today as
President of the Tribunal to report for the first time on
the Tribunal's overall activities, it is my duty to be
absolutely candid and transparent about how these
cases, like those I have described earlier, fit into the
calendar established by this Council. Thus, I must tell
the Council that, based on our present projections, it
will not be possible to accommodate any of these new
indictments within the timeframe indicated by the
Council. I say this recognizing fully that it is the
Prosecutor's prerogative to select the individuals
against whom she will file indictments, and
recognizing that if the Prosecution has sufficient
evidence to make a prima facie case, we judges must
confirm the indictments.

Pursuant to the Statute and Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 1503 (2003), it is not
within judicial authority to assess whether the subjects
of each of these new indictments meet the standard set
by this Council of being the most senior leaders
suspected of being most responsible for crimes within
the ICTY's jurisdiction. The matter is clearly between
the Council and the Prosecutor.

The Tribunal's mandate is to try persons responsible
for serious violations of international humanitarian law
committed during the Yugoslav conflicts. In resolution
1503 (2003), the Council did not spell out the goals to
be achieved during the sunset months of the
Prosecutor's investigatory functions. Clearly, the
Prosecutor will thus submit additional indictments,
which, according to our present calculations, will
inevitably cause a significant additional slippage in the
target dates of the completion strategy - perhaps as
much as two years beyond what it would take to try the
fugitives who are delivered to The Hague. Of course,
once the Prosecutor comes to the end of the
investigatory phase of her work, we will be in a much
better position to make projections with confidence.

One thing must be clear, however: once indictments
have been submitted and confirmed by the judges, the
legal process will have started, and it will have to run its
course in accordance with the governing law and the
demands of due process. A strict application of the target
dates for the completion strategy must not - I repeat,
must not i result in impunity, particularly for the most
senior leaders suspected of being most responsible for
the crimes within the Tribunal's jurisdiction.

I realize that some members of the Council will
find these projections sobering. But, even as I express
my commitment to do everything possible, through
continuing reforms of procedure and trial management
practices, to improve the speed and efficiency of our
proceedings, I must also remind the Council that in
criminal trials speed cannot be purchased at the price
of sacrificing the demands of due process. The legacy
of the Tribunal will be measured not only by whether it
succeeds in judging those responsible for the most
serious crimes falling within its jurisdiction, but also
by whether it does so in accordance with the strictest
standards of fairness.

Ensuring that those standards are met requires
skilful work, not only by our judges, but also by our
staff. Particularly as the completion of the Tribunal's
work comes into sight, it will be more and more
difficult to retain and attract staff of the highest calibre,
unless opportunities for advancement or continuation of
service within the United Nations are made available. The
establishment of additional criminal jurisdictions creates
additional pressure in this regard. I hope the members of
the Council - and the members of the General
Assembly - will recognize the importance of this
issue and support our proposals to address it.
The mission of the Tribunal has been to try, not all
of those who have committed violations of international
humanitarian law, but those most responsible for major
atrocities. That mission will not be completed until we
have tried, in particular, Mladic and Karadzic.

Ten years ago, the Security Council created the
ICTY with the goal of putting an end to impunity for
mass atrocities and serious Violations of international
humanitarian law. During that decade, with the
constant support of the Council, the Tribunal has given
victims a chance to see their sufferings recorded and, at
least in some measure, to be vindicated. By laying bare
the consequences of ethnic and religious hatred, the
trials held by the Tribunal have demonstrated the
viciousness of those who built up their power by
encouraging their followers to embrace such hatred.
The Tribunal has thus made a fundamental and lasting
contribution to bringing justice to the peoples of the
former Yugoslavia. Our jurisprudence will also supply
a foundation for all international criminal courts and a
model for national prosecutions of those who commit
atrocities.

