Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo for his
briefing. China has noted that the Office of the
Prosecutor has pursued its communication with the
neighbouring countries of the Sudan and the African
Union and is continuing its investigation in the case of
a peacekeeper who was attacked in September 2007.
China appreciates the efforts of the Office of the
Prosecutor to seek solutions to impunity in Darfur.

China follows closely the situation in Darfur. It is
regrettable that the conflict has continued in Darfur. It
is all the more heartbreaking to see, as a result, the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation. China
condemns atrocities against human rights and
international humanitarian law and supports a
constructive role for the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in appropriately resolving the problem of
impunity in Darfur.

As the Prosecutor points out in his report, the
ICC is a supplement to the domestic judicial system of
the State. China hopes that the Sudanese Government
will, under the precondition that the domestic judicial
system be the main channel, enhance its
communication with the ICC, strengthen cooperation,
establish mutual trust and jointly resolve the problem
of impunity in Darfur.
We believe that only with the improvement of the
situation and political stability can there be a solution
to the problem of impunity and can judicial fairness be
fundamentally realized. At present, the situation in
Darfur does not allow for optimism. Work in all fields

faces challenges. The international community should
continue its two-track strategy and focus on the
political process and peacekeeping deployment. Work
in all fields needs mutual cooperation and
reinforcement rather than division and isolation.

China understands that some countries are eager
to resolve the question of impunity, but it is not
realistic to do so in a hurry. In the broader picture,
other areas are facing difficulties, and it is thus
impossible for the judicial sphere to achieve isolated,
quick and substantive progress. China hopes that all
parties will cooperate with one another and move in the
same direction so as to achieve a comprehensive
solution to the question of Darfur as soon as possible.

