Mr. Kubis: On 12 May 2018 - within the
constitutional time-frame - Iraq held elections for its
national Parliament, the Council of Representatives.
Prime Minister Haider Al Abadi, after the closing of
the polls, noted that the country had held the elections
on time, that people had been able to cast their votes
and select their representatives freely and safely and
that the liberated areas had experienced a free voting
process for the first time after the victory of the Iraqi
forces and the defeat of Da'esh.

The Secretary-General, on 13 May, congratulated
the people of Iraq on the holding of parliamentary
elections and stated that, following the military defeat
of Da'esh, the elections represented further progress
in building a stronger Iraqi democracy. He saluted
the tireless efforts of electoral officials, party agents
and the security forces in making the elections largely
peaceful and orderly.

Following the elections, international partners,
including the Governments of Kuwait, Qatar, Iran,
Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, the United States
of America and the United Kingdom and the European
Union, also congratulated the Iraqi people.

The elections, held in a generally calm and stable
environment, were marked by a low voter turnout: the
Independent High Electoral Commission informed about
the participation of44.5 per cent -just 10.8 million out
of 24.3 million eligible voters - a significant decrease
in comparison with previous national elections in Iraq
after 2003. The new Parliament will also experience a
massive turnover; according to the preliminary results,
less than 100 of the incumbent members - the total
number of which in the current Parliament is over
300 - have secured their place in the new Council of
Representatives. The decision by more than half of the
voting population not to exercise their democratic right
sends a strong signal to the elites ruling the country
since 2003. I urge the Iraqi political elites to draw
the necessary conclusions on the need for improved
representation, justice for all, democratic accountability
and good governance, devoid of corruption, a sectarian
quota system, nepotism or patronage.

I also urge political leaders to ensure the full
participation of women in negotiations on the formation
of the next ruling coalition and the Government, and
their representation at the highest levels in Iraq's
political and decision-making structures in the
Parliament and the Government, as pledged by many
political leaders in the election campaign.

Following the closing of the polls and the
announcement of the preliminary results, many Iraqi
political leaders publicly endorsed the electoral process,
including the Prime Minister and the President. They
continue to urge a timely conduct and conclusion of the
complaint process, certification and acceptance of the
results, and a speeding-up of the formation of the new
Government, within the constitutional timeline and in
accordance with relevant legal procedures. Some other
political forces and leaders have raised concerns over
some of the technical shortfalls encountered with the
electronic vote tabulation devices, as well as reports of
fraud and vote rigging, active intimidation of voters,
including by some armed formations, and political
interference. They have demanded the recount of votes
in some governorates, the annulment of results of
out-of-country voting and the voting of the internally
displacedpersons (IDPs), and even fresh elections. Amid
questions about the legality of their decisions, including
from the Independent High Electoral Commission, on
28 May, the Council of Representatives voted to request
the Commission to undertake the manual counting of
10 per cent of the ballot boxes, which could trigger
the manual counting of all the ballots in the case of a
discrepancy of 25 per cent or more. It also requested
cancellation of the out-of-country and IDP voting.

On 24 May, the Council of Ministers decided
to form a High Commission to investigate reports
and documents pertaining to the elections. The High
Commission already referred the Independent High
Electoral Commission to the Integrity Commission, a
move rejected by the Commission as interference in
its independence.

Six Kurdistani parties have questioned the
credibility of the electoral process in the Kurdistan
region and have been calling for a recount of the votes
in the Kurdistan governorates, and even for a reholding
of the elections. On the other hand, the Kurdistan
Democratic Party and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan
have announced their satisfaction with the outcome of
the elections and their intention to start dialogue on
coalition-building with political parties in Baghdad.

In Kirkuk governorate - one of several hotspots
of complaints - the situation remains volatile,
with Turkmen and Arab parties demanding manual
recounting ofthe election results, while the Independent
High Electoral Commission has complained that they
have obstructed its work.

On 17 May, I called on the Electoral Commission to
act expeditiously and seriously address all complaints,
including, as necessary, the conduct ofa partial manual
recount in selected locations, notably in Kirkuk. I
stressed the importance of undertaking such measures
in full transparency, witnessed by stakeholders, to
strengthen confidence in the process. I also called on
all political actors to uphold the peace and to remain
committed to resolving any electoral disputes through
the established legal channels.

We urge the independent electoral management
bodies to adjudicate all appeals properly, fully and in
time to enable corrections of the problems, justice and
the timely certification of the final election results. I
also wish to highlight the readiness and availability of
United Nations electoral advice and expertise in support
of any activities and measures that may be required to
retain confidence in the process, including in the light
of the forthcoming provincial council elections across
Iraq on 22 December and Kurdistan regional elections
on 30 September.

Given the controversies around the Council of
Representatives elections, the Kurdistan regional
Independent High Electoral and Referendum
Commission has decided not to use electronic vote
tabulation machines. The United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) stands ready to advise and
support that electoral process.

The post-election phase represents a crucial time
for Iraq. Building on the achievements of the current
Government, we urge political leaders to prioritize
inclusive, non-sectarian dialogue and to ensure the swift
formation of a new genuinely national Government that
reflects the will of the people of Iraq. It is essential
that the new Government works as one across the
sectarian and ethnic divides in pursuing much-needed
political, economic and social reforms, based on the
principles of patriotism and citizenship with equal
rights, responsibilities, justice and opportunity for all
and good governance, while working to improve the
economy, public services delivery and social justice.
A new Government, based on such an approach, will
guarantee the future of Iraq as a stable, prosperous,
united, democratic, fully sovereign and independent
federal State with good relations with all its neighbours,
based on mutual respect, non-interference and common
interests as prerequisites for stability, cooperation and
prosperity, including in the region.

The humanitarian crisis in Iraq continues. More
than 2.1 million people remain displaced and in need
of humanitarian assistance. However, the funding to
provide the most vulnerable with emergency support is
at critically low levels. Out of the required $569 million
in the humanitarian response plan, only $101 million in
donor contributions - 18 per cent - had been received
as of 15 May. In addition, demining and stabilization
efforts are underfunded. I therefore appeal to the donor
community to further extend its generosity to the people
of Iraq for humanitarian, stabilization, demining and
rehabilitation needs.

Despite the Prime Minister's 2017 directive on the
civilian character of IDP camps, a continued military
presence in camps across Iraq, the sexual harassment
of women and girls, the diversion of humanitarian
assistance, the detention and disappearance of their
residents, recruitment activities inside the camps and
attacks by armed actors on humanitarian staff remain
deeply concerning. In April Amnesty International
issued a report that concluded that Iraqi women and
children with perceived ties to Da'esh experience
serious protection issues in camps, including the denial
of assistance, restrictions on freedom of movement
and sexual harassment, rape and sexual exploitation. I
wish to underline that the United Nations in Iraq, in
cooperation with the Government, has been engaged,
notably through the Protection from Sexual Exploitation
and Abuse network, established in 2016, in an urgent
follow-up on reported situations.

With regard to the issue of missing Kuwaiti and
third country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property,
in April, for the second time in 15 years, Iraq hosted
meetings of the tripartite mechanism, demonstrating its
commitment to the missing persons file and a steady
return to normality. I am grateful for the positive
response received with regard to the proposals put
forward by UNAMI during those meetings, namely,
a pilot project to conduct mass grave site surveys in
Iraq with the help of the United Nations Global Service
Centre in Brindisi.

I would like to call upon the Member States in
possession of relevant satellite imagery from 1990
and 1991 to come forward and provide analysis and
information to the Government of Iraq that could assist
in the identification of burial locations. The missing
Kuwaiti property file also did not register any direct
progress during the period under review. UNAMI has
been meeting with the Iraqi Ministry of Foreign Affairs
to discuss how best it can support and facilitate the
repatriation of already located Kuwaiti property, which
has been pending for more than a year.

