Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to join other
members of the Security Council in expressing our
deep sorrow and conveying our sincere condolences to
the families and friends of those who lost their lives in
the tragic accident involving the Ethiopian airplane.
I thank all the briefers for having shared their
insightful and comprehensive analyses on the current
situation in Afghanistan. Let me also express my
gratitude to Special Representative Yamamoto
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/193), as well as for all the work of the
team of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), which is helping to promote
political dialogue, enhance good governance and
foster economic development. In my intervention I
will touch upon three major points, namely, the peace
process, the preparations for the upcoming presidential
elections and the challenges presented by the current
humanitarian situation.

Poland welcomes all the efforts of the Afghan
Government and other initiatives undertaken to
advance the peace process. All the initiatives in that
regard should promote an inclusive, Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned dialogue on reconciliation and
political participation. The process has to include the
effective and meaningful participation of women and
lay a foundation for all those who want to declare that
they renounce violence and respect the Constitution
with a view to building a peaceful Afghanistan. The
peace process, which is crucial for the future of the
whole region, cannot be based on an agreement that
compromises unquestionable gains achieved on human
rights, the rule of law, the freedom of speech and
women's rights.

Afghanistan managed to conduct parliamentary and
district council elections in 2018 within the accepted
time frame. All the experience garnered and the lessons
learned should now be used in the holding of peaceful,
transparent and credible presidential elections in 2019.
We urge UNAMA to provide assistance to the electoral
bodies and support inclusiveness in the electoral
process, including measures to enable the full and safe
participation of women. Poland wishes to underline the
importance of protecting schools and other places used
as polling and voter-registration centres.

In the latest report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict in Afghanistan, the statistics provided
show a very dire picture. Overall civilian deaths reached
a record-high level in 2018, with more than 3,000 killed
and over 7,000 people injured. Nine hundred and twenty-
seven children lost their lives as a result of military
and terrorist activities during the year. This has to
stop. The situation is unacceptable to the international
community; it cannot be allowed to continue. We urge
all parties to the conflict to show genuine commitment
and respect for humanitarian principles, human rights
and international humanitarian law. Poland calls upon
anti-Government elements to stop using improvised
explosive devices and suicide attacks, which remained
the leading cause of civilian casualties in 2018.

Climate change not only poses a threat to some
countries in Africa but also has an impact on the
security situation of other regions, including the region
where Afghanistan is situated. Extreme weather events,
droughts, desertification and water scarcity strongly
affect the humanitarian situation and can lead to the
escalation of local and regional conflicts. Therefore,
we must emphasize prevention and mitigation and
strengthen country resilience. Better climate-related
risk-assessment and management strategies are needed
to effectively address these threats.

In conclusion, let me express our full support for the
efforts of the Government of Afghanistan to bring about
lasting peace and stability in the country. We stand with
Afghanistan in its war against terrorism and support its
unrelenting efforts to spread its authority over its entire
territory. We encourage all parties engaged in internal
and regional dialogue to reinforce their commitments
in order to achieve peace and stability by enhancing
connectivity and cooperation.

