Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): Thank you, Mr. President,
for initiating this very important meeting and for
providing a valuable concept paper to facilitate our
discussions this morning.

The working methods of any organization
constitute a very critical ingredient of its performance
and overall success. We therefore welcome this debate
as a practical step to reinforce not only the efficiency
and transparency of the Council, but also its interaction
and dialogue with non-members of the Council.

I would like to elaborate on three elements that
are crucial to the improvement of the Security
Council's working methods. The first element is
transparency. We believe that transparency in the work
of the Council will not only promote accountability,
but will also earn the Council the confidence of the
broader United Nations membership and the global
public. In accordance with Articles 31 and 32 of the
Charter, more formal meetings, such as today's debate,
and access to information will allow for the proper
evaluation of the effectiveness and inadequacies of the
Council.

The monthly briefing to non-members of the
Council on the programme of work, the monthly
assessment of the Council's presidency, and greater
coverage of the activities of the various subsidiary
bodies of the Council are very commendable. Through
consultations and enhanced content, more useful
information is now being provided to non-members of
the Council in the annual reports. We believe that both
the analytical and the narrative quality of the work can
be further enhanced with information provided in the
monthly assessment of the presidency. The traditional
10-32351
practice of subjecting the reports to an assessment by
members of the Council is also encouraged.

Presidential statements constitute valuable means
of providing information to non-members of the
Council on the decisions of the Council. To improve
their usefulness, they need to be more concrete and
specific in terms of content. We also believe that the
presidents of the Council should return to flexibility in
addressing the media, while lead countries should be
encouraged to provide more statements as appropriate.

The value of informal consultations should be
enhanced through the provision of information to non-
members of the Council on the outcomes of
discussions as appropriate. The Council may also use
other variants of this method, such as informal
interactive discussions, in promoting inclusiveness in
its work.

On interaction and dialogue with non-members of
the Council, we welcome efforts made to increase
interaction with the broader United Nations
membership, troop- and police-contributing countries
and regional organizations. We support the practice of
holding informal consultations with General Assembly
members, as introduced by Viet Nam in 2008 and
sustained by Uganda in 2009, before the adoption of
the annual report. Mindful of the value of local
perspectives and specialized knowledge in guiding the
decisions of the Council, we feel that it is necessary to
maintain and improve the practice of inviting
concerned countries and parties to deliberations on
missions, mandates and other issues on the Council's
agenda.

In terms of efficiency, Security Council field
missions are valuable in enhancing the efficiency of
the Council and in providing the right perspectives on
local realities. Through dialogue with various actors at
the national and regional levels, Council members
become aware of the impact of their decisions. Our
view is that the work of the Council would be greatly
improved and enhanced by more visits and longer
engagements with actors in Africa, considering the
heavy presence of African issues on the agenda of the
Security Council.

The timely circulation of the reports of the
Secretary-General to Council members and to troop-
contributing countries is crucial to the efficient work of
the Council. The implementation of this requirement
has been hindered by the cumbersome process of
10-32351
producing reports. The Council may need to consider
reviewing the time frames required for the production
of these reports on a case-by-case basis, and allocating
more time for the submission of the reports.

At the World Summit in 2005, our leaders
envisaged a reformed Council that would be broadly
representative, democratic, efficient and indeed
transparent - a Council would enjoy enhanced
effectiveness and legitimacy in the implementation of
its own decisions. Fortunately, the Council's working
methods and procedures contain the essential tools for
achieving these ideals. What is needed now, and
urgently, is to overcome the challenges of inflexibility
and the lack of will to implement note S/2006/507 and
the subsequent notes of 2007 and 2008.

