Ireland would like to commend the Niger for facilitating this debate. Environmental stress can amplify other drivers of fragility in vulnerable places, undermining peace and stability. The abilities of States and communities to cope with crises and shocks are strained by the overexploitation and degradation of natural resources, particularly when we consider soil, air and water pollution, the loss of biodiversity and the effects of climate change. Again this year, extreme weather events and unpredictable weather patterns are disrupting places as diverse and far apart as the Sahel, the Caribbean and the Pacific. As we are learning, painfully, the loss of forests and biodiversity is creating conditions for new infectious diseases, and also allowing diseases we thought suppressed to come back. When pandemic, conflict and climate change come together, humanitarian crises are made even more devastating, requiring more complex and more expensive responses. Conflict, and in particular explosive weapons and remnants of war, continue to impact communities even long after hostilities have ended. The environmental impact throughout the life cycle of weapons, including their production, storage, use, abandonment and disposal, can be significant. We must also pay heed to the use of natural resources in armed conflict. For example, the tactical use of rural and forested areas by armed opposition groups around Lake Chad impedes communities' access to these essential natural resources and undermines their livelihoods. The United Nations system, and the Security Council in particular, must address environmental factors as part of its peace mandate. I have four points in this regard. First, we can build on recent positive developments. The establishment of the Climate Security Mechanism and the Informal Expert Group on climate and security can provide essential analytical capacity for the United Nations system. This must inform its conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding work. Ireland continues to call for a special representative on climate and security, who could further support these efforts. Secondly, the disproportionate impact of environmental degradation on women and youth cannot be ignored, given the adverse effects on health, education, livelihoods and food security, and increased risk of gender-based violence. Supporting local ownership, improving leadership and ensuring the inclusion of women and youth in decision-making and governance processes around natural resources in conflict and fragile settings remain critical to effective peacebuilding. Thirdly, peacekeeping operations must continue to be responsive to the environmental drivers of insecurity, while also being increasingly aware of their own environmental footprint. We must continue to consider the inclusion of climate and security in peacekeeping mandates, where appropriate, as well as provide all the necessary supports for the full implementation of the United Nations environmental strategy for missions. Finally, we must address the effects of armed conflict on the natural environment. This means ensuring that parties to conflict abide by international humanitarian law prohibiting attacks on the natural environment, in addition to their responsibility to ensure unimpeded access for humanitarian actors to communities in need. We can also learn from the provisions on environmental remediation in the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. The Security Council plays an indispensable role in protecting peace and preventing conflict. A peaceful and safe world will not be possible if we fail to address the environmental and climate-related challenges that we now face. Ireland, as an incoming member of the Security Council, will continue to drive this issue and advance the collective United Nations efforts towards peace.
