Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, let me
congratulate the United States on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December. Please be assured of my delegation's full
support, Madam President. Allow me also to thank
Ambassador Karen Pierce, Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom, and her team for their
excellent work presiding over the Council in the month
of November.

I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert,
Mr. Robert Mardini and Archbishop Bashar Matti
Warda for their important briefings. Indonesia would
like to underscore the following points.

First, with regard to the recent political turmoil
across Iraq, we fully support Iraq's journey towards
democracy and prosperity for its people and are deeply
concerned by the demonstrations that have turned
violent. The path to democracy is never easy, but
peaceful assembly, demonstrations and peaceful protest
are central to it. We therefore call on all the parties to
act with maximum restraint and resolve the people's
demands through peaceful and inclusive dialogue. We
support the people's right to peaceful assembly, in line
with Iraq's Constitution, and call on the Government,
particularly the security forces, to respect fundamental
human rights. We further urge the Government to
continue the measures it is taking to meet the public's
demands and to investigate the violence that has caused
deaths and injuries in the demonstrations.

Secondly, with regard to post-conflict recovery and
national reconciliation, we reiterate our firm support
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq.
In that connection, we stress that elements such as
combating corruption, strengthening the environment
for investment, respecting the rule of law, reforming
the security sector and creating an environment that
enables women and young people to participate in
nation-building are crucial to post-conflict recovery
and reconciliation. Protecting the rights of minorities,
regardless of their religion, ethnicity or cultural
background, is equally important. We would also like
to encourage the inclusion of more women in senior
decision-making positions in Iraq, and in that regard we
welcome Ms. Suha Ali Bek's appointment as Minister
of Education, which is an important step towards
responding to the calls of the international community.
We also applaud the Government's effort to establish
stronger relations with its neighbouring countries,
as consolidated efforts are crucial to promoting
security and stability in the region and strengthening
economic relations.

Thirdly, with regard to the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals or their
remains, as well as the return of Kuwaiti property,
we are very encouraged by the persistent efforts
of the Governments of Iraq and of Kuwait and the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Tripartite Commission. Collectively, those efforts have
yielded significant progress. We are pleased to learn,
as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
said, that approximately 200,000 books belonging
to the Government of Kuwait have been handed over
by the Iraqi Ministry for Foreign Affairs. We would
also like to echo the Secretary-General, whose report
(S/2019/865) encourages the Iraqi Government to
build on those successful efforts and to take all steps
necessary to promote further progress. Indonesia will
continue to monitor progress on this file, particularly
with regard to the missing Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals or their remains. It is our responsibility to
help their families receive closure.

In conclusion, we once again thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Hennis-
Plasschaert and her team at the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq for their diligent support
to the efforts of the Iraqi people and the Government to
achieve a stable and prosperous country.

