Mr. Tillerson (United States of America): I appreciate
the opportunity to address the Security Council again,
and I thank this month's presidency, Ethiopia.

Members of the Security Council often talk
of threats to global security. The focus of today's
Security Council meeting is an issue with worldwide
implications - nuclear proliferation. At a time when
stabbings, crudely constructed bombs and trucks driven
into crowds of innocent men, women and children are
often our enemies' weapons of choice to attack us, it
is easy to become complacent and see the threat of
nuclear attacks as a relic of the Cold War. The threat of
a nuclear attack remains a grim reality, and those who
would trigger such a horrific scenario pose a unique
threat to peace-loving nations.

The challenge for each of us is: How can we
decrease the threat posed by nuclear weapons, not just
to our own people, but people worldwide? Today I want
to put four points forward.

The first is to highlight the positive trajectory
of nations that have voluntarily relinquished nuclear
weapons. The second is to emphasize the moral burden
of possessing nuclear weapons, and the enormous
responsibility that accompanies stewardship of such
devastating weapons, as well as the technologies and
nuclear materials that go into them. The third is to
make clear that acquiring nuclear-weapons capability
does not provide security, prestige or other benefits,
but instead represents a path to isolation and intense
security scrutiny from the global community, as those
responsible nuclear Powers will check such uncertain
unpredictable threats. And lastly, all nations, but
most particularly the current nuclear Powers, must
recommit to sound nuclear-security practices and
robust and effective non-proliferation efforts in order
to keep nuclear weapons and associated materials and
technology out of the hands of irresponsible nations,
terrorists and non-State actors.

There are historical precedents of nations
abandoning their nuclear-weapons programmes and
arsenals out of self-interest. Belarus, Kazakhstan,
South Africa and Ukraine all weighed the risk and
responsibility of nuclear weapons and made the
decision to eliminate their nuclear programmes or give
up their nuclear weapons. As the apartheid regime in
South Africa ended, the country's leaders eliminated
its nuclear weapons and joined the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as a non-nuclear-
weapon State. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union,
Belarus, Kazakhstan and Ukraine willingly gave up the
nuclear weaponry that the Soviet collapse bequeathed
to their territories, and over the years several other
countries were willing to abandon clandestine nuclear-
weapons development efforts when reassured by the
United States and others that their relationships with us
and the global community enabled them to meet their
national security needs without such tools.

The Republic of Kazakhstan is a particularly
illustrative example of the wisdom of relinquishing
nuclear weapons. In partnership with the United States
and aided by the Cooperative Threat Reduction Act
spearheaded by United States Senators Sam Nunn and
Richard Lugar, Kazakhstan opted to remove from his
territory former Soviet weapons and related nuclear
technologies and joined the Non-Proliferation Treaty as
a non-nuclear-weapon State. This courageous decision
of the leaders of Kazakhstan greatly reduced the
prospect of nuclear weapons, components of nuclear
weapons, nuclear materials or dual-use technologies
from falling into the wrong hands. Nuclear weapons
introduce complexity into relations with other countries
and introduce the risk of miscalculation, accident
or escalation.

Kazakhstan's actions represented a key step in that
country becoming part of the community of nations. As
a result of letting go of nuclear weapons, the world does
not look on Kazakhstan as a potential nuclear aggressor
or a rogue State. It did not make enemies of its nuclear
neighbours, Russia and China. Today, Kazakhstan has
overwhelmingly been at peace with his neighbours, and
its trade relations are robust. This year it hosted Expo
2017, an event in Astana that showcased the sources
of future energy and investment opportunities in
Kazakhstan for attendees from around the world.

Kazakhstan is a modern nation making a substantial
contribution to regional and international peace and
prosperity. It has only benefited from its early decision.

In my previous career, I met President Nazarbayev on
many occasions and had the opportunity to ask him
about this decision. He is more at peace with his choice
than ever. He once remarked to me, "It was the best
thing I ever did for our young country".

Ukraine made a similar courageous choice. Even
after Russia's encouraging incursion into its territory
in Crimea in eastern Ukraine, in violation of Moscow's
commitments under the Budapest Memorandum,
Ukraine's leaders reaffirmed yet again the wisdom of
their decision to remove nuclear weapons. Their friends
and allies quickly came to their aid in response to this
violation of their sovereignty with a strong unified set
of sanctions on Russia and are steadfastly committed to
ending this conflict through full implementation of the
Minsk agreements.

By rejecting the power of nuclear weapons, both of
these two proud nations are in a better place than they
would have been otherwise. They reduced the danger
of nuclear conflict and help reduce the chances of such
capabilities falling into the hands of irresponsible
third parties.

As the only nation on Earth to have used nuclear
weapons in warfare, the United States bears a heavy
responsibility to exercise proper stewardship of nuclear
weapons and to lead in working with other nations
to reduce global nuclear dangers. It is a blessing and
perhaps in many ways a miracle that nuclear weapons
have never been used again. All the peoples ofthe world
pray that they will never be. Experience is a hard but
wise teacher and has taught everyone the grim moral
responsibility that accompanies nuclear weapons.

The United States is reliant upon nuclear deterrence
today for the purposes of safeguarding not only our
own security interests, but also those of our allies who
otherwise might feel the need to acquire such weapons
themselves. Such deterrence and such relationships
have contributed to the absence of war between the great
Powers since 1945 and, indeed, to the fact that nuclear
weapons themselves have never been used again.

We are all fortunate that John F. Kennedy and
Nikita Khrushchev, when they stood on the brink of
a nuclear holocaust during the Cold War, came to a
common understanding of the fearful and awesome
power of nuclear weapons. As potential human
extinction loomed over the Cuban missile crisis, the
dominant emotion was fear. Nuclear weapons brought
the most powerful men in the world no comfort, but it
did make clear the need to minimize the risk of ever
repeating this near-miss of a catastrophe by permitting
nuclear capabilities to spread further.

Just this week, the world learned of the passing of
a little-known but important figure in the history of
the cold war. His name was Stanislav Petrov and he
is sometimes referred to as "the man who saved the
world". In 1983, Petrov was a Soviet military officer
on duty at a nuclear early-warning centre when his
computers detected a barrage of incoming American
nuclear missiles. He said, "I had all the data to suggest
that it was true". He said, "IfI had sent my report up
the chain of command, nobody would have said a word
against it". He said, "All I had to do was to reach for the
phone to raise the direct line to our top commanders but
I could not move. I felt like I was sitting on a frying pan".

Petrov had a hunch that the computer had made an
error, and fortunately he was right about a false alarm.
Instead of notifying his commanders to prepare an
immediate nuclear counter-attack, he instead called
army headquarters and reported a system malfunction.
This episode illustrates just how high the risk factor
is with nuclear weapons, especially when decisions
to use them are entrusted or could be entrusted to
sometimes unreliable technologies or fallible human
judgment. Countries that want nuclear weapons must
ask themselves, "Are we prepared to deal with this type
of scenario in our own country?"

The history of the Cuban missile crisis and the
Soviet early-warning malfunction illustrate how
challenging it can be even for the most experienced and
most sophisticated nuclear-weapon possessors to control
nuclear dangers. Rogue regimes fail to appreciate the
responsibilities inherent to nuclear weapons. They wish
to develop or expand their holdings of nuclear weapons
in what they claim to be a search for security, but in
fact they desire to use such tools to intimidate and
coerce their neighbours and destabilize their regions.
Such acquisitions risk creating an escalating spiral of
regional or global instability and conflict, not just as a
direct result of their own proliferation but by prompting
other nations to undertake their own nuclear-weapons
programmes in response.

In such circumstances, nuclear weapons are
not instruments of mutual deterrence and strategic
stability, but instead are tools of destabilization. Rogue
regimes may have persuaded themselves that they
pursue nuclear weapons to establish and enhance their
security and prestige but in fact nuclear weapons are
more likely to undermine both. There is a very good
reason why almost every country in the world has
joined the Non-Proliferation Treaty.

All parties can know that they will not in the future
face the threat of nuclear catastrophe from any new
direction. If would-be proliferators seek security or to
improve their standing in the world or to enhance the
prosperity of their citizens and their peoples' hope for
a brighter future, proliferation will not provide these
things. There are much better proven ways for nations to
establish and enhance their standing, such as deepening
their trade integration with the rest of the world,
adhering to international standards and agreements and
participating in humanitarian activities.

The Korean peninsula serves as a stark example of
these differing paths. While North Korea has shunned
the international community and let its people starve
while it relentlessly pursues nuclear weapons, South
Korea has opted not to pursue nuclear weapons and is
fully engaged with the international community. As a
result, South Korea has grown into one of the world's
great economic Powers, with a gross domestic product
over 100 times larger that of its neighbour to the north.
By contract, though, North Korea may assume that
nuclear weapons will ensure the survival of its regime.
In truth, nuclear weapons are clearly only leading to
greater isolation, ignominy and deprivation. Continued
threats against us, the United States, and now the entire
global community will not create safety for the regime,
but will rather stiffen our collective resolve and our
commitment to deterring North Korean aggression.

North Korea is a case study in why nations must
work to preserve and strengthen global non-proliferation
norms. As we look to the future, the international
community's record of enforcing compliance with
non-proliferation obligations and commitments is
not what we need it to be. It is partly for lack of such
accountability that we find ourselves in the situation
that we are in with North Korea at the moment.
Although it joined the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons in the mid-19805, North Korea
never came into full compliance with the Treaty and
cheated on every subsequent arrangement designed to
remedy that non-compliance and rein in the nuclear
threat it now presents.

There are also lessons here for Iran, which was
on its own pathway to develop nuclear weapons, in
violation of its Non-Proliferation Treaty, nuclear
safeguard obligations and multiple, legally binding
Security Council resolutions. Iran seems keen to
preserve for itself the option to resume such work in the
future, even while sponsoring international terrorism,
developing missile systems capabilities for delivering
nuclear weapons and destabilizing its neighbours in a
dangerous quest for regional hegemony.

The collective responsibilities of meeting such
proliferation challenges will require more from all of
us. As President Trump said in his speech on Tuesday,

"If we are to embrace the opportunities of the
future and overcome the present dangers together,
there can be no substitute for strong, sovereign and
independent nations" (A/72/PV3, p. 14).

As strong, sovereign and independent nations, we must
work together bilaterally, regionally and globally to
stem the tide of proliferation. Sovereign States, acting
in unison, will produce a global good.

We especially urge Russia to examine how it can
better support global non-proliferation efforts. As the
world's two most powerful nuclear States, Russia and
the United States share the greatest responsibility for
upholding non-proliferation norms and stopping the
further spread of nuclear weapons. We have cooperated
well before. The United States and the Soviet Union
worked together closely in drafting most of the texts
that became the Non-Proliferation Treaty, which helped
keep proliferation under control through the Cold War.
Washington, DC, and Moscow did this, moreover,
notwithstanding their own Cold War rivalry and the
many problems in their bilateral relationship.

In the post-Cold War era, Russia worked hard
to improve accountability for its nuclear stockpile
dispersed across the former Soviet Union, and we
engaged closely in cooperative efforts, through the
Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction Program,
to reduce the risks of weapons or material falling into
the hands of proliferators or terrorists. Unfortunately,
in recent years Russia has often acted in ways that
weaken global norms and undercut efforts to hold
nations accountable. Examples include violating its
own obligations under the Intermediate-Range Nuclear
Forces Treaty, flouting the security assurances it made at
the end ofthe Cold War, impeding efforts to build on the
legacy of past international efforts on nuclear security,
and seeking to weaken the International Atomic Energy
Agency's independence in investigating clandestine
nuclear programmes. If Russia wants to restore its role
as a credible actor in resolving the situation with North
Korea, it can prove its good intentions by upholding its
commitments to establishing international efforts on
nuclear security and arms control.

Cooperation from China is also essential if the
international community is to bring North Korean
nuclear missile threats under control and prevent a
catastrophe spiralling towards instability and conflict
on the Korean peninsula. If China truly desires to
denuclearize the Korean peninsula to promote stability
and to avoid conflict in that sensitive region right on
its own border, now is the time to work with the rest of
us - the rest of the international community - to put
the kind of pressure on North Korea that can change its
strategic calculation before it is too late.

Lastly, we must be fully aware that there
are non-State actors who will never conform to
international norms governing nuclear weapons. Their
grand-scale terror attacks, beheadings, crucifixions,
burnings, rapes, torture and acts of enslavement
expose the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS),
Al-Qaida and other groups as those who seek to find
glory through death and destruction. Their eagerness
to commit atrocities makes it clear that if given the
chance, they would sow death and destruction on an
even larger scale - and there is no scale larger than a
nuclear attack on one of the world's cities. Many jihadist
groups aspire to detonate a nuclear device in the heart
of a booming metropolis. Their mission is to kill our
people and send the world into a downward spiral. We
must never allow this.

We must continue to work to secure nuclear
technologies, blueprints and materials at their own
sources and disrupt proliferation networks. We must
deepen information-sharing between intelligence
agencies in order to identify actors and identify where
nuclear materials have been or may be diverted from
legitimate uses. We must revive the practice of creating
alternative career and job opportunities for nuclear
experts so they do not sell their skills on the black
market.

But ultimately, the best means to halt jihadists
in their quest for nuclear weapons is to destroy them
long before they can reach their goal. Whether on the
battlefield, in the streets or online, terrorism must
be given no quarter. We must remain ever vigilant
against the spread of ISIS and other Islamist groups
in new locations, whether in Africa, Asia, Europe or
elsewhere. One of the great successes of the campaign
of the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS in Iraq and Syria
has been uprooting ISIS from formally safe havens in
which it could freely mastermind attacks against targets
the world over. These efforts must continue.

As a body committed to security, we must treat
nuclear proliferation with the seriousness it deserves.
For those of us on the Security Council, counteracting
nuclear threats begins with full enforcement of the
Security Council resolutions all Member States are
bound to implement. To make sure all nations are able to
play their part, we must continue to work for the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). But
signing treaties and adopting resolutions is not enough.
Stopping nuclear proliferation also entails exercising
other levers of power, whether diplomatic, economic,
digital, moral or, if necessary, military. Ultimately, we
each have a sovereign responsibility to ensure that we
keep the world safe from nuclear warfare, the aftermath
of which would transcend all borders.

The United States will continue to work to halt
the proliferation of nuclear weapons. We ask all
peace-loving nations to join us in this mission.

