Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, allow me to warmly thank Mr. David Shearer and Ms. Betty Sunday for their briefings, their commitment and their excellent work in very difficult conditions. We welcome the decision of the parties in South Sudan to form a Transitional Government of National Unity and the swearing-in of the Vice-Presidents on 22 February. That is an important step towards a lasting peace. Such a development is the result of a spirit of compromise by President Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar and the commitment of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, countries of the region, the African Union and a number of international actors. We now encourage all parties to finalize the formation of a balanced Government of National Unity and to continue to fully implement the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan. Despite the commendable progress in the past few weeks, many challenges remain, such as the unification of the armed forces, a genuine political dialogue, the strengthening of transitional justice mechanisms and rapprochement with the non-signatory parties to the peace agreement. In that context, we welcome the significant efforts of the Community of Sant'Egidio in Rome. The formation of the Transitional Government and the distribution of ministerial portfolios cannot be goals in themselves. It is essential that progress on the political front now translate into a tangible improvement in the lives of the people of South Sudan. The population continues to face a serious humanitarian crisis. More than 7.5 million people are in need of assistance. Hunger is increasing as a result of droughts, floods and the acute political instability of recent years. According to the most recent World Food Programmestatistics, 5.3 million South Sudanese are in crisis or facing even more severe levels of food insecurity. More than 1.3 million children will suffer from acute malnutrition in 2020. Those statistics are unacceptable. The ceasefire continues to be largely respected but fighting continues in parts of Equatoria. Intercommunal violence, sexual violence and crime persist throughout the country, as indicated in the most recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/145). The United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) reports an average of 150 people killed, wounded, abducted or sexually assaulted each month. We call on the Government to bring the perpetrators to justice in order to end the cycle of violence. Impunity for serious human rights violations must also continue to be addressed, including through the operationalization of transitional justice mechanisms, such as the establishment of the African Union hybrid court for South Sudan. Let me now turn to the UNMISS mandate. The encouraging developments in recent weeks can be attributed to the new mandate, but we must remain vigilant. In that regard, we believe that the mandate should remain largely unchanged. The protection of civilians must remain the priority for UNMISS. It is too early for the reconfiguration of protection-of- civilians sites, as the situation on the ground remains difficult and unpredictable. The mandate should give due attention to the issues of human rights, children in armed conflict and sexual and gender-based violence, as those are genuine challenges. We support the request of UNMISS to integrate the Regional Protection Force into the Mission's strength. The operational posture of UNMISS has continued to evolve to become more mobile and to maximize its presence. We encourage the Mission to continue its efforts in that regard to deter violence against civilians. For the first time in some time, there are genuine reasons to be optimistic about the situation. A crucial step has been taken. It is now time to tackle the remaining challenges as well, as there are several. Only in that way can the plight of the people of South Sudan be improved in a sustainable manner.
