Mr. Schwaiger (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for inviting the European
Union to participate in today's debate.
I welcome the important statements made this
morning by His Excellency Mr. Leo Me'rores,
Permanent Representative of Haiti, and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mulet.

The candidate country of Turkey; the countries
members of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia; as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.

I shall now read out an abridged version of the
European Union's statement. The full statement will be
distributed in hard copy.

I should like to emphasize three elements that
seem to me to be crucial: first, the future of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH);
secondly, the contribution of the European Union and
its commitment in the long-term; and, thirdly,
coordination among contributors. Before I turn to those
three points, allow me to commend Mr. Mulet and his
team for the quality of the report before us
(S/2010/446) and for the outstanding work done to date
by MINUSTAH. On behalf of the European Union, I
should like to pay sincere and heartfelt tribute to all
United Nations staff who have worked tirelessly since
the tragedy in Haiti.

Haiti is entering a decisive stage towards its
future stability and the success of its reconstruction.
Without stability, all of our reconstruction efforts will
be in vain. The greatest challenge in the short term will
be the holding of free and transparent elections. A
proper transfer of power to the new authorities and the
strengthening of institutions to implement and enforce
the rule of law and provide greater protection to
displaced persons and vulnerable groups are also
urgent priorities. MINUSTAH continues to have a
major role to play in that regard.

The European Union strongly welcomes the
recommendations of the Secretary-General with regard
to extending the Mission's mandate and maintaining
the current force level of military and security
personnel. Only after elections are held and a full
report of needs is made will we be able to reassess the
situation with regard to staffing levels and to
reconsider MINUSTAH'S tasks in order to ensure a
gradual and realistic transfer of responsibilities.

Likewise, the European Union fully endorses the
strategy put forward with regard to protecting
displaced persons, especially women and children. In
that regard, the European Union underscores the
importance of the steps taken by MINUSTAH, in close
cooperation with the Haitian National Police, to
address sexual and gender-based violence and the
grave violations of the rights of children.

Short- and long-term reconstruction will be a
determining factor in the country's social stability. At
the international donors conference held in New York,
the European Union and its member States committed
themselves to contributing €1.235 billion to Haiti's
Action Plan, of which €460 million will come directly
from the European Union's budget. I have the pleasure
to announce to the Council today that the latter figure
has been reviewed and increased to €522 million,
making the European Union one of the largest donors.
Of that amount, the European Commission has already
mobilized €307 million and is working tirelessly to
mobilize the entire amount, while keeping in mind our
Haitian partners' capacity to absorb it.

We are also providing budgetary support in the
amount of almost €60 million to cover current
expenditures in the areas of health, education and
security, as well as to restore the Government's
capacities in the wake of the disaster.

In addition, we are prepared to provide financial
support for the holding of elections with about
€5 million from the European Union's budget, as well
as to contribute to a secure environment by
maintaining the police forces we have already
deployed, in particular Italian carabinieri forces and
French gendarmes. Only if elections are carried out
legitimately and in a transparent manner will the
results be acknowledged and accepted by all and the
country's social and political stability maintained.

On the humanitarian front, the European Union
will also remain committed to responding to the urgent
needs of victims throughout 2011.

Lastly, the European Union is currently preparing
a new strategic cooperation document, in close
coordination with the Haitian Government, with a view
to establishing a good example of effectiveness for our
assistance, based on a clear division of labour, and to
resolutely making a contribution to the country's
future.

Allow me to finish with a third element that is
equally central to us: the need for coordination among
donors. In that regard, the European Union welcomes
the establishment of the Interim Haiti Recovery
Commission and commits itself to full participation in
its work. The idea is clearly not to create an extra
administrative and bureaucratic layer, but to truly
strengthen local capacities and gain quick results,
while ensuring monitoring and follow-up by the
relevant ministries.

In that context, the European Union advocates
closer coordination between the Commission and the
Haitian ministries, with a view to better aligning
reconstruction with State sectoral strategies and the
Haitian people's ownership of the reconstruction. That
link should also help strengthen the capacities of the
Haitian administration, which was severely struck by
the earthquake.

In conclusion, our role, as the international
community, is to help the country rebuild its future for
the better on the basis of the action plan that was
submitted to us on 31 March. Four months later, the
European Union has begun to translate its promises
into tangible reality, working closely with the Haitian
Government and the United Nations family.

