Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): Thank
you for convening this meeting, Mr. President. First of
all, allow me to welcome and thank Ambassador
Takasu for his detailed presentation and to reiterate the
support of my delegation for him as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Today we are examining both the form and the
substance of the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission in carrying out the mandate given to it by
the heads of State and Government at the 2005 World
Summit. As members of the Commission, we have
witnessed the arduous work that has been carried out
and the fruits of its first year of work. In this context,
we feel it is necessary to recognize the work completed
by the first Chair of the Organizational Committee,
Ambassador Gaspar Martins of Angola, by the Vice-
Presidents of the country-specific meetings for Burundi
and Sierra Leone, Ambassador Johan Lovald of
Norway and Ambassador Frank Majoor of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, as well as the work
completed by Vice-Chair of the Group on Lessons
Learned, Ambassador Carmen Maria Gallardo
Hernandez of El Salvador, and the support of
Ms. Carolyn McAskie and her team. We would like to
thank each of them for their excellent contribution.

Panama applauds the role of the Commission
during the initial stages in developing coordinated,
coherent and integrated responses to threats to
peacebuilding, especially in the specific cases of
Burundi and Sierra Leone. It must be recognized that
the Commission also made efforts to ensure the
participation of civil society, the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund, the European Union, and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference. That
contributed positively to the development of the
operational criteria for the work of the Commission.

Notwithstanding these achievements, there are
many challenges for this body in its second session, in
order to ensure that it has a true and lasting impact in
the field. Among them, the Commission will have to
redefine its working methods with a View to ensuring
that they are sustainable. It needs to ensure concrete
indicators to measure the implementation of integrated
strategies. It also needs to increase the participation of
regional and subregional organizations to its work.

Clearly, the Commission could usefully include
more countries in its agenda, taking into account its
capacities and the lessons learned from the two pilot
cases. But it needs to define appropriate criteria for the
process, ensuring that whichever country it happens to
be is ready to benefit from the work of the
Commission. On this point, I would support what was
said by the representative of Indonesia, which I thought
was particularly clear, precise and pertinent.

The work of the Commission is clearly urgent
and should be recognized as such. For that we need to
design a communications and information strategy that
will ensure that its mission and achievements are
known to all.

The responsibility of ensuring the success of the
Commission is that of the entire Organization. The
Security Council, together with the Commission, needs
to decide on criteria and mechanisms so as to avoid
duplication and ensure the complementarity of efforts
deployed in the countries that are on their agendas.
That will be an important step in redoubling our efforts
during the second session to ensure that the countries
being considered by the Commission achieve peace
and sustainable and socially responsible development.

Finally, allow me to make a brief comment on our
meeting today. I understand that the main objective of
this meeting was to receive a report from the
Peacebuilding Commission that would allow the
Security Council to carry out its work in the next year.
I share the opinion of the representatives of Italy and
Slovakia that it would have been preferable to allow all
persons directly linked or interested in the work of the
Commission to speak to us. I would like to specifically
mention the interest in doing so expressed by
Ambassador Gallardo Hernandez, and the evident
interest in doing so expressed by the Non-Aligned
Movement and the European Union. I also think that it
would have been preferable to hear those people before
the members of the Security Council gave their
opinions on these issues.

