Mr. Navarrete (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation appreciates the opportunity you have given
us, Mr. President, to express our views with regard to
an issue that, sadly, has great currency due to the fact
that it reflects an unhappy reality: the multiplication
and escalation of armed conflicts and their effects,
particularly the acute suffering they bring to the
civilian populations of affected countries and regions.
In this connection, an examination of the report of the
Secretary-General is both a timely and urgent task in
order to attempt once again to bring an end to
situations that are increasingly more serious and
intolerable. I shall refer to some of the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General.

A powerful deterrent to violence committed
against civilian populations is the prospect that those
responsible for serious violations will be brought to
justice. My country has stated that Mexico's non-
participation in the election of judges to special
tribunals is in no way an indication that it tolerates
impunity. On the contrary, Mexico has just set a
precedent with regard to the universality of jurisdiction
in the prosecution of crimes against humanity.

My country recently approved the extradition,
requested by a third State, of a foreigner detained in
Mexico accused of having committed genocide, torture
and terrorism in his country of origin. Once the
extradition is carried out, for the first time, the courts
of a country making an extradition request will be able
to try a person accused of having committed crimes
against humanity in another State and who was arrested
in a third country. It is in this way that, as the
Secretary-Generals' report states, safe havens for mass
murderers and torturers are disappearing.

I would now like to refer to the recommendation
on the need for greater contact and interaction between
the Security Council and the General Assembly, and
between the Presidents of those two bodies. Any
information that the President of the Assembly can
provide the Council will no doubt serve to inform the
judgement of the Council. My delegation suggests that
such contacts not be limited to the monthly meetings
already held by the Presidents, but that they take place
as circumstances warrant. This should really be
considered a two-way street, for the President of the
Council can also keep the General Assembly informed
on a regular basis.
My delegation welcomes this proposal to
strengthen the links between these two principal organs
of the United Nations, which clearly reflects the letter
and the spirit of the Charter.

Mexico acknowledges that it might prove useful
to involve, as recommended, regional organizations in
the work of peacekeeping operations. However,
Mexico considers that this involvement can be
envisaged only with those bodies whose constitutive
instruments provide specifically for such collaboration.

Another element that I would like to stress is the
need to respect at all times the agreed principles
governing the provision of humanitarian assistance. My
delegation would be very concerned if, in an attempt to
implement some of the recommendations contained in
the report, the impartiality and neutrality of United
Nations operations were to be compromised, as these
principles are essential to guarantee the legality and
ensure the success of these operations.

Let me conclude by underlining the fact that, as
the report states, the international community must
move towards a culture of protection, in which
international organizations, national Governments,
armed groups and civil society would fully discharge
their respective responsibilities to reduce and eliminate
violence against civilians. All of those actors must also
initiate and pursue political processes of dialogue and
negotiation leading towards a culture of prevention, in
order to avert the emergence of violent conflicts.

