The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, in which he requests to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Misie (Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a place at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the entry into
force of the cease-fire agreement between the Bosnian
parties of 5 October 1995. The Security Council takes
this opportunity to express its gratitude to all those
who negotiated the cease-fire agreement, and to the
United Nations Protection Force and others who, often
at risk to their own lives, have made possible, with the
cooperation of all the parties, the restoration of gas
and electricity supplies to the inhabitants of Sarajevo
enabling them to live in more decent conditions.

"The Security Council demands that all parties
fully comply with the provisions of the cease-fire
agreement and refrain from any military activity that
could jeopardize the peace process. It expresses its
deepest concern at any operation that provokes large-
scale movements of population detrimental to the
peace process and a final and fair settlement. The
Council is particularly concerned about new reports
related to the movements of the displaced population
in the areas of Sanski Most and Mrkonjic Grad.

"The Security Council reiterates its strong
condemnation of all practices of ethnic cleansing
wherever they occur and by whomsoever committed.
It demands their immediate cessation and underlines
the need to alleviate the sufferings caused by these
acts. The Council urges all Bosnian parties to
respect fully the rights of all communities including
their right to remain where they are or to return to
their homes in safety.

"The Security Council is in particular deeply
concerned about new reports concerning acts of
ethnic cleansing committed in the Banja Luka and
Prijedor areas, especially about reports, including
those by international humanitarian organizations,
that non-Serb men and boys of draft age are being
taken away by Bosnian Serb and other paramilitary
forces. The Council demands that these persons be
immediately released.

"The Security Council demands that the
Bosnian Serb party grants immediate and unimpeded
access for United Nations personnel and the
representatives of the International Committee of the
Red Cross to all the areas of concern. It also
demands that ICRC representatives be allowed to
visit and register any persons detained against their
will. The Council reiterates in this context the
demands set out in resolution 1010 (1995) and in the
statement of its President of 7 September 1995 on
Srebrenica and Zepa.

"The Security Council reaffirms that those who
have committed or have ordered the commission of
violations of international humanitarian law will be
held individually responsible for them. The Council
recalls in this context the establishment of the
International Tribunal pursuant to its resolution 827
(1993) and reiterates that all States shall cooperate
fully with the Tribunal and its organs.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/52.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.
 

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

