Mrs. Odera (Kenya): My delegation welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General on protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations and is pleased to participate in today's formal
meeting. We attach much urgency and importance to this
1ssue.

As conditions for the provision of humanitarian
assistance become increasingly precarious around the world,
the international community has a collective responsibility
to ensure the safety and security of the personnel of the
United Nations, non-governmental organizations and other
humanitarian organizations.

Coming in the wake of the Council's discussion of 21
May 1997 and the subsequent presidential statement of 19
June 1997, which invited the Secretary-General to study the
matter of protection for humanitarian assistance further, this
report represents a clear and succinct study of the main
aspects of the problem and takes note of such important
elements as the increasingly violent environment in which
refugees, displaced persons and other victims of conflict
find themselves. It also reminds us of the disregard for
humanitarian norms and the high risks faced by
humanitarian personnel.

The African continent holds the unenviable record of
having the highest number of refugees and internally
displaced persons. The situation is aggravated by changing
patterns of conflict. Today, all the taboos concerning
conflict have been violated, as we witness whole societies
being mobilized for war, children as young as nine being
recruited and trained to fight and civilian populations
including women and children being specifically targeted.

In the recent past, the civilian character of refugee
camps has changed; such camps now include, in some
cases, armed elements, militias, mercenaries and child
soldiers. In addition, a culture of impunity has developed,
as violators of human rights and humanitarian law
continue to wreak havoc unpunished. In this regard,
Kenya welcomes the recent establishment of an
International Criminal Court, which will ensure
accountability of those who violate international law by
stressing the individual responsibility of such violators.

We wish to rise to the challenge to both States and
non-State actors to comply with existing international
legal instruments that are designed to assist and protect
civilian populations from harm and that outline urgent
measures to ensure that refugees, displaced persons and
other affected people in conflict situations have access to
international protection and assistance. In this regard, my
delegation welcomes the adoption of the guiding
principles for the protection of internally displaced
persons, as noted by the Economic and Social Council at
its substantive session of 1998.

In our capacity as a host country, we in Kenya have
always endeavoured to ensure that refugees, displaced
persons and other civilians have safe and unimpeded
access to such assistance as a right. We know at first
hand the social implications and environmental
degradation caused by a high concentration of refugees in
designated areas, and now we urge the international
community to assist by enhancing local capacity for
provision of humanitarian assistance. Today, our greatest
contribution to refugees and displaced persons is to ensure
that access to this assistance remains neutral and
impartial. In this respect, we call upon the Security
Council to continue to play a decisive role in
humanitarian operations.

