Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow me
to begin by thanking the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Malaysia, His Excellency Mr. Dato Sri Anifah
Aman, for his presence, and to take this opportunity
to congratulate the Ambassador of Malaysia, His
Excellency Mr. Ramlan BinIbrahim, for his commitment
and tireless efforts as Chair of the Security Council
Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict. I would
also like to thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the Secretary-
General's Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, for her courage and dedication to the
thorough implementation of her mandate and the high
quality of her report. I would also like to thank the
representative of UNICEF for her briefing.

A year after the launch of the "Children, Not
Soldiers" campaign and 10 years after the adoption
of resolution 1612 (2005), much progress has been
made. Children continue, however, to be the first
victims of conflicts. The year 2014 saw an alarming
intensification and a dangerous recurrence of conflicts,
which are becoming increasingly complex, with
unprecedented forms of violence, destructive effects
and the involvement of violent extremist groups, all of
which has made clear the great vulnerability of tens of
millions of children.

The mass abduction of children by Daesh and
Boko Haram has become an increasingly widespread
characteristic of conflict situations. The whole world,
powerless, frustrated and outraged, is witnessing a
wave of child abductions being systematically used as
a military tactic to terrorize, subjugate and humiliate
entire communities. Children are also being abducted
for the purposes of recruitment and exploitation for
all sorts of tasks, including their use as human shields
or as suicide bombers. Many are used as combatants,
messengers, sex slaves, spies or traffickers, or even as
beasts of burden to transport ammunition. Snatched
from normal life, school and the bosom oftheir families,
they are carried off by armed groups and thrust into a
world of Violence and horror. Their abduction is often a
precursor to other grave violations against them, such
as murder, mutilation, recruitment, exploitation and
sexual violence.

Another source of concern is their detention
and the denial of their basic liberty in response to
their presumed association with extremist groups.
Children should be treated as Victims. The prohibition
of Violence, in particular murder, mutilation, cruel
treatment and torture, against civilians, in particular
children, is a principle of international customary law,
universally applicable to all armed conflicts. The illegal
and arbitrary detention of children is prohibited under
international humanitarian and human rights law.

No cause can justify the abduction of children.
They have the right to be protected at school, at home,
in their environment and in their community. Those
abducted by State or non-State armed groups and
subsequently released have lived through terrible scenes
and psychologically traumatic experiences during
their captivity. How can such children be expected to
get over their suffering, their traumas, and be able to
rebuild their life or start it anew? They need our support
as a matter of priority. As Ms. Zerrougui emphasized
this morning in her statement, the continuation of and
increase in child recruitment in armed conflict, in
particular by jihadi armed groups including the Islamic
State, and the abduction of hundreds of girls by the
terrorist group Boko Haram, demand our attention
and the coordination of the efforts of the international
community.

Morocco condemns in the strongest possible terms
all forms of violence against children, their abduction
by State or non-State armed groups, their use as shields
near arms depots or military camps, their being taken
as hostages or their recruitment at refugee camps.
Morocco also condemns attacks on schools or hospitals
and the use of such facilities for tactical purposes.

It is the international community's duty to take
strong emergency measures to hold accountable all
those who continue to flout international law and
the rules for the protection of children, wherever
they are. The coordination of such efforts among the
various stakeholders in the United Nations system is a
guarantee of effectiveness and success, but the primary
responsibility falls above all on the parties to conflict,
who must comply with their international obligations in
accordance with the resolutions of the Security Council
and the relevant international conventions.

Although today's debate has the merit of
remobilizing all the stakeholders in the international
community, it must, unfortunately, be acknowledged
that the efforts made so far to end Violence against
children and their involvement or use in armed
conflicts are insufficient. My delegation believes that
the international community's efforts would benefit
from being part of a composite, strategic approach
that not only addresses ongoing conflict situations but
also emphasizes prevention through the establishment
of democracy and the upholding of human rights, the
enhancement of good governance and the promotion
of sustainable development. At the same time, the
approach must be pragmatic, combining incentives
with more binding measures, in particular with regard
to accountability and the struggle against impunity.

Lastly, the resettlement of children who have been
victims of terror and scenes of horror during their
abduction, and their reintegration into society, must be
given a high priority. There is no single solution, but
various methods are effective in reducing, for example,
the number of child soldiers in non-State armed groups,
including the strengthening of the rule of law, the
mobilization of resources for rehabilitation programmes
and the analysis of the social, political and economic
dynamics that result in children allowing themselves
to be enlisted. It is time that crimes committed against
children in armed conflict be considered crimes against
humanity, for children are the future of their nations.

