Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Allow me to begin by
congratulating the delegation of Canada on arranging
another discussion on this important topic in this Chamber
and to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report. We would also like to commend you, Minister
Axworthy, for your decision to preside over this debate in
person. Your personal presence here bears eloquent
testimony to Canada's commitment to its human security
agenda. We would also like to acknowledge the
contribution made by Mr. Kellenberger this morning and
to pay tribute to the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) for its substantial contributions over the
years through its efforts to bring relief to civilians and
those in need, often under very trying circumstances.

As this is the fourth meeting we have had on this
subject, it may be fair to ask ourselves whether we are
going in the right or wrong direction in our
discussions - that is to say, will all our discussions
actually lead to fewer civilians being killed in armed
conflicts?

 

Our first goal in the United Nations is always to
prevent conflict, or, as the United Nations Charter states,
"to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war".
However, if conflict occurs - and it is likely to occur
again - our job is to ensure that we protect the lives of
civilians before those of soldiers in these conflicts. Is this
goal realistic?

We should begin by acknowledging that civilians have
been killed in armed conflict for thousands of years. In an
annex attached to our remarks, we have reproduced two
tables from a recent book by Michael Renner, which
indicate the heavy casualties among civilians in armed
conflicts before and after 1945. Whether we live in Asia,
North America or Europe, none of us has been spared the
horrors of war. Indeed, as recently as 1898, in the Spanish-
American War, up to 95 per cent of the victims were
civilians.

As we enter the twenty-first century, the great conceit
that we have begun to believe in is that mankind as a whole
has become more civilized. Indeed, we have in some
respects. Inter-State wars seem to be a sunset industry.
With a few exceptions, we do not see large armies in the
field killing each other.

But unfortunately, a new trend has emerged. In place
of inter-State wars, we now see more intra-State wars.
Hence, it is no longer a case of soldiers killing soldiers.
Instead, as we heard at the debate on the Carlsson report,
on Rwanda, last week in this Chamber, it is neighbours
who kill neighbours, friends who kill friends, civilians who
kill civilians. Rwanda is not the only place in recent history
where civilians have killed civilians. We have seen the
same thing in Sierra Leone, in Kosovo and elsewhere.

We should, of course, be dismayed that such recent
atrocities have taken place despite the great progress we
have made in formulating rules to protect civilians and
combatants alike against some of the more reprehensible
acts of war. These norms are clearly set out in the Geneva
Conventions, as well as in other instruments of international
humanitarian law. We can therefore support the call by the
Secretary-General to encourage a "climate of compliance"
(S/J 999/95 7, para. 5), which many others have echoed in
their remarks today - a "climate of compliance" of
existing rules and principles.

But how does one explain humanitarian law to
combatants, who are often underaged, poor and illiterate, let
alone expect them to comply? Even the ICRC has
acknowledged the difficulties of applying accepted
humanitarian norms in today's "new" conflicts. It states,

"The lack of discipline among belligerents, the
targeting of the civilian population as weapons
flood the territory and the increasingly blurred
distinction between combatants and non-
combatants often cause confrontations to take
an extremely brutal turn in which there is little
place for the rules of law."

Clearly, the long-term solution to this problem is to
promote development and education. But is there anything
we can do in the meantime to save civilian lives when an
armed conflict breaks out? Here, we should be grateful
for the incisive analysis and recommendations contained
in at least three recent reports: the Secretary-General's
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, of
8 September 1999, the Carlsson report on the 1994
Rwanda genocide, of 15 December 1999, and the
Secretary-General's report on Srebrenica, of 15 November
1999. If we read these reports in detail, as we all should,
we will find many valuable solutions.

I also understand that the Council's informal
working group has been studying the Secretary-General's
comprehensive recommendations since last September to
examine how they could be implemented. But let us
remember that the peoples of the world will judge the
United Nations not by its words but by its deeds. What
message, for example, was conveyed by the deeds and
actions of United Nations operations in Rwanda and
Srebrenica? Will such history repeat itself again? Will the
United Nations once again be paralysed by political
inertia and apathy? Will soldiers again abandon
supposedly safe areas, leaving innocent civilians as sitting
ducks ready for the inevitable ensuing slaughter? Will the
United Nations once again send a mission that is from the
start grossly understaffed, under-resourced and ill
equipped?

If we are to be completely honest with ourselves, we
have to admit that both in Srebrenica as well as Rwanda,
it would appear that the protection of the lives of soldiers
was more important than the protection of the lives of
civilians. Although this may appear strange at first sight,
we know why this happened. We congratulate
Ambassador Peter van Walsum of the Netherlands for
candidly explaining the source of the problem:

"It is understandable, but unfortunate, that a
troop-contributing country which suffers heavy

 

casualties will inevitably find itself under
pressure from its parliament and its media to
withdraw its contingent. The more this reflex can
be counted on, the greater the likelihood that
precisely such a contingent will be targeted by
parties opposed to the peace operation. We have
no solution for this problem, but it raises a
discomforting question as to the suitability of
democratic countries for peace operations."
(S/PV.4]27, p. 6)

Fortunately, not all democracies behave in this way. In
East Timor, the lives of hundreds of thousands of East
Timorese civilians were also threatened by rogue militia.
Fortunately, in this case the United Nations authorized the
deployment of a well-equipped international force, under
strong leadership and provided with a clear mandate. This
force had the will to robustly execute its mandate. In so
doing, this operation proved that the United Nations could
fulfil its responsibility of preventing the brutalization of
innocent civilians by armed militia.

Clearly, all conflict situations are different. But
none - I repeat, none - provide easy solutions. As
Foreign Minister Lloyd Axworthy of Canada told the
Council last week,

"the protection of civilians requires strengthening
our disposition to intervene with force if
necessary." (ibid., p. 24)

Minister Axworthy may have been stating the obvious. But
the key implication of what he said is often unmentionable
in the Security Council - to save civilians you need
effective military forces. The question is, where will they
come from and who will pay the costs? In the case of East
Timor, for example, every Australian taxpayer was asked
to pay an additional 1,000 Australian dollars per person.
How many taxpayers in democracies are prepared to do
this?

Even when troops and resources are available, it may
not necessarily mean that civilians will be protected. It is
troubling that Timothy Garton Ash, in a recent article in
The New York Review of Books, has reported a growing
intolerance of all other ethnic groups among the Kosovars.
Ash has also detected what he had called "reverse ethnic
cleansing" taking place in Kosovo "under the very noses
and tank barrels of more than 40,000 international troops".

Resolution 1291 (2000), which extended the mandate
and authorized the expansion of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUC) in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, exemplifies yet again the difficulties of
reconciling the lofty ideals of today's debate and the
actual painful decisions made by the Council. MONUC's
mandate to protect civilians is deliberately couched in
even more conditional language than the mandate given
earlier to the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL). A quick comparison of resolution 1291
(2000) and resolution 1289 (2000), expanding UNAMSIL,
will, we believe, illustrate this point.

In short, we should recognize that protecting
civilians in armed conflict will require hard decisions.
Considerable resources, human and otherwise, have to be
placed at risk. Consistent and coherent policies have to be
worked out. But in this context, is it fair to ask the United
Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations to do
more when it is being starved of resources, especially
from the United Nations major contributors? Is it not
obvious that an underfunded United Nations can do little
to protect civilians?

Our remarks today are not intended to create
pessimism. But we should set realistic expectations for
the civilian populations of the world about what the
international community can and cannot do. On this we
agree with the point made by Minister Axworthy this
morning when he described the work of the Council here
today to promote human security as being work in
progress. Indeed, last week Minister Axworthy also cited
a very moving account given by Philip Gourevitch in his
book of how young, defenceless Hutu girls in a convent
school refused to leave the side of their Tutsi friends,
even though they were ordered to do so by the
genocidaires. The simple question that the rest of the
world will ask of the United Nations in the future is
whether the soldiers will display the same courage and
sacrifice as those Hutu girls, or whether they will be
withdrawn by their parliaments and media at the first hint
of danger.

