Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Chile for initiating today's debate and
putting the issue of inclusive development, and the
links between development and peace and security, on
the Security Council's agenda. It is a crucial issue for
all of us, and one that has not been discussed in the
Council since 2011 (see S/PV.6479). I welcome your
presence, Madam President, which testifies to your
country's commitment to the subject. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Patriota,
Permanent Representative of Brazil and Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, and Ms. Leymah Gbowee,
President of the Gbowee Peace Foundation Africa.

France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later on behalf of the European Union.

Inclusive development is a necessary condition of
security. Rebellions and conflicts are often fuelled by
a sense of exclusion and injustice on the part ofa social
group or an ethnic or religious community. Many of the
conflicts on the Council's agenda arise in the wake of
human-rights violations and an insufficiently inclusive
political process. At the same time, it must be made
clear that it is primarily up to States to institute those
processes if conflicts are to be prevented. From that
point of View, the Security Council can only encourage
States to embrace this issue and establish policies of
inclusive development aimed at preventing conflict.

Conflict prevention naturally implies respecting all
citizens' rights, including economic, social and cultural
rights. Only institutions that represent the people's
legitimate aspirations, the transparent management
of public monies, an independent judiciary and law
enforcement, and security forces that respect the law
are capable of ensuring sustainable development. A
State's stability thus depends on respect for the rule of
law. In particular, such policies should focus on gender
equality and women's participation in decision-making.
Gender equality is not only one of our most fundamental
human rights; combating every form of discrimination
between men and women is also a factor in development,
in the stabilization of countries in transition and in
peace.

In that regard, Madam President, I welcome the
foundational work you have led in New York in the past
few years as the first Executive Director of UN-Women.
France is currently working with UN-Women on
a number of cooperation programmes aimed at
strengthening women's participation in development,
including a gender and social cohesion employment
programme for young men and women in Morocco,
Tunisia and Egypt. In our national capacity, I should
add that, working with Congolese non-governmental
organizations, we have also established a socioeconomic
rehabilitation programme for women rendered
vulnerable by the violence in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

I would also like to emphasize the importance of an
inclusive approach as countries prepare to emerge from
crisis. Reconciliation often requires the fair division
of power among the communities in conflict. In this
context, women can play a decisive role. I welcome, in
this regard, Ms. Gbowee's commitment and the role of
women played in the transition to peace in Liberia. It
is essential that women be involved from this moment
forward in the peace negotiations in Mali so as to
prevent their exclusion from a peace agreement and
to ensure their inclusion in the post-conflict transition
period.

Finally, I would like to make some remarks on the
role of the Peacebuilding Commission, echoing our
debate on this subject last week (see S/PV.7359). Ten
years on from the establishment of the peacebuilding
architecture, whose role and achievements have just
been recalled by Ambassador Patriota, undeniable
progress has been achieved, first, in terms of a better
understanding of the specific challenges facing
countries emerging from conflict and, secondly,
in terms of better coordination of the efforts under
various international interventions in the countries
concerned. Ambassador Patriota cited examples where
the peacebuilding architecture has made an effective
contribution to improving the situation. These efforts
must continue. In this regard, France supports the
review of the peacebuilding architecture review, which
will be carried out during 2015 jointly with the strategic
review of peace operations. We welcome both of these
exercises.

I would like to conclude by recalling that the
General Assembly will adopt in September 2015 an
ambitious and renewed development programme for the
15 years to come, which will orient all of our actions
towards sustainable development with a comprehensive
approach. This programme will include ambitious goals
on fighting inequality, on gender equality, on peaceful
and inclusive societies for sustainable development, on
access to justice for all, and on transparent, accountable
and inclusive institutions. These tools will contribute to
the prevention of conflicts.

The year 2015 will also mark 70 years since the
establishment of the United Nations, and in this
context, the various bodies of the United Nations,
including the Security Council, must more than ever
strengthen the coherence of their respective activities
towards an approach that is yet more preventive and
inclusive in dealing with crises. Peace and security can
never be won as long as discrimination against groups
or individuals persists.

