Mr. Kamau (Kenya): I congratulate Germany on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of September, and we are very encouraged by
the initiative to hold this open debate today. We believe
that today's debate presents an excellent opportunity
for Member States to reaffirm their strong support for
this important mandate.

At the outset, my delegation warmly welcomes the
appointment of Ms. Leila Zerrougui as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary General for Children
and Armed Conflict. Her exceptional ability, breadth of
vision and wide experience should ensure the successful
execution of her mandate.

Similarly, my delegation welcomes the most recent
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict (S/2012/261).

We appreciate the many activities that the Office of
the Special Representative has undertaken. We believe
that action plans, participation in ceasefire negotiations
and de'marches with various countries have gone a
long way towards improving the lives of innocent
children who become the victims of conflict and
strife. My delegation pledges to engage constructively
with the Office to achieve the set objectives. Lastly,
my delegation also recognizes and appreciates the
continued exemplary work of UNICEF in the support
of children in armed conflict.

Long before the Graca Machel study, which gave
rise to this mandate, was undertaken, Kenya recognized
the importance of championing the rights of its children
and of ensuring their protection. The promotion and
protection of the rights of children in any situation has
become the sine qua non for policies and interventions
implemented by the Government of Kenya. For that
reason, the protection of children has been interwoven
into the very survival of society. Such actions are now
firmly anchored in the Kenyan sociocultural fabric,
where children were and still are considered the
mainstay of the bright future that we all hope to obtain.

In following the same tradition, Kenya has invested
considerable efforts and resources in advocating for
and promoting the protection of the rights of children.
The Kenyan Constitution is a pillar of hope for every
man, woman and child. It has clear provisions on the
rights of children. Priority has been given to education,
health care, protection, water, food and the provision
of a safe environment in which children can grow,
enjoy their lives and develop. Our national legislation
has elaborated on the various rights and encompasses
service provision under the supervision of strengthened
national institutions mandated to monitor and evaluate
any child-related intervention.

We are confronted by the challenges of protecting
children in all situations. The burden is odious in
times of conflict, but children must be protected
in all situations nonetheless. The situation will be
exacerbated if institutions charged with protecting
children are weak. The process of ensuring that children
are protected during conflict has to begin before any
conflict is envisaged. We should be able to address the
triggers of conflict. The specific underlying causes of
strife, conflict or civil intimidation that are the primary
deniers of peace and security are many, varied and
well documented. They range from deficient States
and infrastructure to competition and from the illegal
exploitation of resources and the inequitable sharing of
the fruits of development to failed governance practices.

The international community must work in tandem
to dim the embers ofconflict. The most urgent agenda on
which people and their Government mostly agree is the
need for urgent, sustained and accelerated development
and a rise in prosperity. The United Nations system has
a major role to play in that regard. Agencies, funds and
programmes play important roles in strengthening the
capacity of countries to promote and protect the rights
of children. As the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General begins herjourney on this mandate,
my delegation urges her to continue working with
such developmental and humanitarian organizations
to strengthen the capacities of countries to address the
myriad of challenges facing our children.

The Council would readily understand Kenya's
concern for the dire fate of the many Somali children
who are under the repression and terror of Al-Shabaab
in that country. After decades of the slaughter of
innocent men, women and children, an incalculable
loss of property and indescribable suffering and
deprivation, the international community, led by the
regional neighbours, has undertaken concrete steps
to ameliorate the situation in Somalia. We urge the
Special Representative and agencies and funds of the
United Nations, non-governmental organizations and
well-wishers not to lose sight of the children who have
been recruited into the ranks of Al-Shabaab and, for
that matter, other gangs and terrorist groups.

The children of whom I speak need to be helped to
leave the ranks of such armed terrorist groups and gangs,
to relocate and rejoin their families and communities,
and to regain their childhood and liberty. My delegation
therefore urges the international community to
continue supporting the efforts of the African Union
and neighbouring countries of Somalia to bring peace
to that country and to guarantee its children a brighter
future.

As I conclude, I would like to express my
delegation's deep gratitude for the work of Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, the immediate former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her
dedicated service to the cause of children. I wish her
the best in her future assignments.

Finally, my delegation wishes to reiterate its support
for the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. I also wish to restate the truism
that life for children will ill be much better if we not
only recognize the interconnectedness among security,
human rights and development, but also dedicate
resources to improving children's lives everywhere
and to supporting countries that are in difficulties in
providing such rights.

