The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a brief statement. Given that time management is
a legitimate concern of the Chair, I shall summarize a
few points. The written text of my statement will be
circulated.

I first wish to pay tribute to Ms. Carla Del Ponte,
whose term is coming to an end soon, for the
outstanding and exceptional manner in which she has
discharged her duties. Without the determination that
she demonstrated, it is clear that the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
would not have been able to achieve the outstanding
record it has today.

Secondly, I wish to note that for Belgium the
Tribunals cannot be seen as having adequately served
the cause of justice as long as there are fugitives that
have not been apprehended and have not been brought
to justice. That is particularly important for those
accused of the most serious sorts of crimes - they are
Radovan Karadzic, Ratko Mladic and Felicien Kabuga.
We call on all States concerned to cooperate fully with
the Tribunal as is their obligation, in order to
apprehend those individuals.

Belgium welcomes the information given by
Ms. Del Ponte on the improvement of cooperation with
Serbia and the apprehension of Mr. Tolimir and
Mr. Djordjevic. Those events should be welcomed, but
the ultimate objective is still the apprehension and
bringing to justice of all fugitives.

Thirdly, it is clear to Belgium that the dates set
for the conclusion of work, as set out in resolution
1503 (2003), are estimates and are not set in stone.
What is important is that the Tribunals be in a position
to bring to trial any high-level accused who have not
yet been apprehended. Otherwise, justice will not have
been done, or it will have been done in an incomplete
fashion. Some victims may feel aggrieved, and the
legacy of the Tribunals will be tarnished. If the
fugitives are apprehended before those dates, we
cannot exclude the possibility that the dates will be
modified so that they can be brought to trial before the
Tribunals, which were created for that specific

purpose.

This brings me to my final point: the question of
the so-called residual functions of the Tribunals. One
of the most important of those concerns the trials of the
fugitives that I have just mentioned, who may be
apprehended after, or immediately before, the date set
for the end of the Tribunal's work. There are other
residual questions, including those relating to archives,
administrative issues, human resources and purely
judicial functions, such as the supervision of those
trials that have been moved to national jurisdictions,
the serving of sentences, witness protection
programmes and so forth. Officials from the two
Tribunals have already begun to consider those issues,
and it is now up to the Council to deal, as soon as
possible, with those complex issues so as to define an
appropriate mechanism. My delegation is determined
to take an active part in that process.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

