Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): The situation in
Myanmar and that of the Rohingya refugees remain
among the most critical problems of concern for the
international community. The world is today witnessing
one ofthe most serious catastrophes and violations in the
humanitarian space, with the displacement of more than
700,000 Rohingya refugees who have fled to Bangladesh
since August last year. At the same time, on procedural
grounds, the invitation to the independent international
fact-finding mission on Myanmar - mandated by the
Human Rights Council, which is a subsidiary body
of the General Assembly - to brief the Council is
beyond its mandate. My delegation therefore abstained
during the procedural voting. On the other hand, we
acknowledge the update by Chairperson Darusman and
we thank him.
My country has always stood for an early and
comprehensive solution to this humanitarian crisis, with
the direct participation of Myanmar, Bangladesh and
the entire international community. That stance remains
unchanged even today. We note the arrangements made
by the Government of Myanmar for the repatriation
and resettlement of the Rohingya refugees, as well as
its cooperation with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations
Development Programme and the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Burgener. We welcome her
third visit to Myanmar from 10 to 20 October, which
has led to further progress in that regard.

With that in mind, my delegation also expresses
grave concern about the results of the fact-finding
mission investigation and condemns the atrocities
committed in Rakhine. The reported flagrant, massive
and systematic violations of human rights have been
shocking, including discrimination on ethnic and
religious grounds, with ongoing large-scale deportation
and systematic oppression that are still prevalent. We
are particularly concerned that the report comes to the
conclusion that,

"The extreme vulnerability of the Rohingya is
a consequence of State policies and practices
implemented over decades" (A/HRC/39/64, para. 20).

It is obvious that the full disclosure of the atrocities
and taking action against those responsible will be
a necessary prerequisite to instil confidence in the
refugees that they can return home. Likewise, under the
current circumstances, the return of Rohingya refugees
from Bangladesh to their homes in Rakhine state will not
be possible unless the authorities of Myanmar expedite
the process of creating the necessary conditions and
providing full security assurances, as well as access to
education, employment, health care and stable, long-
term sources of livelihoods.

We strongly believe that it is only by addressing
the root causes - namely, the issues of citizenship
and restoring the rights and freedoms of the Rohingya
Muslims - that this complex and long-standing crisis
can see a dignified and durable solution. We expect
the Government of Myanmar to continue to adopt
confidence-building measures and implement all the
practical measures recommended by the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State. For example, the
freedom of movement of the Rohingya Muslims in
Myanmar should be ensured immediately by the
Government of Myanmar in order to clearly demonstrate
its own sincerity.

More than 1 million Rohingya Muslims 4 the vast
majority being women and children - have to remain
in extremely difficult conditions in refugee camps
in Bangladesh. Kazakhstan commends the efforts
of the Government of Bangladesh in helping such an
unprecedented magnitude of refugees and providing
them with shelter, medical care, food and other forms of
assistance. At the same time, we still need an enormous
amount of additional funds, as well as all forms of
in-kind assistance. We therefore appeal to all Member
States, international organizations and other actors to
continue providing full support to Bangladesh. At the
same time, Kazakhstan understands that establishing
intercommunal trust is a long-term and challenging
process that will demand the active participation of
all stakeholders.

However, the main responsibility for resolving the
problem lies with the Union of Myanmar itself. We are
particularly encouraged by the results of an informal
meeting between China, Myanmar and Bangladesh
on the margins of the seventy-third session of the
General Assembly. We believe that this third meeting
of the joint working group, to be held on 29 and
30 October in Dhaka, will contribute to resolving the
issue of displaced persons in a friendly and expeditious
manner. In our view, the engagement of the Asian
troika has considerable potential to contribute to the
resolution of the current crisis.

Finally, we believe that the Security Council should
contribute positively to settling the crisis and avoid
needless polarization. My delegation is committed to
supporting the multilateral actions aimed at ensuring
peace and security for the Rohingya refugees and the
people of Myanmar, and we expect the Government to
make every effort to that end.
