Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I wish, first of
all, to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate on a very important topic. I take this
opportunity to express my delegation's appreciation to
Under-Secretary-General Holmes for his
comprehensive briefing. We are convinced that
periodic briefings on this issue constitute a critical
mechanism to update the Security Council on the
situation and to take appropriate measures.

My delegation joins other Council members in
welcoming efforts made by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and
United Nations missions to protect civilians in armed
conflict. We also recognize the progress they have
made in recent years, which has contributed to
lessening civilian suffering in some parts of the world.
The most notable recent cases include the United
Nations missions in Cote d'Ivoire, Timor-Leste and
Nepal.

However, we are deeply concerned about the
worsening situations in many areas where civilians -
first and foremost women and children - continue to
fall victim to killings, maiming, abuse, humiliation and
other inhumane treatment. We recall with concern the
alert raised two weeks ago by Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Marie Guehenno (see S/PV.5892) with regard to
attacks on villages occupied by civilians in North and
South Darfur, as well as the alert raised in great detail
today by Under-Secretary-General John Holmes with
regard to pervasive hostilities in many countries in
Africa, Asia, the Middle East and Latin America.
These, plus sexual and gender-based violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and elsewhere,
represent a strong warning that the efforts of United
Nations bodies and Member States are not enough.

While sharing the view that humanitarian access,
among other things, is critical to protecting civilians in
armed conflict, we hold that humanitarian access and
assistance should be independent of political and
military measures, in keeping with the principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence
and in conformity with national and international law.
We are mindful of the millions of people who are still
excluded from access to life-saving assistance and of
continued attacks targeting United Nations personnel,
relief workers and other humanitarian staff in many
conflict places. Beyond the detailed account of attacks
on humanitarian workers that Under-Secretary-General
Holmes has just given us, the recent ambush of four
United Nations peacekeepers in West Darfur and the
kidnapping of two Italian volunteers in Somalia are but
two of the many examples of this situation. It is
therefore urgent now to demand that parties to armed
conflicts end hostilities against humanitarian staff and
allow them to help people in need.

As we have highlighted during several Council
meetings, the best way to protect civilians in armed
conflict is to prevent and peacefully resolve armed
conflict itself. In that regard, we wish to underline the
need to ensure better and closer cooperation and
coordination between the Security Council and the
General Assembly and other agencies and
organizations and between United Nations bodies and

regional organizations, for we trust that regional
organizations, with their good understanding of
regional stakeholders, are well positioned to convince
parties to armed conflict to minimize their operations
in civilian areas, facilitate humanitarian access and
respect humanitarian and human rights law. At the
same time, we emphasize that parties to armed conflict
should comply with the principles of international
humanitarian law relating to distinction and
proportionality and refrain from exerting measures
against civilians, and that the Security Council should
consider the issue of the protection of civilians on a
case-by-case basis and in line with the approach
endorsed in previous relevant resolutions.

While supporting international cooperation, I
would like to reiterate Viet Nam's view that it is States
that bear primary responsibility to protect their own
civilians and to deal with violence against civilians as
well as violations of international humanitarian law. In
order to help States fulfil their responsibilities, the
United Nations can help improve their national
capacity, provide technical assistance and work with
them to conduct other awareness-raising activities, for
instance through training courses. Bearing that in mind,
we hold that the creation and application of any
international mechanism should be thoroughly studied
with a view to ensuring its efficient, effective and
sustainable performance without resulting in an
unnecessary financial burden for States, and that such
an act should respect national sovereignty, territorial
integrity, ownership and self-determination and should
be in accordance with the United Nations Charter and
international law.

