Mr. Traavik (Norway): Let me first of all thank
Lord Ashdown and Special Representative Klein for
their extremely lucid and balanced presentations this
morning.

The Norwegian Government would like to
congratulate the Bosnian authorities on their successful
implementation of the general election on 5 October.
This was, after all, the first election that the Bosnian
authorities had sole responsibility for. It is encouraging
against that backdrop to note that the elections have
been assessed as free and fair.
However, while the election process itself was
encouraging, voter turnout was low. This is especially
disappointing given the fact that these were elections
for the first four-year period. In many respects, these
were the first normal elections since the end of the war
and one would have hoped that the electorate had
shown greater interest and responsibility for the fate of
its country.

Secondly, the election results indicate continued
strong support at almost all levels for the three mono-
ethnic, nationalist political parties. Although this might
not be the outcome most wished for by the
international community, the results must nevertheless
be respected as the free and fair expression of the
political will of the voters. However, Norway shares
the assessment of Lord Ashdown that the election
results can also be interpreted as an expression of
discontent at the slow pace of reform and a general
lack of confidence in the political process.

We, the international community, must and
should take this disenchantment seriously, all the more
so since the same sort of dissatisfaction is in evidence
in other parts of South-East Europe. It provides fertile
ground for these simple solutions offered by populist
extremists and, as Lord Ashdown rightly pointed out,
the situation in many parts of the region remains
fragile.

Hence, this is not the time for the international
community to stand back or to disengage. We would do
well to pay heed to Lord Ashdown's call on us all to
stay the course and remain engaged. We, for our part,
intend to do so.

Extensive reforms, and efforts to continue
reforms, remain required in order for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to move forward. Bosnia and
Herzegovina's future clearly lies with enhanced
cooperation with Europe. The sooner Bosnia and
Herzegovina conforms to European democratic and
economic standards, the better.

It is now up to the country's newly elected
authorities to demonstrate in practice their readiness
and political will to fulfil the responsibilities entrusted
to them. Now is the time to follow up the rhetoric of
reform with specific and tangible action to provide
reform. Therefore, Norway fully supports the High
Representative's six priority tasks for further reforms
to be carried out by the new Bosnia and Herzegovina
Government in the coming six months. The priority
tasks are important and in many respects daunting.
However, Bosnia and Herzegovina enjoys the strong
support and engagement of the international
community. Of course, that engagement will not last
forever, and the engagement of the people and the
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina must come
to the fore sooner rather than later.

I would like to express my Government's
gratitude and appreciation to Mr. Klein for his
dedication and leadership at the helm of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) as we are approaching the home stretch
before it closes its mission. Clearly, the United Nations
will be folding this operation with flying colours and
with the satisfaction of having done an important job
and having done it well.

We appreciate the readiness of the European
Union to take over responsibility for the police mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and indeed the willingness
of the European Union to take on the largest share of
the responsibility of the international community in the
wider region of South-Eastern Europe.

Norway, for its part, intends to support the
European Union Police Mission, as we have steadfastly
supported UNMIBH.

