Mr. Amayo (Kenya): I would like to begin by congratulating Belgium on its presidency over the Security Council for the month of February, as well as commending the Kingdom of Belgium for allocating time for the Security Council to discuss this timely and significant topic. Given that peacebuilding is both a short- and a long- term process, it is beneficial for the Security Council to have regular discussions and exchanges on this topic in order to continue addressing persistent challenges facing fragile and conflict-affected situations around the world, as well as to develop implementable action points on transitional justice framed around sustainable peace processes. Kenya aligns itself with the statement delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (see S/PV.8723). Transitional justice and peacebuilding are, in our view, multi-dimensional phenomena that should embody several interrelated and critical elements. Those elements include, but are not limited to, the entrenchment of democracy and accountability, resilience-building, the enhancement of affirmative actions for peaceful coexistence and the introduction of programmes for the establishment of national reconciliation, restorative justice, restitution and reparations, inter alia. When addressing a conflict situation, it is important for stakeholders to draw on the principle of inclusivity in seeking to build meaningful partnerships with the parties involved in the conflict. The inclusion of different voices and perspectives in a conflict situation provides stakeholders with an opportunity to consider the different structural root causes that might at times be side-lined by other approaches. In that regard, the involvement of witnesses, victims, minorities and individuals at risk of reprisal or intimidation, for instance, may be of crucial importance in building confidence and giving credibility to the process. Formal and informal initiatives to support the transitional justice and national reconciliation processes by local actors, such as civil society, as well as private actors and academia, could make an important contribution. At the national level and of equal importance, mechanisms that play a critical role - including national truth and reconciliation commissions - deserve support. Regarding groups perceived to be marginalized, such as minorities, women and young people, the Kenyan experience has taught us that investment in the training of women and youth for peace is not without reward. Women leaders in Kenya have been working in peace and bridge-building activities. The Security Council should seek to systematically and contextually integrate regionally and nationally led transitional justice processes into its work within the broader framework of mission mandates. Kenya joins other Member States in recognizing the African Union's (AU) adoption of its transitional justice policy in February 2019. It is a critical guide for AU member States to achieve essential transition components, including the political ones. My delegation welcomes that initiative.
