Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the outset,
on behalf of the Haitian delegation, I would like to
welcome the initiative of the British presidency of
the Security Council to convene this open debate on
the very important topic of mediation and conflict
resolution. It is certainly not a new one; it is in line with
the commitment of the Security Council, following a
similar debate (see S/PV.6108) held in April 2009,
almost 10 years ago, to exploring ways to strengthen
the promotion of mediation as an important means of
peacefully settling disputes.

Threats to international peace and security today
have become increasingly complex. The multitude
of non-State actors and of identity- and ethnic-based
conflicts, the rise of terrorism, the correlation between
Violent conflict and poverty - almost half of those
who live in extreme poverty are in fragile or conflict-
affected countries, according to the Secretary-General's
2018 report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace
(S/2018/43) - and the shortcomings of the international
preventive system are all factors that call for redoubling
our efforts to achieve peace. That includes improving
our mechanisms for preventing and resolving disputes
and conflicts under the Charter of the United Nations,
so that we can work more effectively upstream, save
more lives and ease human suffering.

As is frequently pointed out, one of the major
failings of the international community is its inability
to prevent conflict. As we know, that inability often
comes from behaviour that is passive and insufficiently
proactive, and even from inertia on the part of the
main body responsible for the maintenance of peace
and security. The Security Council has shown how
divided it can be when the so-called vital interests of
the permanent members take precedence over their
commitment to respecting the universal values on
which the Charter is founded. Their abuse of the right
of the veto deprives the Organization of the unity
necessary for the implementation of appropriate action,
which severely handicaps the efforts of the international
community when it comes to resolving conflicts that are
all too often accompanied by unacceptable violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law.

There are myriad missed opportunities in that
regard, of which the seven-year civil war in Syria is
a particularly tragic example. Clearly we must remedy
this kind of paralysis that sometimes takes hold of
the United Nations and tends to fuel cynicism about
it. Some critics have gone so far as to wonder if this
state of affairs is not ultimately favouring those who
do not want the United Nations to be too effective.
The fact is that the United Nations often waits too long
to act. We have not been there when people needed
us, as the President of the General Assembly rightly
noted last year, adding that we could have done more
to respond to conflicts and even more to prevent them
from happening.

For his part, the Secretary-General has reminded
us at a very opportune time that where wars are raging,
whether in Syria, Yemen, South Sudan or elsewhere,
or where there are long-standing disputes such as the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, we need more mediation,
arbitration and creative diplomacy. The Haitian
delegation endorses that vision. In that regard, we
support the efforts of the international community
to put greater emphasis on certain tools, such as
mediation, that can contribute to the maintenance and
sustainability of peace, in the spirit of the recent twin
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
on sustaining peace (resolutions 2282 (2016) and
70/262). My delegation welcomes the Secretary-
General's establishment of the High-level Advisory
Board on Mediation, whose members include one of
my compatriots. The Council's purpose is to support
mediation initiatives and strengthen the collaboration
of the United Nations with regional organizations,
non-governmental organizations and other actors
involved in mediation around the world.

That approach is particularly significant in the
context of the renewed focus on prevention and
mediation activities as part of United Nations peace
diplomacy. It gives mediation an even bigger profile
when we consider that the United Nations record in
that regard continues to be bleak. For we have to admit
that the United Nations often struggles to impose itself
on events, even though it has achieved some notable
successes. According to some statistics, during the 50
years from 1945 to 1995, United Nations mediation
efforts represented only a quarter of the total reported
attempts, and only half of those were led by States.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the United
Nations, especially the Security Council and the
Secretariat, must be ready to use its good offices and
its ability to mediate proactively wherever the situation
requires it. We must therefore spare no effort to
ensure that the Organization has the resources to fully
assume that role, while strengthening the coherence
that is so vital to international efforts in support of
national Governments and their peoples. Only then
can international peace and security, sustainable
development and human rights, to which we are all
committed, emerge victorious.

