Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
is a member of the Rio Group, and associates itself
with the statement that the Ambassador of Peru,
Mr. Osvaldo de Rivero, will soon be making on behalf
of the Rio Group.

My delegation would like first to express its
gratitude to Ambassador Inocencio Arias of Spain for
the work accomplished since he assumed the
chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), and to the members of his team and the
Committee experts. We also thank the Ambassador for
his presentation of the report and programme of work.

Mexico is a member of the Committee. Being one
of the Vice-Chairpersons, we work very closely with
the Chairman and greatly appreciate his efforts. We are
aware of his thinking and his programmes, and a lend
them our full support.

As I have said, Peru will be making a statement
on behalf of the Rio Group, so I shall be brief. But I
would like to emphasize two points that my delegation
considers very important and to make a few comments
on the Committee's present and future work.

First, we consider that an important development
in the work of the Committee has been the inclusion of
a special section with explicit questions in the
Committee's letters to Member States on the machinery
that each country uses to deal with all kinds of
weaponry, especially the illicit traffic of small arms
and light weapons. This is an important step to ensure
that the Committee can support the objectives of the
United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. It will thus
contribute to solving problems that are clearly related
and therefore require a joint and coordinated solution.

Secondly, I wish to refer to the protection of
human rights. In our view, the Committee must
maximize its efforts to ensure that counter-terrorism is
carried out in full compliance with international
humanitarian law and with respect for human rights.
The inclusion of this issue in the letters to States will
promote awareness of it. As the Security Council
considers the changes to the CTC to improve its
effectiveness, it should take account of the need to
include a human rights expert on the Committee. That
would enhance the Committee's legitimacy with all
nations.

A step in the right direction was the inclusion of a
section on human rights and terrorism on the
Committee's Web site. We particularly welcome the
link with the publication by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on the
practices of the Organization and regional
organizations with respect to the protection of human
rights in the fight against terrorism. We ask the CTC to
carefully study and carefully discuss this in order to
clearly identify areas for its participation.

With regard to the current work of the
Committee, I would like to refer to the identification of
criteria for States that are moving from the
implementation stage to the legislative measures
recommended in accordance with resolution 1373
(2001), namely, stage B. We view positively the fact
that at this new stage Committee experts will be in
close contact with States to propose specific measures,
case by case, and above all to identify the needs for
assistance that States demonstrate.

Committee members have the sensitive task of
giving the appropriate orientation, in close consultation
with the experts, to define priorities for each country.
We would like to make it clear that all States, whatever
stage they have reached, must continue to submit
reports and continue the dialogue with the Committee,
no matter how advanced their own institutional or
judicial mechanisms to combat terrorism may be.

It should be remembered that the obligations set
forth in resolution 1373 (2001) apply to all Member
States. We thus avoid focusing exclusively on one
group of countries. The Committee should also
continue to work on the basis of cooperation with, and
assistance to, States that lack the capacity to meet all
the requirements of resolution 1373 (2001). The
Committee should continuously strengthen this aspect,
in order to facilitate and maintain interest and
momentum in the campaign against terrorism.

As for the CTC's future work, while it has
certainly made headway, we perceive a weakness in its
structure, owing to the Committee's full workload. The
challenge now is for it to be efficient yet sufficiently
flexible.

In that respect, my delegation awaits with interest
the report on States' problems in complying with
resolution 1373 (2001), as well as the difficulties in the
structure and functioning of the CTC itself. That
document should provide a foundation for real
improvements in the Committee's work. Mexico will
therefore be active and constructive in putting forward
proposals.

On other matters, we view with interest the
progress in strengthening dialogue with the relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations.
We welcome the recent meeting of the Organization of
American States, of which Mexico is a member, to that
end. Strengthening such links should help principally
to complement efforts and avoid duplication or
confusion in the areas of competence of the various
organizations.

We support the initiative of the Chairman of
accepting invitations to represent the Committee when
he considers it advisable to do so.

I cannot conclude without saying that terrorism is
one of the greatest threats facing the international
community today. All Members of the Organization are
agreed on this. But there is also consensus that the
struggle against terrorism must not be waged in such a
way that the values and principles that nourish our
countries and the United Nations itself are weakened.
My delegation will continue to insist that it must be
pursued in accordance with human rights, international
law and the Charter.

