Mrs. Juul (Norway): As Under-Secretary-
General Pascoe noted in his briefing, yesterday in
Madrid, Norway chaired the biannual meeting of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee (AHLC), the coordination
mechanism for the international donor community. The
purpose of the meeting was to take stock of the
implementation of the Palestinian Government's
two-year plan and to discuss the way forward.
Launched in August 2009, the plan is a political vision
for the establishment of a Palestinian State and the
3
primary platform for the engagement of the
international donor community.

Prime Minister Fayyad reported that his
Government is on track with the implementation of the
plan. Some sectors are in need of additional attention,
while others are developing beyond expectations. But
overall the Palestinian Authority is progressing towards
the goal of completing the State-building process by
the end of 2011. In the Prime Minister's words, we are
approaching "the home stretch" of the Palestinian
State-building process and seeing the contours of an
emerging Palestinian State structure.

The Palestinian economy, however, is suffering.
While economic growth for 2009 is estimated at
around 7 per cent, there is doubt as to whether that
growth can be sustained unless Israel continues easing
restrictions and allows the Palestinian economy to
flourish. A precondition for a sustainable Palestinian
economy and reduced donor dependency is access and
movement of goods and people throughout the
Palestinian territory. East Jerusalem constitutes 12 per
cent of the Palestinian economy and must become an
integral part of the West Bank. The Palestinian
Authority estimates its annual loss of revenue from the
blockade of Gaza at $500 million, representing around
42 per cent of the estimated donor funded budget
support to the Authority in 2010.

There is, however, a limit as to how far the
Palestinian Authority, with the financial support of the
donor community, can move the reform agenda without
a meaningful peace process and a negotiated
settlement. At one point, the fundamental issues that
stand in the way of a two-State solution must be
negotiated and resolved, paving the way for a
Palestinian State. Norway strongly supports the efforts
by the United States of America to resume the
negotiations and will continue to work with the
international donor community to make sure that
support for the two-year plan remains intact. However,
the unconditional support of donors cannot be taken for
granted. Unless the donor community sees a strong
determination by the parties to enter into a meaningful
peace process with a timeline for the completion of
negotiations and the two-State solution, willingness to
continue funding the Palestinian State-building project
will erode, undermining all that we have achieved over
the past 17 years.
When it comes to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
warnings that we are at a critical juncture have over the
years not been in short supply. But I would like to
point out one element that has changed the picture. The
notion of a Palestinian State has over these years
evolved from merely a concept, through a possibility,
and now, judging from the reports to the AHLC
meeting yesterday, to a reality within reach. The
Palestinian Authority has provided us with a timeline
for the completion of the State-building process. It is
time for the parties to provide us with a timeline for the
completion of the final status negotiations.

