Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes these exchanges with
Mr. Alexandre Zouev, Ms. Tuesday Reitano and the
Police Commissioners of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH). We congratulate them
and commend them for the remarkable work they carry
out in particularly difficult security environments. The
relevant briefings that we have just heard, informed by
daily experience on the ground, gives us a better idea
of the decisive role of the Organization's police forces
and the many challenges they face in implementing
their mandates.

United Nations peacekeeping operations are not
intended to replace the host State authorities, but rather
to support them as part of a crisis-exit strategy that is
based on an inclusive and credible political process.
Each time United Nations peacekeeping operations
have engaged with host State authorities and all of the
stakeholders in a crisis, dynamic cooperation based on
mutual trust and the pursuit of goals that are realistic and
consensual has created the conditions for a successful
transition, thereby paving the way for lasting peace
and stability.

The quality of collaboration among leaders is
essential, especially between the police components of
peacekeeping missions and all stakeholders in the crisis-
resolution processes, primarily the host Government
and the local population. That creates the conditions
for strong national ownership of United Nations action.
It is therefore my delegation's view that that is an
crucial, and even indispensable, condition to make the
work of the United Nations police force more effective,
particularly in the implementation of their obligations
within the mandate that has been entrusted to them,
namely, the protection of civilians, ensuring free access
to justice for women and children and support for the
host country in the fight against organized crime.

The fact that United Nations missions are made up
of a mosaic of contingents from different cultures and
countries could suggest that there would be a negative
impact on the perception of their obligations in the
context of peacekeeping in difficult environments. The
merit of the Force Commanders who have just delivered
their briefings therefore lies in their daily efforts to
maintain a sufficient level of cohesion and unity of
action among the police forces so that, in spite of the
many challenges, they can continue to be an effective
instrument at the service of the peace continuum.

In that regard, my delegation would like to seek the
insight of the Police Commissioner of MINUJUSTH,
Mr. Serge Therriault, on the status of the collaboration
with the Haitian authorities concerning the capacity-
building mandate of the Haitian National Police to
help them take ownership of national security. How far
along is the process of professionalizing the Haitian
National Police in terms of achieving the goals of
the MINUJUSTH exit strategy two years from now?
Will the transference of tasks and responsibilities be
completed within the established time frame? It is
imperative that Haitians take ownership of the proposed
fundamental reforms and implement them in order to
ensure the success of the transition. With regard to the
zero-tolerance policy on sexual violence, my delegation
seeks clarification on the actions carried out within
the framework of the three peacekeeping missions
that are the subject of this meeting, with a view to the
implementation of that requirement.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
commend the thousands of men and women of the
police forces deployed in United Nations missions and
pay tribute to the soldiers who have lost their lives.
Their sacrifice should lead us to further our efforts to
translate into reality the hope of peace and prosperity
held by millions of people in those countries.

