Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I welcome you, Mr. President, to New York.
We are happy to see you presiding over the Security
Council. This is the first meeting of the Council under
the presidency of Equatorial Guinea in the month
of February. We are grateful to you, Sir, for having
honoured us with your presence on this important
occasion and for setting the tone of the presidency of
Equatorial Guinea for the month of February. We will
fully support our friends from Equatorial Guinea. We
would like to thank the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
their briefings. We also thank the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs ofthe African States for attending this meeting.
We are grateful to Equatorial Guinea for organizing
and conducting today's discussion. It is no secret that
the activities of soldiers of fortune, despite being a
criminal offence in many countries, including Russia,
are still an unwelcome reality of contemporary armed
conflicts. In that regard, mercenarism in Africa, the
topic of today's debate, is more relevant than ever.

We would like to draw attention to the fact that
the use of mercenaries is often directly linked to
interference in the internal affairs of sovereign States.
The Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention
and Interference in the Internal Affairs of States,
adopted by the General Assembly in 1981, stipulates
a ban on the training, financing and recruitment of
mercenaries and their deployment on the territory of
another State. It also refers to the obligation of States
not to carry out any activities aimed at violating the
integrity or at undermining or overthrowing the political
system of other States. We live in a time when that
appeal is more relevant than ever. An unconstitutional
change of Government and the violent overthrow of
a State regime with external support are therefore
inadmissible. However, mercenaries are often recruited
and financed for precisely such tasks.

Foreign mercenary companies have played a
particularly nefarious role on the African continent.
The use of mercenaries to fight national liberation
movements in Africa and to prevent peoples under
colonial oppression from exercising their right to self-
determination remains a stain on the conscience of a
number of Western States.

Even after their independence, young African
States faced attempts by the colonial Powers to carry
out coups d'etat using mercenaries, who were often
involved in atrocities and the torture and executions of
civilians. Guided by self-interested economic goals or
the desire to prevent the establishment of independent
Governments with differing ideological views, those
former colonial masters wilfully carried out violations
of the principles of international law condemning
colonialism, racism and foreign hegemony.

The issue of the nefarious activities of mercenaries
in various African States has been repeatedly considered
by the Security Council, which has consistently pointed
to the inadmissibility of the use of foreign fighters to
destabilize States and Violate their territorial integrity
and sovereignty. Their malign activities are also used in
the fight to control Africa's rich natural resources, which
is one of the key sources of the problems facing Africa:
the fight to control Africa's rich natural resources.

We are aware of the fact that Equatorial Guinea
recently had to confront such challenges and managed
to confront them. We share its concerns in this regard
and strongly condemn any form of interference in the
internal affairs of a sovereign State.

Many conflicts in Africa, including those externally
provoked, are often breeding grounds for the activities
of criminals of all stripes. The clearest example in this
context is the crisis that followed the regime-change
operation in Libya, which dealt a devastating blow
to the entire system of regional security and led to a
large-scale influx of weapons and criminal elements
into the countries of the Sahel. We call on those
devising similar plans to carefully consider what that
short-sighted policy in Libya led to. Similar policies
should not be applied to other regions.

The problems in Central and West Africa are
compounded by the activities in a number of countries of
illegal armed groups, as well as terrorist and extremist
organizations, whose members are fighting not only for
their distorted political or ideological goals, but also
for money.

Of particular concern is the situation in Mali, the
Lake Chad basin and the Great Lakes region. In order to
successfully combat these challenges, what is required is
not only decisive action by national and regional armed
forces, but also the suppression of external financial
flows that fuel mercenary and extremist activity. We are
convinced that in order to eradicate these phenomena,
it is Vital to achieve a lasting resolution of conflict;
strengthen State institutions, first and foremost in the
security sector; and implement measures promoting
socioeconomic development.

In many cases, the support of the international
community is needed, and such assistance should be
provided only at the request of the countries concerned.
Colonial approaches should become a thing of the past,
and certain practices that have become State policy,
from blackmail, threats and provocations to the use of
force against sovereign States, should also be consigned
to history.

We would note that the challenges and threats
facing the Central African region, including mercenary
activities, are interlinked and interconnected, and
that the States themselves are highly interdependent.
Destabilizing the situation in one country could send
shockwaves through the entire subregion, undermining
the security of neighbouring countries. It is therefore
extremely important to monitor the situation
very closely.

We support the quest for African solutions to the
problems facing the continent, including the problem
of mercenary activity. A relevant impetus could be
provided by updating the 1977 Organization of African
Unity-predecessoroftheAfricanUnion-Convention
for the Elimination of Mercenarism in Africa. We
believe that that document laid important groundwork
for collective efforts to prosecute and eradicate such
illegal activities on the continent.
