Mr. Jagne (Gambia): We are honoured to see you
presiding over this open briefing on the situation in
Guinea-Bissau, Madam President. Your presence is
clear testimony to the importance that your great
country attaches to the crucial issue of post-conflict
peace-building and, by extension, to development
cooperation generally. The enthusiasm, zeal and energy
with which you have presided over this meeting are
indeed remarkable.

Let me also take this opportunity to congratulate
Ambassador van Walsum on his presidency this month.
It has been an eventful and successful month by all
accounts. Through you, Madam President, we owe the
Netherlands a debt of gratitude for arranging this
meeting.

I remember vividly Ambassador van Walsum's
early days in the Security Council, when he
demonstrated a keen interest in post-conflict peace-
building and even suggested Guinea-Bissau as a
possible example. Those efforts will not be in vain. It
is our fervent hope, therefore, that the people of
Guinea-Bissau will reap the benefits at the end of the
day. As he will be leaving us soon, allow me to wish
him success in his future endeavours.

In the same vein, I would like to pay tribute to his
predecessor, our brother and colleague Ambassador
Andjaba, for a job well done during Namibia's
presidency last month. We recall encouraging
Ambassador Andjaba, when we were leaving the
Council, to keep the flag flying. Well, he has not only
kept it flying, but kept it flying even higher. I would
like to request the Namibian delegation to convey to
Ambassador Andjaba the fact that we are very proud of
him.

Allow me to join previous speakers in welcoming
the high-ranking delegation from Guinea-Bissau, led
by the Vice-Prime Minister. After his eloquent
presentation this morning, it will not be necessary to go
into great detail. But as neighbours of Guinea-Bissau,
we in the Gambia cannot afford to be indifferent to the
plight of our brothers and sisters in that country. In
fact, this body will recall the preponderant role played
by President Jammeh in the quest for a lasting solution.

Furthermore, the situation has a regional
dimension that cannot be ignored. In other words, the
potential for serious ramifications throughout our West
African subregion still exists. It was partly for this
reason that the Group of Friends of Guinea-Bissau was
formed to contribute to the collective endeavour to
mobilize resources for the reconstruction efforts in
Guinea-Bissau. This was done bearing in mind the
vicissitudes of the transition process. More often than
not, the situation is precarious - thus the need for
sustained external assistance to consolidate the modest
gains made by the people and their leaders.
It is necessary in this connection to recall the
successful emergency Round Table Conference of
donors for Guinea-Bissau that was held in Geneva last
year. It was successful in terms of the pledges made,
but, as we all know, donors have yet to make good on
their promises. I need hardly emphasize that democracy
and the rule of law cannot flourish in conditions of
active poverty. The people of Guinea-Bissau have
come a long way, resilient and resolute as ever to move
ahead, despite all the odds.

We certainly do not underestimate the problems
involved and the many challenges that lie ahead, but
we are confident that with a little help from outside,
these challenges are not insurmountable. At our last
meeting of the Group of Friends, the Secretary-
General's Representative in Guinea-Bissau - who, by
the way, is doing a superb job, along with his staff, in
the United Nations Peace-building Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) - did not mince his words
when he discussed the socio-economic situation of the
country. He described it as very, very difficult. Yet he
described the overall political situation, in particular
parliamentary activity, as satisfactory.

Furthermore - and this is very important - we
were informed that the human rights situation has
improved a great deal. As was mentioned by many
speakers during the debate on exit strategies, there is a
need to avoid a gap in the transition phase from
conflict resolution to peace-building. That is why we
have put a great deal of emphasis on timely assistance.
Moreover, financial institutions should show some
degree of flexibility when dealing with countries in
transition, notably the Bretton Woods institutions.

Let me at this juncture also commend the World
Bank in particular for the assistance provided to the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process.
Programmes related to this process should be
vigorously pursued. We are encouraged by the presence
of the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) and, indeed, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) at this briefing. The remarks made
by Mr. Madavo, Vice-President of the World Bank,
were most reassuring.

In his report of 29 September 2000, the
Secretary-General stated:

"Guinea-Bissau has continued to make important
progress towards consolidating its democratization
process. However, the overall situation in the country
remains worrying. The ever-present threat of military
intervention, the precarious border situation and the
country's chronic poverty make the road ahead
difficult. The challenges are formidable, and the new
civilian Government has neither the means nor the
capacity to address them on its own." (5/2000/920, para. 20)

Allow me to thank the Secretary-General for his
opening remarks this morning, which set the tone for
our debate. There could not have been a better
summary. While it is true that since the report was
issued, a number of countries have contributed
generously towards the UNOGBIS trust fund, it is also
true that a lot more remains to be done.

In this connection, it is gratifying to note that
another Round Table Conference is scheduled for
February next year. We all look forward to it. But at the
same time, it should be borne in mind that it is one
thing to convene a Round Table Conference of donors
and make pledges, and quite another to disburse the
funds, as recent experience has shown. We are
optimistic, though, that we will get it right this time, so
that together, through an integrated and consolidated
approach, we can succeed in our partnership with the
Government and people of Guinea-Bissau to make their
country a shining example of post-conflict peace-
building. The Government and people of the Gambia
will always be available in our concerted efforts to
make this dream come true.

