Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today's important
meeting, which includes the extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) mandate. I also wish to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for the month
of March.

We convey our gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his remarks, his presence and his report (S/2013/l33),
which provides a comprehensive picture of the situation
on the ground. I also extend my appreciation to Special
Representative Kubis for joining us today. And I wish
to thank the Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Carr, for honouring us with his presence and
participation.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
members of the Council for the spirit of cooperation
and openness shown during the course of negotiations.
A special thanks goes to Ambassador Quinlan and his
team at the Australian Mission to the United Nations
for the able manner in which they led the process.

In just two days, on 21 March, the Afghan New Year
will begin, a year in which transition to full Afghan
responsibility is central to our efforts, a year that will
take us to the next elections, a year to bring an end to
war, and a year for building confidence and resilience.

Since the adoption of the UNAMA mandate last
year, Afghanistan and the international community
have placed a new focus on the needs of the transition
period, which involves strengthening peace and security
and the realization of national priorities. Together
with the international community, we developed the
parameters of future cooperation to ensure the building
of a peaceful, stable and prosperous Afghanistan that
is able to stand on its own feet. We did that through
continuing dialogue with our partners and agreements
made at the NATO Summit in Chicago last May, at the
Heart of Asia Ministerial Conference in Kabul in June
and at the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan in July.
More will need to be done to crystallize all aspects of
cooperation between Afghanistan and the international
community, including the shaping of our relations
within the region.

A successful and orderly transition to Afghan
ownership and leadership is about a continuous focus
on five priority areas.

First, strengthening Afghan national sovereignty
and national ownership and leadership are central to
transition. After more than a decade of shared efforts,
the strengthening of sovereignty entails normalization
through security, political and economic transition. For
the Afghan people, national sovereignty means taking
full responsibility for their destiny.

With the announcement of the fourth tranche of
the transition in December 2012, the assumption of
full security responsibility by Afghan forces is more
tangible than ever. By the end of that stage, 87 per cent
of the Afghan population will be living in areas where
Afghan security forces are in charge of security.

The Afghan people are keenly focused on a
successful political transition, and all eyes are on the
election next spring. The Government of Afghanistan
is committed to fair, democratic, transparent and
inclusive elections in which the men and women of
Afghanistan will again shape their political future.
Preparations for the elections are well under way.
There is an overwhelming consensus that a successful
and credible election will be necessary for stability and
lasting peace.

At the same time, peace talks and reconciliation
with the armed opposition are essential for a successful
election. The Afghan Government is doing its utmost
to ensure the success of the reconciliation process. The
High Peace Council recently took the necessary steps
to galvanize the reconciliation efforts. The support of
the international community, and in particular of some
countries in the region, is important for an Afghan-
led and Afghan-owned reconciliation process. As we
work to move the peace process forward, the role of the
Security Council will remain imperative. We welcome
the adoption of resolution 2082 (2012), which refined
the Taliban sanctions regime in view of Afghanistan's
leadership of the reconciliation process.

Secondly, during transition and the decade of
transformation to follow, the relationship between
Afghanistan and our international partners will evolve.
Strategic partnership agreements, such as those we
finalized in the past two years, are key for shaping long-
term relationships and for stability during the transition
and beyond. Afghanistan has established bilateral
strategic partnerships with a number of countries,
including the agreement between Afghanistan and the
United States signed in May, which was followed by
the recognition of Afghanistan as a major non-NATO
ally of the United States. Talks are ongoing to conclude
the security agreement between the two countries,
which will be finalized in due course. Just last month,
we signed a strategic partnership with Norway. We are
now defining the parameters of similar partnerships
with Denmark and Finland. With the transition,
Afghanistan is entering a new era of relations with
international partners. We are committed to basing our
strategic cooperation on bilateral frameworks, which
is an important step towards the normalization of the
situation.

Our close partnership with NATO has been a
significant source of progress for stabilization efforts.
We look forward to furthering our partnership into
the transformation decade ahead. In that context, we
welcome the important discussions that took place
at the meetings of the NATO North Atlantic Council
at the level of Defence Ministers held in Brussels on
21 to 22 February, where NATO took concrete steps
towards planning improved capabilities and reinforced
its commitment to the NATO post-2014 role oftraining,
advising and assisting Afghan National Security Forces.
Such strategic cooperation will ensure the future
sustainability of Afghan National Security Forces.

Thirdly, economic transition and aid delivery will
be crucial for the sustainability of the transition. That
requires the commitment of the international community
in supporting our self-reliance strategy through the
transformation decade. The Tokyo Conference in July
was about not letting the drawdown of international
combat forces affect Afghanistan's strides towards
stability and prosperity. It will be important to see
how the realization of the mutual commitments made
in Tokyo will help us to address humanitarian and
development challenges, which is essential not only
for stability but also for sustainability in Afghanistan.
Afghanistan is committed to upholding the agreements
made in Tokyo, which include commitments in the
areas of equitable elections; good governance and the
rule of law; human rights, including women's rights;
and inclusive and sustainable development. We look
forward to continuing to work with our international
partners on the basis of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework.
The economic transition is also about improving
aid effectiveness, ensuring alignment with national
priorities, and accountability for and transparency of aid
spending. Aid delivery and efficiency are particularly
important at a time when not only do we face economic
instability as a result of conflict, but unemployment
and poverty remain significant problems. Building
the capacity of Afghan institutions to address the
challenges ahead will be essential. It is crucial that
the international community's support be in line with
national priorities and channelled through the Afghan
budget, as agreed at the 2010 Kabul Conference. It is
also important that aid delivery be based on emerging
needs on the ground and directed to areas where need is
greatest. Afghanistan is ready to be held accountable for
every penny it spends. We believe that the commitments
made in Tokyo will facilitate a sustainable economic
future for Afghanistan.

Fourthly, relations with Afghanistan's neighbours
and with countries in our greater region are critical
for stability and progress. Afghanistan is developing
its bilateral and multilateral relations in all areas
with countries in the region. We are in the centre of
the Heart of Asia Process and see that cooperation as
essential for peace and stability. Our partnerships with
all countries in the region can be mutually beneficial;
Afghanistan can serve as an economic bridge in an
increasingly globalized region that is seeking progress
and prosperity. At the Heart of Asia meeting in Kabul in
June 2012, participating countries agreed upon a series
of confidence-building measures regarding a range of
issues, a number of which were endorsed in February in
Baku. We look forward to the next ministerial meeting
in Almaty in April.

We are engaged with a number of countries on
our path to normalization, which includes helping
our reconciliation process. Most recently, we have
continued trilateral discussions with Pakistan and
the United Kingdom, as well as other forums, to help
cooperation. We are hopeful about the outcome of our
joint efforts.

Fifthly, a successful transition will require
effective partnership with the United Nations. Since
2001, the United Nations has been at the centre of the
coordination of international efforts in Afghanistan,
and we appreciate the important role it has played.
More recently, we have seen how the United Nations
is adjusting its role to meet the transition needs. In that
regard, the United Nations underwent a comprehensive
review of its activities in Afghanistan in 2011. In his
recent report, the Secretary-General emphasizes the
importance of realigning the relationship between
the international community and the Government of
Afghanistan, and it reflects on the role of the United
Nations beyond the transition.

As we complete the transition and transfer full
responsibility to the Afghan Government, we can
envisage the normalization of United Nations activities
in the years to come. Aid coherence, One UN and
greater accountability are important for Afghanistan,
for the United Nations itself and for donor countries.
Afghanistan looks forward to close cooperation
with UNAMA in the coming year as it continues its
efforts towards the priority areas of good offices in
support of Afghan-led political processes, human
rights, development coherence and the coordination of
humanitarian assistance. In that regard, we welcome the
renewal of the UNAMA mandate, which has continually
evolved to reflect and reinforce the principles of Afghan
ownership and leadership.

The end of the transition will signal the beginning
of a new chapter - one marked by national resilience
and the strategic goal of self-reliance. While the
nature of the international community's engagement
with Afghanistan is evolving, its continued support
will be vital. The full realization of sovereignty and
self-reliance will make Afghanistan a more effective
partner for the world, but achieving that requires the
trust, confidence and long-term commitment of the
international community. Afghanistan looks forward
to lasting cooperation with our international partners
towards enduring peace, stability and prosperity in the
country.

