Mr. Amendola (Italy): It is a pleasure for me to
be here today to engage in this discussion on such a
crucial topic. Let me thank the Ukrainian Minister,
Mr. Klimkin, for convening today's debate and bringing
today's resolution 2341 (2017) to the Security Council
for adoption.

The threat posed by terrorism and the need to
protect critical infrastructure perfectly serve to
describe the complexity of the security challenges that
affect us all today. The Security Council called for a
comprehensive and pre-emptive approach to address
their potential impact on global security. Security
involves the resilience of States and the cohesion of
public opinion. Indeed, resolution 2341 (2017) allows
the international community to fill a critical void. Italy
therefore welcomes and supports this initiative.

As previous speakers have underlined based on
their experience, terrorists target critical infrastructure
in many ways, and at times they succeed in disrupting
our way of life. It is a matter of the resilience of the
State, of public involvement and the fear that terrorists
cause in our societies. Last year, for excample,
terrorist attacks at airports in Brussels and Istanbul
showed how ruthless and effective terrorist groups
can be. The targeting and exploitation of facilities by
Da'esh in Iraq is another clear, although qualitatively
different, example of very damaging attacks on
critical infrastructure. In the framework of Iraq Italy
remains committed - and we are proud this - to the
protection of the Mosul Dam, which has been targeted
by Da'esh since 2014, threatening the lives of hundreds
of thousands of people living nearby.

Those are just a few examples, but their impact
shows how vital it is for the international community
to swiftly act upon this threat. It is a transnational
threat that requires a transnational response.
Clearly, the United Nations has a prominent role in
recognizing - just as we are doing today - the need
for international cooperation in coordinating a coherent
response, including through regional organizations.
First of all, we must identify which targets are critical.
Secondly, we must announce cross-border synergies
to prevent terrorist attacks and mitigate their impacts.
Thirdly, we must respond to the threats with cooperation
along borders and among States. Since every chain
is as strong only as its weakest link, international
dialogue and partnership involving public opinion and
capacity-building are key elements in the protection of
critical infrastructure.

As many speakers have already mentioned, at this
stage of global affairs the importance of connections
means that the infrastructure connecting the people
very often has transborder effects on society. Sometimes
those connections are stronger than borders, and in
respecting and defending borders we must be aware
that the fact that the nationalities should cooperate
to defend the connections. We are therefore ready to
support the role of the United Nations, as the resolution
suggests, in identifying and spreading best practices
for protecting that infrastructure.

A key element of partnership is information
exchange. We know this in Europe, as we are doing
with the European Union, and the membership should
be made aware of the nature of the threats to a single
country when they affect our collective security.

Let me say a few words about the role and relevance
of cyberspace, and more generally about information
and communication technology. We know that today
they have decisive relavance to infrastructure and
that they are both a means and a target of terrorism.
We believe that we must have a broad understanding
about what constitutes an attack on information and
communication technology. We are already under
attack when we are unable to detect and stop the online
planning of attacks and the propaganda of terrorist
groups on the Internet. We also recognize that an attack
is taking place when a plane or a truck is hijacked, so
we must acknowledge that a different kind of attack
is taking place when network spaces are hijacked by
terrorist organizations. We must be able to balance
the free access of our public opinion and civil society,
as an extraordinary source for communication and
democratic participation with our collective security. It
is not easy, but plans for our freedom and security are
enhanced with today's resolution.

That brings me to a new alliance that we must
emphasize and boost. In this framework, defending
critical infrastructure also requires an alliance between
the public and private sectors, because the connections
driving trade, business and communication also drive
our civil society dialogue and, at the same time, our
need to protect and defend our security. That is why
today's debate and resolution are important. They
provide an indispensable international legal framework
for such a partnership to be announced and to flourish
in our free, open and creative society.

