The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
September, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Andrey I. Denisov, Permanent Representative of
the Russian Federation to the United Nations, for his
service as President of the Security Council for the
month of August 2004. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing our deep
appreciation to Ambassador Denisov for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf ofthe Council:

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the heinous terrorist act involving
the taking of hostages at a secondary school in
the town of Beslan, the Russian Federation, on
lSeptember 2004, as well as other terrorist
attacks committed recently against innocent
civilians in Moscow and on two Russian airliners,
in which many lives were claimed and people
injured.

"The Security Council demands the
immediate and unconditional release of all
hostages ofthe terrorist attack.

"The Security Council expresses the deepest
sympathy and condolences to the people and the
Government of the Russian Federation and to the
victims of the terrorist acts and their families.

"The Security Council urges all States, in
accordance with their obligations under
resolution 1373 (2001), to cooperate actively with
the Russian authorities in their efforts to find and
bring to justice the perpetrators, organizers and
sponsors ofthese terrorist acts.

"The Security Council reaffirms that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security and that any acts
of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation, whenever and by
whomsoever committed.

"The Security Council expresses its
determination to combat all forms of terrorism, in
accordance with its responsibilities under the
Charter ofthe United Nations."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2004/3 l.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 8.30 p.m.

