Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): The first
question, posed by the representative of Tunisia,
related to mines and demining efforts in the area.
Cooperation with the parties has been good in terms of
obtaining the information we need. As I have noted,
Eritrea has provided 313 detailed maps of mined areas;
Ethiopia too has provided substantial information, and
we are expecting supplementary information from
Ethiopia. The full demining of the area will
undoubtedly involve considerable work; in the
meantime, we must mark mined areas and keep the
population away in order to avoid the tragedy of
civilians stepping on unmarked mines.
(spoke in English)

The representative of Ukraine asked about the
status of the commissioners. We hope that the issue of
commissioners both on the Boundary Commission and
on the Claims Commission will be resolved promptly.
Both parties have shown a spirit of cooperation, and we
hope that that spirit will help resolve this problem. But
at the moment I cannot give an answer to the question.

The representatives of Ukraine and of France also
asked about the financing of the trust fund for the
Boundary Commission, and about the financial
arrangements for the Commission. First, let me say that
the recent contributions and pledges to the trust fund
would put its balance at $5.7 million. And the
Boundary Commission has requested each party to
make deposits towards meeting the costs of the
Commission. The budget for the logistics of the
Commission is not yet there, because it has to be
developed on the basis of a detailed assessment, in the
field, of what exactly will be needed. At the moment, a
team from the office of the Chief of the Cartographic
Section of the Secretariat is in Asmara; it will establish
such a plan of field activities. It is on that basis that we
will then be in a position to address very precisely the
request of the Security Council about the exact
logistical costs for the Boundary Commission.

The question of direct flights was also raised by
several delegations. The Ethiopian party has agreed to
a route that is almost direct but that slightly deviates
from a direct route because that would overfly some
Ethiopian defensive positions. At the moment, the
Eritrean party insists on an absolutely direct route. It is
that difference that, for the moment, has not yet been
overcome and that prevents a direct route - and it is a
really circuitous route that has to be taken: almost
going through Djibouti, so it is two sides of a triangle
instead of one line between the two capitals.

