Mr. Matussek (Germany): I have the honour to
speak for the European Union. The European Union
welcomes this debate prior to the upcoming renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report and Tom Koenigs
and by Antonio Maria Costa for their briefings this
morning. We are honoured by the presence of
Mr. D'Alema, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Italy.

We have taken note of the recommendations of
the Secretary-General with regard to the focus of the
activities of UNAMA in the upcoming months. We
agree that those should include: strengthening
international coordination, including in the
humanitarian field, and continuing to contribute to the
protection of human rights and to extending good
offices through outreach in Afghanistan and in the
region.

We shall further reflect upon the detailed analysis
of the Secretary-General. He has presented a mixed
picture of current trends. Progress in some areas
appears to contrast with an overall precarious security
situation, widespread lack of good governance, the
alienation of segments of the population and a thriving
narcotics industry.

The Afghanistan Compact, based on Afghan
leadership and partnership with the international
community, will continue to be the strategic framework
for our common efforts. The United Nations plays the
key role in coordinating efforts for institution-building
and reconstruction within the framework of the
Afghanistan Compact, in particular as co-Chair of the
Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board. The
European Union commends UNAMA, under the
excellent leadership of Tom Koenigs, for its
outstanding work.

We underline our appreciation for the central role
of the Joint Board as the main coordination body, both
within the international community and with the
Government of Afghanistan. The recent Board meeting
in Berlin was an important step towards enhanced
coordination.

The European Union welcomes the recent
extension of UNAMA's field presence with
17 locations now, as well as the plans for the opening
of two new provincial offices by May 2007, security
conditions permitting. We encourage the United
Nations to continue expanding its network throughout
the country after that time. We also welcome all
efforts, including those of UNAMA, to promote
regional cooperation between Afghanistan and its
neighbours. The stabilization of Afghanistan is key to
the stability of the whole region.

The European Union encourages the development
of regional cooperation through political dialogue,
increased economic links, and confidence-building
measures between Afghanistan and all its neighbours,
including the Central Asian States. We call on
Afghanistan and Pakistan to cooperate closely in order
to address insecurity in the border areas, while we urge
Pakistan to build on current efforts to prevent the use
of its territory by the Taliban.

The European Union has made a commitment to
long-term support for the people and Government of
Afghanistan. The core principles of the European
Union engagement are to promote Afghan leadership,
responsibility and ownership, and to foster the
development of a democratic, secure and sustainable
Afghan state. The Afghanistan Compact and the Joint
EU-Afghanistan Political Declaration of 16 November
2005, remain a comprehensive framework for
European Union engagement with Afghanistan. To cite
but one figure: in the 2002-2006 period, the European
Union, as the second-largest donor, collectively
contributed €3.7 billion in aid to Afghanistan, apart
from large contributions to the International Security
Assistance Force and NATO made by European Union
members.

The European Union remains concerned about the
still-thriving narcotics industry. The most recent survey
by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
suggests that opium cultivation in 2007 may not be
lower than the record harvest in 2006. Trends
apparently vary among provinces. The results show
clear correlations between insurgency and illicit drug-
related activities. The European Union recognizes the
significant and detrimental impact the production and
trafficking in drugs has on the stability and security of
Afghanistan, the surrounding region and the European
Union member States themselves. Most recently, the
European Council has reaffirmed its commitment to
supporting the Government of Afghanistan, which has
primary ownership of the process, in its efforts to
tackle drugs through the National Drug Control
Strategy, including anti-corruption efforts.

We have also reaffirmed our support for the
efforts of the Government of Afghanistan to promote
and extend the rule of law through development of the
police, courts, prisons and the wider justice system. We
recognize the important role of counter-narcotics as
part of this. The European Union intends to fund a
regional project against chemical precursor diversion
under the European Union's new Stability Instrument.

In February 2007, the European Council decided
to set up a European Security and Defence Policy
Mission to Afghanistan in the field of policing, with
linkages to the wider rule of law. That mission will
work towards an Afghan police force of local
ownership that respects human rights and operates
throughout the country, within the framework of the
rule of law. Particular attention will be paid to ensuring
complementarity and mutual reinforcement with the
European Union's actions, especially its engagement in
reform of the justice sector as well as with
international partners active in the fields of security
sector reform. This justice programme aims to
professionalize the judicial and public prosecution
service, for instance, through reforms to pay, grading
and recruitment, as well as the establishment of a code
of ethics. The programme could also assist in the
development of a new national legal aid system and
thus improve citizen access to justice. This work is
being designed to dovetail with the European Security
and Defense Policy (ESDP) mission.

The European Union notes the adoption by
Parliament on 10 March 2007 of the Charter on
National Reconciliation, which has now been signed by
the President, and the concerns expressed about the
possible impact of some of its provisions. In this
context, the European Union recalls that the Action
Plan on Peace, Justice and Reconciliation is part of the
Afghanistan Compact and underlines the need to
ensure its full implementation.

Freedom of speech and free media have been
among the most impressive achievements of recent
years in Afghanistan and continue to be key elements
of democratization. However, the European Union has
noted with some concern that recent amendments to the
draft media law under discussion in Parliament appear
to enhance Government control of the media, including
potential for direct interference with personnel
decisions and content transmitted by Radio Television
Afghanistan. In our view, the draft media law first
enacted by a presidential decree in 2005 provided a
sound basis for the protection of free and independent
media regulation mechanisms. We hope that the media
law will be adopted on this basis.

In the spirit of European Union-Afghan
partnership, the European Union stands by
Afghanistan. The European Union will continue to
work together with the Government of Afghanistan to
stabilize and rebuild the country by addressing issues
of both security and development. We wish the United
Nations, and particularly the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), success in their
efforts. The European Union will continue to support
their mission.

Croatia, Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Iceland, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Serbia, Moldova and Ukraine have aligned themselves
with this European Union statement.

