Mr. Von der Schulenburg: In presenting to the
Security Council the second report (8/2009/267) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL), I
would like to concentrate my introduction on four
issues. First, I want to speak about the significance for
peacebuilding of the joint communique between Sierra
Leone's political parties. Secondly, I want to draw the
Council's attention to the importance of the
forthcoming special session of the Peacebuilding
Commission for rallying international support around
one common development strategy for Sierra Leone,
namely, the Government's Agenda for Change. Thirdly,
I want to highlight the new integrated approach to
peacebuilding by the United Nations family, namely,
the United Nations Joint Vision for Sierra Leone.
Finally, I would like to add a few words on UNIPSIL
itself.

Politicians do not have the luxury of choosing the
political events and problems that they are confronted
with, but they do have a choice in how to react to them.
For that reason, we rate politicians not so much by the
problems that they encounter but by the way they deal
with them. Measured by that standard, Sierra Leone's
politicians deserve the highest praise for how they
handled the recent outbreak of political violence in
their country when they came together and signed and
committed to the joint communique on 2 April of this
yean
09-36192

We must all recognize the gravity of the sudden
eruption of the political violence and intolerance that
occurred in March. That was the most serious outbreak
of violence since the end of the civil war in 2002. It
brought to the surface deeply rooted historical
differences and emotions that continue to exist in
Sierra Leone. Those differences were fueled by a
general dissatisfaction among many Sierra Leoneans
that peace and democracy have not yet brought them
significant improvements in their daily lives, and in
particular by the frustrations that are felt by many
young Sierra Leoneans who have no jobs and few
hopes for a decent future. If continued unabated, those
disturbances could have easily spiraled out of control
and split the country between supporters of one party
another, between members of one ethnic group or
another, between the young and the older generation,
between northerners and southerners or between
citizens in Freetown and those in the provinces.

The joint communique between the two major
parties, to which other parties also later pledged their
support, has effectively ended the spiral of violence.
But the significance of the joint communique goes
much beyond that, as it recognizes the joint
responsibility that both the governing and the
opposition parties have in building a democratic and
prosperous Sierra Leone. In addition to re-emphasizing
national reconciliation and dialogue, the joint
communique therefore stresses multi-partisan support
for developing further Sierra Leone's democratic
institutions - such as the Parliament, the justice
system and the national security services - as well as
for the need to create strong, credible and independent
national commissions in the areas of elections, party
registration, human rights and media supervision. The
joint communique further recognizes the need to
develop multiparty consensus on key national policies,
such as on youth integration and employment, on the
mitigation of regional rivalries, on the development of
an independent media and on fighting illicit drug
trafficking and international crime.

I believe that the joint communique, by
combining a call for dialogue with an emerging
multiparty consensus on core elements of State-
building and national policies, is the quintessence of
peacebuilding in Sierra Leone. I also believe that the
joint communique could serve as a model for other
countries that are in similar post-conflict
circumstances. For those reasons, we should all work
09-36192
together to make the joint communique a success and
to implement its various agreements in full.

I am therefore glad to note many encouraging
signals in Sierra Leone from all political parties that
they are serious in wanting to implement those
agreements. In an unprecedented move, the leaders of
all major political parties were invited to the recent
congress of the governing All People's Congress,
where they pledged publicly to work together and to
put the interests of the country above those of their
respective political parties. In a sign of reconciliation,
President Ernest Bai Koroma visited the destroyed
party headquarters of the opposition. In return, John
Benjamin, the Chairman of the opposition party, visited
the political party headquarters of the governing party.
Leaders of all parties have repeatedly appeared
together in public debates, including on national radio
programmes, to call on all their supporters to work
together and to reject all kinds of political violence.
Regular multiparty talks have now started in Freetown,
and it is planned to extend them into the regions. The
youth wings of political parties are now meeting and
planning joint confidence-building events. In
consultation with the opposition, the President has now
set up an independent inquiry into allegations of
politically motivated sexual violence. We expect a
further independent review to be launched within the
coming days to look into the sequence of events that
led to the political violence in March.

I would also like to stress, in this context, the
support that the joint communique has received from
Sierra Leone's religious communities, civil society,
women's organizations and groups of artists. A call to
observe the joint communique's agreements was made
by all religious communities at both Muslim and
Christian religious services around the country. Civil
society organizations have translated the joint
communique into local languages and distributed it
widely.

Most importantly, however, a group of 26 young
artists have formed the group Artists for Peace and
developed two popular songs propagating the message
of reconciliation and peace of the joint communique.
Their songs can now be heard all over the country on
radio stations and in youth centres. On 13 June, 40,000
young men and women from all parties will gather at
the national stadium to welcome the Artists for Peace
and to launch their tour around the country. There is no
better way to mobilize Sierra Leone's youth around the
3
message for peace than through music, and I would
like to take this opportunity to thank the Artists for
Peace for their valuable engagement.

As a close observer, I witnessed the extraordinary
courage and determination with which President Ernest
Bai Koroma, the chairman of the main opposition
party, John Benjamin, and the leadership of the
political parties resisted the temptation to ride rising
emotions or give in to long-established patterns of
behaviour that re-emerged during the outbreak of
political violence. In many ways, these bold political
leaders decided to swim against the tide of polarization
that had gripped parts of the political spectrum in the
country, even within their own political parties. Allow
me to therefore take this opportunity to salute the
President, the leadership of the All People's Congress
and the Sierra Leone People's Party and Sierra
Leoneans in general for having chosen the way of
dialogue over confrontation and for having agreed on
such a far-reaching document as the joint communique.

Peacebuilding must be defined in Sierra Leone. It
cannot be done in New York or in any other place
outside the country. I am therefore pleased with the
new approach that the forthcoming special session of
the Peacebuildinq Commission for Sierra Leone
promised to take. At that session on Wednesday, we
expect Member States to support all major local
peacebuilding initiatives as an integrated package that
includes the political parties' joint communique, the
Government's Agenda for Change and the United
Nations family's Joint Vision.

The special session will be a confirmation of how
the Peacebuilding Commission here in New York and
the Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Freetown can
mutually reinforce their respective responsibilities and
activities for the benefit of Sierra Leone. I would like
to take this opportunity to thank in particular the new
chair of the Sierra Leone configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador John McNee,
for his foresight, vision and leadership in bringing this
special session about.

We anticipate that the special session will set a
clear strategic framework for development and
peacebuilding in Sierra Leone by adopting the
Government's Agenda for Change as the core strategy
that will guide all future national and international
development efforts. For this purpose, the special
session is expected to call on all Member States to
support the Government's Agenda and to adjust their
bilateral and multilateral assistance programmes
accordingly. With this decision, the special session will
help the Government replace the approximately 32
different and often unrelated national, bilateral and
multilateral strategies that have complicated
development efforts in the past. By rallying efforts
around one single national document, the
Peacebuilding Commission will set the stage for a
successful Consultative Group meeting for Sierra
Leone that will be held in London on 18 and 19 of
November 2009, with the kind assistance of the
Government of the United Kingdom.

In Security Council resolution 1829 (2008) of this
past August, the Council requested that a fully
integrated peacebuilding office be set up in Sierra
Leone. To achieve that, we have developed a joint
strategy, the United Nations family's Joint Vision for
Sierra Leone. The Joint Vision brings together
UNIPSIL and all the 17 United Nations development
and humanitarian agencies, programmes and funds that
operate in Sierra Leone. In parallel to the Agenda for
Change, the Joint Vision will cover a period of four
years, from 2009 to 2012, and envisages a total
financial envelope of $350 million.

With the Joint Vision, we have tried to break new
ground, to develop new, innovative approaches and to
establish joint implementation mechanisms. The Joint
Vision reflects the special requirements for
peacebuilding in Sierra Leone and combines the
political mandate given by the Security Council with
the development and humanitarian mandates of United
Nations agencies, programmes and funds into one
single strategy. With the Joint Vision we will present a
well-coordinated, transparent and integrated United
Nations approach to peacebuilding. The document
outlines how the United Nations family will comply
with the mandate of the Security Council, how we will
support the Government in its development efforts and
how our efforts will fit the wider development
activities that are carried out by our international
development partners.

In the Joint Vision we have not only agreed five
joint priorities and defined our joint benchmarks but
have also identified risks and outlined options for
mitigating those risks. With its 21 programmes, the
Joint Vision will provide for much more focused
interventions by the United Nations family and
establish clearer responsibilities for the preparation,
09-36192
approval and implementation of those programmes. All
those programmes are clearly aligned with the
Government's Agenda for Change. The Joint Vision
includes a number of other innovative features, such as
the joint multi-donor trust fund, a joint outreach
initiative, a joint network of regional field offices and a
number of joint support services.

On Wednesday, we will present our Joint Vision
at the special session and appeal to Member States to
support us financially and politically. As the Joint
Vision is, in many ways, the embodiment of the
mandate that the Council has given us for creating a
fully integrated peacebuilding mission in Sierra Leone,
I hope that I can also count on the strong support of the
Council.

In September, the Council will have to decide on
a possible extension of our mandate, and I feel that this
may be the time to mention a few issues regarding
UNIPSIL that may help in guiding the Council's future
deliberations.

UNIPSIL is now in its ninth month of operations.
By now, we have largely completed the build-up phase
and have developed a common peacebuilding strategy.
The emphasis has now shifted towards implementation.

In transitioning from the United Nations
Integrated Office in Sierra Leone to UNIPSIL, we have
refocused our aims and reoriented our approaches in
order to create a less dominant and more service- and
support-oriented organization. We have reduced the
staffing levels from 350 to about 70 staff members, but
at the same time we have expanded our presence inside
the country. In order to enable us to provide sound and
reliable policy advice, we have increased considerably
the share of professional national and international
substantive staff and reduced the number of
administrative and support staff. To underline a change
in attitudes from a peacekeeping to a peacebuilding
mission, we have moved to smaller and less costly
premises, which provide a friendlier and more
approachable atmosphere.

In building up UNIPSIL, we have also taken
great care to maintain the temporary nature of the
Integrated Peacebuilding Office. While we strive to
give UNIPSIL a more forceful, focused and substantive
configuration, we have, at the same time, tried to avoid
the temptation of constructing permanent structures or
creating long-term commitments that could inhibit a
possible exit strategy if and when this will be decided
09-36192

by the Security Council. For this reason, UNIPSIL
structures and approaches, through their integration
with those of other United Nations agencies, are
designed to facilitate a transition towards a more
regular development set-up under a United Nations
resident coordinator.

Allow me to end here by thanking the
Government and the people of Sierra Leone for
continuing to welcome UNIPSIL and me so warmly in
their midst. Sierra Leoneans are a peace-loving, gentle
and charming people who are so ably represented here
by their Foreign Minister, Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura.

I would also like to thank my colleagues from the
United Nations country team in Sierra Leone for all
their support and for the excellent team spirit that
exists among us. Finally, let me thank you, Mr.
President, and the members of this Council for your
patience in listening to me.

