Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We learned with interest about the initiative
of the United States delegation to return to a discussion
of one of the aspects of the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, namely, the protection of
journalists. We would like to thank Deputy Secretary-
General Eliasson and the other briefers for their very
interesting statements, which are a cause of concern.

In our view, instances of violence against
journalists in armed conflict are unacceptable.
Media professionals in complex military and political
situations are providing an important function by
informing the international community of the status of
events, including humanitarian issues and the suffering
of civilian populations. In the context of continuing
armed conflicts, journalism has earned itself a
reputation as one of the most dangerous professions. It
is no coincidence that journalists, who are considered
to be civilians under international humanitarian law,
have a similar level of protection in armed conflict.

The primary responsibility in this area is borne
by the warring parties. One of the major tasks of the
international community and regional organizations is
to assist national efforts in this area. At times, opinions
are expressed about the wisdom of including additional
international legal standards on the status of journalists
and about reviewing their status. There are already
legal norms and standards in place in that regard.
Priority should be given to compliance with the relevant
standards of international humanitarian law and to
having States not yet party to existing international
legal instruments accede to them.

It is clear that all attacks on journalists are
unacceptable. Issues pertaining to the activities
of journalists are already on the agenda of various
international organizations and bodies. The topic is
among the priorities of UNESCO, which is the main
entity for considering the whole host of issues related
to the safety of journalists. The Human Rights Council
deals with the human rights element of journalistic
activity. There is active work being carried out in this
area by many regional organizations. The resulting
division of labour facilitates ensuring the effective
functioning of the relevant structures.

Against that backdrop, we believe that the task of
the Security Council is to focus on issues having to do
with ensuring the safety of journalists in the context
of protecting civilians in situations of armed conflict.
An important contribution in ensuring the safety of
media professionals in extreme conditions is resolution
1738 (2006), which is the Council's basic document
on the topic. In spite of measures being taken by the
international community, the situation with regard to
ensuring the safety of journalists could nevertheless
be improved. Their rights are sometimes completely
ignored, and their lives and health are unjustifiably at
risk.

We saw clear violations of international law and the
needs ofjournalists in missile strikes in Belgrade in
1999 and Tripoli in 2011. Those strikes led to casualties
and the destruction of the equipment necessary for
journalists to carry out their professional duties.
Paragraph 3 of resolution 1738 (2006) directly states
that the equipment ofthe media are civilian objects, and
therefore should not be subject to attack.

Information from journalists concerning the actual
events in areas of armed conflict has been noted by
various United Nations bodies. Therefore, information
concerning attacks in Libya have been taken up by the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and have been the subject of their
investigations. Information on the matter was also
included in the most recent report of the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights to the Human
Rights Council. However, we have not yet received an
answer in that serious investigation.

We can learn a great deal from the media that is
of importance to the work of the Security Council.
In recent times, we learned a lot about the illegal
smuggling of weapons from Libya into Syria, as well
as about violations of the weapons embargo with regard
to Libya. The Sanctions Committee is aware of that
information. It is important that the work be completed.

When dealing with the protection of journalists
in situations of armed conflict, we also cannot forget
the precautionary measures that should be observed by
the representatives of the media themselves so as not
to be subject to unjustified risk for themselves, their
escorts and colleagues. We should also consider the
responsibility for observing an internal code of contact
by the correspondents and their superiors who send
into areas of hostilities. Excessive pursuit of a scoop
to the detriment of common sense in armed conflict
can be highly dangerous. Of course, journalists as well
as diplomats must comply with the laws of the host
country.

