Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I join previous
speakers in commending you, Mr. President, for
organizing today's debate on peace and security in
Africa and support to African Union peacekeeping. The
importance of this debate is further underlined by your
presidency and the presence here of the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Nigeria and Somalia, whom I greet
very especially. I also wish to express my thanks for
the useful statement by the Secretary-General, and to
welcome his comprehensive and valuable report on
support to African Union peacekeeping operations
authorized by the United Nations (S/2010/514). Let me
also thank Ambassador Lamamra for his briefing and
his important contribution to today's debate.

Portugal naturally shares the views contained in
the statement just made by the representative of the
European Union, so let me only mention some specific
points that we think should be stressed.

The history of the United Nations shows that
peacekeeping operations are not a short-term activity.
In this regard, partnerships with regional organizations
are playing an increasingly important role in our
collective peace and security, under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations and always with respect
for the primary role of the Security Council.
There are several examples of this collaboration,
including with the European Union in Chad or Kosovo
and with the African Union in the Sudan and Somalia.
Today, we are analysing that last situation: the African
Union peacekeeping operations authorized by the
United Nations. It has become more and more clear
that, if they are to be successful, it is necessary that we
develop an effective and strategic partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union that not only
envisages the direct support of the United Nations to
the African Union when the latter is conducting
operations authorized by the United Nations, but also
helps the African Union to develop its own capacities
in this area. This is a partnership that will have to work
in two directions by also reinforcing the United
Nations political capacities and increasing its
preventive diplomacy capacities. Both organizations
and their member States agree on that, but to achieve
it, there must be persistence, flexibility and sustained
political commitment from all parts involved.

Since the issuance of the Prodi report
(8/2008/813), several important steps have been taken,
as noted in the Secretary-General's report under
consideration today. Portugal welcomes the recent
launching of the Joint Task Force on Peace and
Security between the United Nations Secretariat and
the African Union Commission. This is a commitment
of the utmost importance to strengthening the strategic
cooperation between the two organizations in this area.

We also welcome the establishment of the United
Nations Office to the African Union in July, headed by
our former colleague Zachary Muburi-Muita, whom I
salute and congratulate most warmly. We believe that
the establishment of the Office will help to reduce
duplication and reinforce the joint work where it is
most needed - at the local level.

All these are very significant steps towards the
enhancement of the strategic cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union, as are the
annual consultative meetings between the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council, which provide the fundamental political
commitment. Nevertheless, more should be done to
achieve a truly and essential strategic and operational
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union.

The new United Nations Office in Addis Ababa
will have a key role to play in the development of these
relations, and I am confident that it will do so. Also,
the day-to-day relations between the United Nations
Secretariat and the African Union Commission -
through the implementation of the framework for the
10-year capacity-building programme for the African
Union, and through more regular and operational
communication - will be essential.

The Secretary-General's suggestion to use the
Security Council Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa as an informal
secretariat to the meetings between the Security
Council and the African Union Commission could be a
step towards ensuring that those meetings will have
concrete and substantive results.

Capacity- and institution-building in conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, as well as
management, are crucial areas to be supported.
Portugal praises all the work being done here by the
Secretariat and all the efforts being conducted on the
African Union side, and we urge the African Union and
all its members to continue these efforts, thus
becoming more capable of assuming full ownership of
their own peace and security.

We recognize that, even with all these efforts
going on, there are other major challenges, difficult to
overcome, to improving the effectiveness of the
African Union authorized peacekeeping operations.
One example is the imbalance between the number of
deployed forces and the vastness of the territories;
another is the related challenge of financing the
missions.

Portugal, while recognizing the enormous efforts
the United Nations has undertaken regarding
increasingly large and complex operations in Africa,
believes that the African Union peacekeeping
operations authorized by the United Nations require
more sustainable, predictable and flexible financing in
their current form. Portugal welcomes the efforts
undertaken by the Secretary-General, as stated in his
report, regarding budgeting and financial management
and accountability reform. We consider that a certain
measure of pragmatism and realism will be necessary
to address this issue.

Finally, I would also say a word regarding the
relevance of subregional organizations in the African
peace and security architecture. These organizations
can have an important role to play in helping to
maintain peace and security in their regions, but their
capacity must be improved in this sense. The United
Nations could also have a role here, helping them to
build their capacities and institutions and reinforcing
effective coordination with them. This would
undoubtedly also reinforce the United Nations capacity
in mediating conflicts and in preventive diplomacy.

In conclusion, much has been done in the past
year regarding the development of this strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union. Portugal is strongly committed to
supporting the continuation of these efforts, as they are
essential to promoting peace and security in all parts of
the world.

