Mr. Seger (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, I thank you, Madame, for this
opportunity to address the Security Council today. I am
speaking in my capacity as Chair of the Burundi
configuration.

I would also like to convey my thanks to the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2010/608), which
covers all the pertinent aspects of peacebuilding in a
comprehensive and balanced way. To finish my thanks,
I join with your thanks, Madam President, to Charles
Petrie, his team and his predecessors for the excellent
work they have done. I have personally greatly
10-68327
benefited from Charles' support, and I will miss him. I
can only hope that his successor will be as competent
and excellent. I believe that the Burundi configuration
and the United Nations need a strong personality in
Burundi.

As the Council knows, in resolution 1902 (2009)
the Security Council welcomed the configuration's
commitment to continue its work in Burundi and
requested it, with support from the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi, to lay the foundations for
sustainable peace and security, reintegration and
development in Burundi and to mobilize resources to
that end.

In my report, I will briefly touch on the activities
of the Burundi configuration, assess the current
situation and try to set out a Vision of the
configuration's future tasks. In the interest of time, I
will summarize my written statement, which, I believe,
will be distributed, and I would simply ask Council
members to refer for the details to the statement.

With regard to the activities, Charles Petrie has
already mentioned several. I would first like to express
my gratitude for the excellent cooperation with the
Burundi Government, which has greatly facilitated our
work. I count on continuing that excellent cooperation
in the future.

As Charles said, during the past year in the
configuration we basically focused on the facilitation
of the elections in Burundi, the entire election cycle.
We concentrated chiefly on financial aspects. The
donors within the Burundi configuration contributed
greatly to the success of the electoral process. Just to
give a few figures - of the $46.5 million that the
elections cost, the greatest part was paid by the
contributors. Burundi assisted with $7.9 million. Also,
the Peacebuilding Fund contributed $3 million to the
elections.

Furthermore, we continued to help with political
support for the country. My predecessor Peter Maurer
and I visited the country. We also held meetings with
the Burundi Government and the configuration here in
New York.

Thirdly, I also visited the World Bank to try to
involve the Bank in the economic and social
development process. I believe that there are important
elements in merging the peacebuilding and socio-
economic efforts, because I am of the view that there is
10-68327
no peace without development, nor is there
development without peace. Hence, fusing the political
efforts of the United Nations with those of the World
Bank seems important to me.

Very briefly, with regard to the assessment of the
current situation, first of all, we fully share the
excellent analysis contained in the Secretary-General's
report. I believe that now, after the electoral cycle
process - which concluded to the satisfaction of the
observers - a new phase, a new chapter, has opened in
Burundi. There are several positive aspects. There is
the establishment of a democratically elected, stable,
recognized Government and, in particular, the
prospects for Burundi's integration into the East
African Community, and others.

I believe that for that progress to continue, it will
be necessary to promote an institutional and political
environment conducive to economic and social
development and, above all, to create a stable
environment attractive to foreign investment. In other
words, it seems to me that we must continue to work
on two elements: the economic and social aspect, on
the one hand, and the political and institutional aspect,
on the other.

On the economic and social side, I believe that
above all it is necessary to be aware of the fact that the
people of Burundi expect what I would call a peace
dividend. Now, following the elections, they want the
economic and social development to continue. I believe
that we have a task - a moral and political
obligation - to support them in that. I am thinking in
particular of the young people, who are rightly
expecting results.

On the political and institutional side, in my view
it is necessary to continue to improve the situation in
the areas that Charles rightly mentioned. Among others,
I will mention the fight against corruption - which,
moreover, is a priority of the Government - but also
sectors such as transitional justice. There are important
and useful elements there that can be developed.

It also seems important to establish and
encourage a culture of political dialogue in the country.
The election process and the boycott by the opposition
have left wounds. I believe it is necessary now to
encourage the moderate groups that are calling for
reconciliation and dialogue, in order to isolate potential
radical elements that could advocate violence and
oppression. I primarily refer to the politically
motivated acts of violence that are mentioned, as the
Council will no doubt have read, in the Secretary-
General's report, and even cases of extrajudicial
executions.

I should also say that there a several members of
the configuration that are particularly concerned about
an appreciable increase in human rights violations,
which is also mentioned in the Secretary-General's
report, including cases of torture.

What is positive is that the country - as I
realized during my visit in July - has a Vibrant, active
and very committed civil society, as well as a very
involved media. I believe that in the configuration we
also have the task of supporting that civil society,
supporting freedom of expression and supporting the
media. We have the will and are ready to work with the
Government on those points.

That brings me to the vision, perhaps by way of a
preliminary comment. The goal of the configuration is
to contribute to the country's achieving a degree of
stability and security sufficient to terminate the
configuration's help. In other words, my mandate is to
make myself obsolete. So we are working with the
Government towards that goal, but I believe that there
is still work to do, and I think the Minister agrees with
me. I touched on the socio-economic, political and
institutional aspects that we should address together. I
think that we will be able to do that now in the context
of the current Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding,
which will be completed in early 2011. We are working
with the Government towards that.

To sum up, I think that I see four areas on which
the configuration could work.

First is to support the country in its integration
into the East African Community. I believe that is an
important element for the economic and political
stability of the country.

Secondly, I think that it is necessary to
incorporate conflict-sensitive aspects in the socio-
economic aspects, that is, in the poverty reduction
strategy, in order to implement the principles of there
being no peace without development nor development
without peace.

Thirdly, the rule of law, institutional issues and
human rights aspects must be addressed. We talked
about the issues of corruption, the rule of law and
human rights that, I believe, we should improve and
further support.

Fourthly and lastly is perhaps the most delicate
and difficult issue; I am not sure. That is to promote
that culture of dialogue among the various parties in
the country. I think it important to consolidate and
stabilize the country politically and to help the parties
that support moderation and reconciliation.

That is more or less my vision for the future and
we will endeavour to broaden it with the Government. I
also express my gratitude for the Security Council's
trust in the configuration to work with Burundi. As I
said from the outset, I believe that a strong and active
political presence of the United Nations is important.
In that context, it is important to appoint a new United
Nations Special Representative soon.

I conclude by reiterating that I greatly appreciate
this opportunity to speak before the Council and hope
the tradition will be maintained in the future. I believe
that the famous document S/2010/507 offers an
opportunity for the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations to speak more regularly to the Council
and to help it with its task. I remain fully available to
do so at any time in the future.

