I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his detailed briefing on the situation in the Middle East. Amid the continuing normalization of relations between Israel and its Arab neighbours and the hope it inspires, my delegation remains concerned about recent developments in the Middle East, particularly with the decision of the Israeli authorities to continue building new housing in the settlements of the occupied West Bank, in addition to the forced evictions and the demolition of Palestinian structures. The Niger deplores those events, which come less than a month after the signing of normalization agreements between Israel and two Arab countries in the Gulf, opening up a promising path for the resumption of dialogue between Israelis and Palestinians. In view of the efforts made for so many years to bring the parties closer together, and in the light of the positive developments since the 15 September agreements, the Israeli authorities' decision is likely to sorely test confidence between the parties and bog down the peace process. That is why we call on Israel to respect the principles of international law in the occupied territories and to refrain from any measure to the contrary, which could undermine the prospect of a resumption of peace talks with a view to reaching a negotiated two-State solution, as endorsed by the international community. It is more necessary than ever for the international community, the members of the Middle East Quartet and, in particular, the Security Council, to spare no effort to bring Israel and Palestine closer together and lead them towards the negotiating table for the settlement of the conflict in a way that satisfies the legitimate aspirations for the creation of a viable State for one and security for the other. The abandonment of that path would have repercussions for the entire region and for international peace and security. The spirit of restraint and receptiveness of the Israeli authorities to the various appeals from the international community, as well as the great political will shown by President Mahmoud Abbas before the General Assembly, are assets we must avail ourselves of at every opportunity in order to bring the parties back to dialogue. The humanitarian situation in the region remains worrisome, particularly with the spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic, which spares neither Israelis nor Palestinians. The pandemic has exacerbated an already complex health situation, with a lack of adequate medical equipment and medicine, as well as a disastrous economic situation induced by the continuing unsustainable blockade on the Gaza Strip, which increases the vulnerability of the Palestinian population. That is why the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East requires additional support to enable it to continue its useful activities on the ground. It is also incumbent on Israel, as the occupying Power, to assume its responsibilities under international humanitarian law in the administration of the territories under its control. In conclusion, the Niger commends the tireless efforts of Nickolay Mladenov and reaffirms its full support for the efforts of the international community to bring about a positive outcome to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
