Mr. Otunnu: As always, it is a great honour to
participate in this debate under your presidency,
Madam; you are a true advocate of the protection and
rights of children.

This is the fourth open debate of the Security
Council devoted to the protection, rights and
rehabilitation of children affected by conflict. Since
1998 we have seen the progressive integration of these
concerns into the peace and security agenda of the
United Nations. This has resulted in an impressive
body of practice, key elements of which include
resolutions 1261 (1999) and 1314 (2000); the
progressive inclusion of child protection provisions in
peacekeeping mandates; the creation of the role of
child protection advisers; the incorporation of child
protection issues into peace agendas and peace accords;
and the establishment, as a regular feature of reports to
the Security Council, of specific sections on child
protection.

The Security Council is at the centre of these
developments. On behalf of millions of war-affected
children, I would like to thank the members of the
Council for embracing and promoting their cause. My
Office has developed very close collaboration on this
agenda item with various United Nations partners,
particularly the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the United Nations Children's Fund; I
express warm appreciation to Carol Bellamy and Jean-
Marie Guehenno for their strong support and
cooperation. I must pay a special tribute to our partners
in the non-governmental-organization community;
quite simply, the advancement of this agenda depends
in large measure on their work - their advocacy and
programmes on the ground. I also thank members of
the Council for inviting to today's debate a young
person who comes from a conflict situation where
children have experienced unbelievable horrors of war.
I extend to Alhaji Babah Sawaneh of Sierra Leone a
very warm welcome.

In spite of the impressive progress which has
been registered, especially at the levels of advocacy,
public opinion, policies and programmes, I regret to
report that the overall situation of children exposed to
war remains grave and entirely unacceptable. The full
magnitude and details of this situation are set out in the
report of the Secretary-General, which is before the
Council.

We share a common preoccupation: how to
change the situation for children on the ground. In this
context, I should like to underscore some measures,
drawn from the report of the Secretary-General and the
draft resolution before the Council, which I believe are
particularly important for changing the situation on the
ground.

There is an urgent need for the international
community to organize a more systematic and effective
way of monitoring and reporting on the conduct of
parties to conflict in terms of their treatment of
children. Who is brutalizing and targeting children?
When and where are they doing so? Which parties to
conflict are observing or flouting their obligations and
commitments concerning the protection of children?
Such monitoring and reporting, conducted on an
objective and impartial basis, would then serve as the
basis for concerted action, triggering targeted advocacy
and mobilization of pressure by all concerned.

We have good news on the Optional Protocol: just
last week we attained the required threshold of 10
instruments of ratification. This means that that
important treaty will enter into force in February next
year. The entry into force of the Optional Protocol will
constitute a milestone in our collective endeavours to
end child soldiering. But this milestone will remain
largely a theoretical achievement unless it becomes a
prelude to concrete measures on the ground. We need
to take the following actions, among others: ensure the
application of the Optional Protocol in theatres of
conflict; mobilize adequate resources for programmes
of demobilization and social rehabilitation for children
who have already been made to participate in conflict;
and, above all, address underlying causes - political,
social and economic factors - that create an
environment conducive to the alienation, exploitation
and radical indoctrination of children and young
people, thus facilitating their involvement in conflict.

A particular scandal in warfare today is the
pillage of natural resources by parties to conflict and
others. This is robbing children of their birthright.
Resources that should provide for rehabilitation,
education, health care and nutrition for children are
instead being plundered by networks of local,
neighbourhood and international actors. Who is reaping
the benefits of the rich diamond resources of Angola
and Sierra Leone, or the diamond, gold, coltan, timber
and coffee of the Democratic Republic of the Congo?
Certainly not the children of those countries. Moreover,
this has become a means of fielding and prolonging
conflicts in which children suffer most. For the
children of Angola, Sierra Leone, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and other countries, the
blessings of natural resources have been turned into a
veritable curse. I urge the Security Council to redouble
its efforts in this regard.

As indicated by the Secretary-General earlier, the
appointment of child protection advisers represents an
important innovation for integrating child protection
concerns into peacekeeping operations. This practice
needs to be strengthened and given wider application.
The current situation in Afghanistan and Burundi
present immediate opportunities for designing child-
conscious mission mandates and for deploying child
protection advisers.

We are eager to learn from our collective
experience thus far. For this reason, we have formed an
informal inter-agency working group to strengthen our
ongoing initiatives on incorporating child protection
into peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-building
processes. Similarly, following the call made by the
Security Council, we have formed an informal working
group to strengthen the training of peacekeeping
personnel.

The international community is not doing as
much as it should to prevent harm to girls in times of
war and to ensure their recovery and rehabilitation.
Several recent examples underscore the very particular
vulnerability of girls in situations of war. I recall that
girls in Rwanda suddenly became the heads of some
60,000 households in the aftermath of the genocide; the
trafficking of girls from the Balkans into prostitution
rings in Western Europe; the abduction of schoolgirls
by the Lord's Resistance Army in northern Uganda; the
systematic denial of education to girls in Afghanistan;
that in January 1999, the Revolutionary United Front
abducted more than 4,000 children from Freetown
alone, 60 per cent of them girls; and sadly, that there
are fighting groups we know whose preferred agents to
serve as suicide commandos remain girls. We must do
much more to protect and rehabilitate girls exposed to
war.

Last year the Security Council took up for the
first time the issue of the correlation between war and
the spread of HIV/AIDS, especially in the corridors of
war. We need to do a good deal more to ensure public
education and prevention.

We meet at a time when our collective attention is
focused on Afghanistan. Indeed, taking place in
Washington at this very moment is a very important
meeting, convened by Japan and the United States, on
recovery and reconstruction in Afghanistan. Children
today make up more than 50 per cent of the total
population of that country. Twenty-three years of war
in Afghanistan has defined the lives of at least two
generations of children and youth, most of whom have
grown up amid violence, death, deprivation, lack of
education and despair. Key indicators present a
sobering picture of the direct and indirect impact of
that conflict on Afghan children.

I appeal to the Security Council and the
international community in general to ensure that the
well-being and rehabilitation of war-affected children
become central concerns in any response to the
situation in Afghanistan. In order to facilitate this, I
urge the Council to support the efforts of the United
Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan to ensure that
child protection remains a priority throughout the
peacemaking and peace-building processes in
Afghanistan, including through the deployment of
specialized child protection staff. No peace is likely to
be sustainable there unless children and youth are
provided with rehabilitation and hope, so that instead
of being potential spoilers they become a constructive
force in rebuilding their country.

Only by doing what is right for children today
can we build a solid foundation for peace and security
tomorrow. However, while properly focusing on the
serious situation in Afghanistan, we must not lose sight
of the needs of other war-affected children who equally
need our attention and support.

The full text of my remarks will be distributed,
and therefore I will not read the entire text. However,
before concluding, I hope you will forgive me, Madam
President, for invoking the voice of Jamaica's favourite
son, your special gift to the world, whose powerful
voice gave the world the gift of reggae music. Bob
Marley's often deeply spiritual renditions of the themes
of suffering and redemption seem particularly
appropriate for our deliberations today. I hear Bob
Marley's voice calling us to action on behalf of
children. I hear him saying something like this:

"Hear the children cryin'

We had told them in yesteryears

Don't worry about a thing

'Cause every little thing gonna be all right.

"Hear the children cryin'
From Afghanistan to Angola
Asking for the same thing -
One Love.

"Hear the children cryin'

From the Balkans to Burundi

Waiting for the same thing 7
Redemption Songs. Redemption Songs.

"Won't you help to sing
These songs of redemption
Rendering hope and protection.

"I hear three little birds

Perched on the doorsteps of the Council
Singin' melodies pure and true

Sayin' again and again

'This is our message to you-ou-ou."'

