Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Earlier this morning,
a joint media statement by the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) facilitator, the
representative of the Zimbabwe African National
Union-Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF) and the Movement
for Democratic Change (MDC) was issued in Pretoria.
The statement reads:
"The talks between the Zimbabwean political
parties consisting of ZANU-PF, MDC-Tsvangirai
and MDC-Mutambara, chaired by the
Government of South Africa as mandated by
SADC, resumed in South Africa yesterday. The
talks are aimed at finding solutions to the
challenges in Zimbabwe."

As we meet this afternoon, the talks are
continuing in South Africa as the Zimbabwe parties
continue to seek a political solution to the challenges
they face, complicated by the holding of an election
that was preceded by violence and political
intimidation that resulted in a process that was unfair
and declared to be not transparent by the observers
from SADC, the African Union and the Pan-African
Parliament.

South Africa was appointed as facilitator at the
Extraordinary Summit of the Heads of State and
Government of SADC, chaired by the Chairperson of
the SADC the Organ on Politics, Defence and Security
Cooperation, held in Dar es Salaam, United Republic
of Tanzania on 28 and 29 March 2007. At that time, the
Extraordinary Summit of SADC appealed for the
lifting of all forms of sanctions against Zimbabwe.

The African Union Assembly of Heads of State
and Government, meeting in its eleventh ordinary
session held from 30 June to 1 July 2008 in Sharm
el-Sheikh, Egypt, expressed deep concern about the
prevailing situation in Zimbabwe. However, when
considering the matter of Zimbabwe, the African Union
summit did not call for sanctions against that country.
Instead, the African Union summit "appealed to States
and all parties concerned to refrain from any action
that may negatively impact on the climate for
dialogue".

The summit also decided

"to encourage President Robert Mugabe and the
leader of the MDC party, Mr. Morgan Tsvangirai,
to honour their commitments to initiate dialogue
with a view to promoting peace, stability,
democracy and reconciliation of the Zimbabwe
people".

The summit further

"expressed its appreciation to SADC, and its
Organ on Politics, Defence and Security
Cooperation, as well as the facilitator of the intra-
Zimbabwe dialogue, His Excellency Thabo
Mbeki, President of the Republic of South Africa,
and His Excellency Jean Ping, Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, for the ongoing work
aimed at reconciling the political parties".

Accordingly, South Africa, as a member of both
SADC and the African Union, is obliged to follow the
decision of those regional bodies. For that reason, my
delegation will vote against the draft resolution before
us.

Nonetheless, we are encouraged by the
commitment to dialogue by the Zimbabwe parties. That
dialogue will lead to the improvement of the
humanitarian and economic situation, thereby
contributing to a better life for all Zimbabweans. The
Security Council must give space for the African Union
summit decision to be implemented.

