Mr. Sen (India): Let me begin by expressing my
appreciation, Sir, for your successful stewardship of
the Security Council over the past fortnight. Let me
also express my appreciation of the dedication shown
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Koenigs, and wish him all the very best for the
future.

Today's debate on Afghanistan is most opportune,
taking place a fortnight after the high-level meeting
chaired by the Secretary-General and President Karzai.
Like that occasion, today's meeting affords us an
opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to the
stabilization and reconstruction of Afghanistan. As the
Minister of External Affairs of India noted two weeks
ago, India is fully committed to implementing the
benchmarks of the Afghanistan Compact and to
addressing the interrelated security, political and
development challenges facing Afghanistan.

The central task in Afghanistan involves
addressing, in the face of insecurity created by vicious
terrorist violence, the socio-economic challenges that
are the result of decades of strife, destruction and
privation. The challenge before the international
community is, on the one hand, to ensure security
while helping resolve those problems, while on the
other, to transform our respective high-level political
commitments into operational strategies and concrete
outcomes on the ground. Only if we succeed in all
three tasks can we create the conditions that engender
greater national ownership of security, reconstruction
and development processes in the long term.

It is an unavoidable reality that it is only in the
long term that we can rebuild national institutions
destroyed over the decades. Therefore, our collective
goal must be to build upon the significant successes
recorded thus far, while recognizing the fact that the
road ahead is long. We must redouble our political and
economic commitment to helping Afghanistan over the
medium to long term and ensure that our determination
is unshaken by short-term developments. The resolve
displayed by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan in that context, in expanding its presence
to 17 offices, is commendable. We look forward to
further expansion as and when capacities are created.

In that context, no challenge is more of a test of
our collective resolve than that posed by the security
situation. It is also the threat that could most quickly
undermine our collective efforts in Afghanistan.
Therefore, we cannot and must not underestimate the
ferocity of the Taliban and Al-Qaida resurgence. India
fully appreciates the Government of Afghanistan's
position that the challenge of terrorism - in particular
the growing trend of suicide attacks, cross-border
infiltration, and the nexus between terrorism and drug
trafficking - requires a robust international political
solution and a stronger domestic military response.

At the same time, as our Minister underscored,
security challenges must be addressed realistically.
That is to say, we in the international community must
provide appropriate responses, including security
enforcement and economic and development strategies
that rapidly bring the benefits of governance and
development to people in the worst-affected districts.
We can ill afford partial solutions that provide only
temporary relief in limited areas. Terrorism cannot be
fought piecemeal.

With regard to the interrelated aspect of
addressing the development challenge, India believes
that the good work being undertaken by the
international community in Afghanistan can be
sustained in the long term only if we invest in

developing Afghan human resources. For that, a multi-
pronged approach is required; on the one hand, we
must invest in rebuilding infrastructure and generating
employment, and on the other, we must progressively
transfer the necessary skills and managerial authority
to the Afghan people so that they can take on the
ownership of those projects.

For our part, I must underline that India's
commitment to the rebuilding and development of
Afghanistan remains unflinching. Our assistance
programme, which has been in place since the Berlin
conference, has now reached $750 million. Of that
total pledge, India has already disbursed around
$300 million in the implementation of various
assistance projects since 2002. Our projects run the
gamut of activities, ranging from capacity-building
projects to infrastructure creation and reconstruction.

With regard to capacity-building, India has
trained more than 2,700 Afghan citizens in India. Since
2006, we have trained, annually, 500 Afghan public
officials in short-term courses and 500 Afghan students
in university-level courses in India. India is also
implementing a capacity-development programme in
public administration, in partnership with the United
Nations Development Programme, to depute 30 Indian
civil servants to assist in various Afghan ministries. In
addition, India is including a strong capacity-
development component in all its infrastructure
projects in Afghanistan.

As regards projects, apart from the completion of
ongoing mega-infrastructure projects, India is now
simultaneously focusing on small development
projects. These include activities that require the
participation of local communities. Such projects are
aimed at providing the most direct peace dividend to
communities that have yet to see the benefits of
development. India has worked to align its assistance
programmes with Afghan priorities. Our projects are
being implemented in close coordination with Afghan
stakeholders, focusing particularly on local
implementation, management and ownership of assets.

As a country with traditionally close historic,
cultural and regional links with Afghanistan, it is
natural for us to see regional cooperation as the third
pillar of the effort to stabilize Afghanistan. Regional
economic cooperation is an important benchmark of
the Compact and is a strategic element of the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy.
Afghanistan's entry into the South Asian Association
for Regional Cooperation in April 2007 will not only
further strengthen its historical links with the South
Asian region, but also provide the region with lasting
benefits in free trade and shared economic activities. In
that context, several important regional cooperation
events have taken place over the past few years,
including the Kabul Conference on Regional Economic
Cooperation and the New Delhi Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference.

However, the central challenge remains the need
to develop coordinated measures to implement the
programmes formulated in such regional processes.
Those include addressing key and topical challenges,
such as cross-border terrorism, the upgrading of law
enforcement and governance capacities, the facilitation
of overland transit and the expansion of trade and
business linkages.

In conclusion, at the macro level, our best
response to those who seek to drive the international
community out of Afghanistan is to display a
heightened sense of resolve. We can only succeed by
showing that our commitment is long-term and that our
resolve is unshaken. Most important, we must work
together in a more effective partnership with the
Government of Afghanistan. As the latest report of the
Secretary-General underlines, strong leadership from
the Afghan Government must be matched by greater
donor coherence and a strong commitment from all of
us in the neighbourhood. That remains the key to
collectively building upon the gains made since the
Bonn conference.

