Mr. Tiendrebeogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): My delegation would like to join others in
welcoming the presence at this debate of President Jose
Ramos-Horta. I would like in particular to thank him
for his important and encouraging statement. I also
wish to thank the Secretary-General for his decision to
personally introduce his report (S/2009/72) on the
situation in Timor-Leste.

My delegation would first like to welcome the
calm that prevails today in Timor-Leste, especially
following the tragic events of February 2008. Although
the situation can still be considered fragile, it is
reassuring to note that it is the result of both a
courageous policy and the resolute commitment of the
country's officials to ensuring full respect for the
Constitution and the rule of law. The prevailing
situation is also the outcome of an inclusive and
participatory approach to the management of public

affairs that emphasizes consensus in the search for
lasting solutions to national problems such as security
sector reform, strengthening governance and the rule of
law, and economic development. We hope that the
environment of relative stability will be utilized to
strengthen mechanisms for consultation and to further
promote national dialogue and reconciliation, in line
with the efforts already made to that end by President
Ramos-Horta and the Government with the help of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) and United Nations agencies.

That will require the full support of the entire
population, and in particular that of all of Timor-
Leste's political actors. The latter in particular have
today a historic responsibility to exercise, and it is for
that reason that we urge them to demonstrate
moderation and the highest level of restraint in order to
avoid endangering the still precarious stability. That
will be especially important in this year of local
elections.

Unfortunately, the young country of Timor-Leste
still has to face all sorts of challenges, including those
associated with security. In that regard, we should
welcome and encourage every effort aimed at
strengthening security. My delegation therefore
welcomes the efforts made to reform and strengthen
security sector institutions. In that regard, we hope
that, among other things, the Government will take
advantage of UNMIT's expressed readiness to provide
advice and operational support, as the obstacles to be
overcome in that regard are still numerous and real.

Throughout the country's history, the law and the
administration of justice have been of crucial
importance in ensuring social justice, the public's trust
and the further entrenchment of democracy and the rule
of law. We welcome the significant progress made on
social matters, especially as regards the issue of the
petitioners and displaced persons. That progress is a
reflection of the desire of both the Timorese people as
a whole and their officials to quickly turn the page on a
painful chapter in their history. It is therefore important
that, above and beyond the difficulties and incidents
referred to in the report of the Secretary-General, we
support the genuine efforts being made to combat
impunity as well as every initiative aimed at
strengthening the capacities of the relevant national
institutions.

On the socio-economic front, it is heartening to
note that, with the support of its partners, the
Government of Timor-Leste has understood the full
scope of the challenges and difficulties it faces and that
it has already put in place the necessary clear policies
to overcome, or at least lessen, them. In that regard, its
decision to declare 2009 as the year of infrastructure,
rural development and human resource capacity-
development is an important one.

Unfortunately, the impact on the levels of poverty
is still insufficient. We nevertheless hope that efforts
under way will help to reverse that trend. In the
knowledge that poverty and the problems associated
with it are among the underlying causes of conflict, we
hope that the international community will be able to
provide the necessary assistance to the country, in
particular by financing the 2009-2013 United Nations
Development Assistance Framework and the five-pillar
National Recovery Strategy aimed at assisting
internally displaced persons.

In this regard, we welcome the medium-term
strategy drawn up by the United Nations, with the full
support of the Government. The strategy will be an
important tool not only for consolidating the
achievements made in a number of specific areas, but
also and above all for revitalizing and devising
improved development policies, in the ultimate aim of
laying the foundations of a stable, democratic and
prosperous Timor-Leste, as clearly noted by the
Secretary-General.

In conclusion, I pay tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Atul
Khare, and to UNMIT for their efforts in Timor-Leste.
Despite the progress that has been achieved in a
number of areas, their work is far from over. That is
why, in accordance with the wishes of the Timorese
authorities, the United Nations and the international
community in general must maintain an effective
presence in and significant support for the country. In
this regard, Burkina Faso supports the recommended
extension of the UNMIT mandate by 12 months.

