Let me begin by congratulating South Africa on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of December and on its leadership as Chair of the African Union (AU). I also welcome my dear friend Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union Commission, who is with us today. Cooperation between the United Nations, the African Union and the African regional economic communities and other regional mechanisms has never been stronger. Our joint work has gained in depth and scope, particularly since we signed the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security in 2017 and the African Union-United Nations Framework for the Implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in 2018. This partnership is deeply rooted in the principles of complementarity, respect and African ownership, as well as the conviction that no single organization or State can overcome the challenges of our time on its own. Since the beginning of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the African continent has shown exemplary leadership and solidarity. I commend the African Union and its member States for spearheading a rapid and coordinated response and for establishing a strong partnership between the World Health Organization and the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. The African Heads of State and Government presented a compelling vision for peace and security through the flagship Silencing the Guns in Africa initiative and the Lusaka Master Roadmap 2016. The United Nations has sought to support these initiatives in a number of concrete ways, including through technical assistance to mediation and disarmament capacities, such as the joint implementation of the African Amnesty Month initiative in seven countries in 2020; partnering with the African Union to create the African Women Leaders Network and its 25 national chapters; and investment in youth- empowerment activities, including peace education. I am also pleased to see the expansion of the operational support role of the United Nations, which is becoming not only a partner but also a service provider for the African Union. With the support of United Nations special political missions and peacekeeping operations, our partnership has also yielded significant results at the country level. In Libya, the parties signed a ceasefire agreement under the auspices of the United Nations, and political talks have resumed. I am grateful for the continued and close engagement of the African Union in support of the ongoing dialogue processes, including as a Chair of the Security Working Group of the International Follow-up Committee. The Contact Group of the African Union High-Level Committee on Libya, chaired by the President of the Republic of the Congo, continues to be an important platform for facilitating the joint engagement of the United Nations and the AU in Libya. We look forward to continuing our cooperation, especially in supporting the African Union's organization of a Libyan national reconciliation conference. In the Central African Republic, the United Nations has supported the establishment of the African Union Military Observers Mission, and we have seen progress in the implementation of the peace agreement brokered by the African Union with our support. The United Nations has also reinforced its engagement with the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS), following the establishment of the new ECCAS Commission in September. This stronger collaboration was exemplified by the recent joint visit to the Central African Republic of senior officials from the United Nations, the AU and ECCAS in support of the country's efforts to consolidate peace. Our joint work and close collaboration will be critical in ensuring peace consolidation through the organization of free, credible and fair elections within the constitutional timelines. The United Nations and the African Union continue to cooperate in South Sudan, where the ceasefire has mostly held, and where improved political stability across the country has generated cautious optimism. We are also working closely with the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), including in South Sudan. Through my Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa, the United Nations has also supported IGAD in the development of its regional response strategy for addressing the COVID-19 pandemic. We are also working hand in hand in the Sudan, where a new peace agreement between the Government and armed movements is the culmination of a year of constructive talks and a testament to the commitment of the parties to peace. It opens a new chapter, particularly for people living in Darfur, South Kordofan and the Blue Nile. In Somalia, beyond our support for the African Union Mission in Somalia, we are supporting the Government on extending State control to additional areas and preparing for new elections. Our two organizations also worked with the Economic Community of West African States in Cete d'Ivoire and Guinea before and after elections and, in September, joined efforts to facilitate the establishment of the 18-month transition in Mali. Together with the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and the Office of the SADC Facilitator, we are supporting political and institutional efforts towards the implementation of Lesotho's comprehensive reform process. We are also cooperating with SADC to facilitate the reconfiguration of the Force Intervention Brigade and the joint strategy on the exit of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Despite these positive steps, the challenges loom large. New conflicts are erupting, the climate emergency is raging and the COVID-19 pandemic is exacerbating fragilities and disproportionately affecting women and the most vulnerable. As in other parts of the world, trust is being eroded, underscoring the importance of good governance and respect for human rights, which are not just essential to the continent's development but are also crucial to peace and security. Dealing with the pandemic must not take attention away from maintaining peace and security in Africa. As was highlighted in the high-level dialogue with regional and other organizations that I convened a few days ago, we see growing restrictions in civic space and increasing threats to minorities around the world. Furthermore, terrorist and violent extremist groups are exploiting the uncertainty created by the pandemic, as we are observing in the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin. I welcome and support the efforts of United Nations entities aimed at providing assistance to Member States in countering terrorist and related threats in various African countries. Enhanced cooperation with the African Union Commission and its African Centre for Study and Research on Terrorism, along with regional bodies on the continent, is crucial in that regard. As an example, the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism is working with the African Centre to develop options as part of a suite of United Nations inter-agency projects to assist Mozambique. But more must be done. I reiterate my appeal for African-led peace and counter-terrorism operations to receive Security Council mandates pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter, as well as predictable funding guaranteed by assessed contributions. I want to reaffirm my full support for the African Union's initiative, led by South Africa, to resolve grievances through dialogue. More broadly, I repeat my appeal for a global ceasefire. I also thank Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat for his call to all belligerents to stop fighting, allow access for the delivery of humanitarian assistance and enable political solutions. Earlier this year, I commissioned an independent assessment of the United Nations-African Union partnership and the work of the United Nations Office to the African Union. It revealed a broad consensus that a strong United Nations-AU partnership is essential to addressing the range of peace and security challenges in Africa. Moreover, the United Nations-AU partnership is one of the most important relationships in the domain of international peace and security and a cornerstone of multilateralism. The process highlighted significant progress in our partnership, both in mission and non-mission settings, but also acknowledged areas for improvement. Our two organizations and our action in Africa would benefit from a number of concrete steps: the further institutionalization of our cooperation at every level, since a sustainable partnership must be grounded in trust between the two organizations, which will also require a stronger collaboration between the United Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council; ensuring the predictability of financing African Union peace support operations through assessed contributions; and doing much more to involve and engage women and young people in the peace and security agenda. To foster resilience and prepare for the challenges of the future, we need to build more networked, inclusive and effective institutions to prevent conflict, reinforce good governance and boost service delivery. In short, we need a renewed multilateralism. As we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, we have embarked on a deep reflection on how we can best move our common agenda forward. I count on the African Union to help lead the way. As Nelson Mandela said, "It always seems impossible until it is done." May his wisdom, compassion and example help us all and inspire us all to get it done.
