Mr. Rock (Canada): I am grateful for the
opportunity to speak today on behalf of Canada on the
important issue of revitalizing the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). I want to first join with other
colleagues in expressing our gratitude and admiration
for the skilful and effective way in which Ambassador
Arias is discharging the complex and important work
of the Committee.

Since the Committee's inception, Canada has
recognized the CTC as the focal point of the efforts
both to implement resolution 1373 (2001) and to make
the resources of donor States available to assist others
in meeting their international counter-terrorism
responsibilities. We believe the CTC should continue to
play a leading role in that respect.

We appreciate the progress the CTC has made,
particularly in promoting the importance of
implementing resolution 1373 (2001) and the 12
United Nations counter-terrorism conventions and
protocols.

We share the concern expressed by others about
the sustainability, effectiveness and continued
relevance of the CTC in the fight against terrorism. We
agree that the process of revitalization undertaken by
the Committee is important. The evaluation of reports,
coordination and expert needs assessments are all
critical activities. But we must take the measures
necessary to move beyond assessment to action, so that
identified gaps may be filled and required follow-up
activities may take place.

(spoke in French)

Some of these measures relate to the very
structure of the CTC. In this regard, the creation of an
Executive Directorate would be worthwhile, since it
could provide critical technical support to the Chair
and ensure continuity when the CTC's chairmanship
changes. Measures that streamline decision-making,
facilitate communication and enhance flexibility should
also be welcomed.

(spoke in English)

We would hope, however, that restructuring
measures do not disproportionately increase the budget
and resources already allocated to the CTC, but rather
facilitate a more effective use of those resources. A
number of the challenges that the CTC faces are of
course mirrored at the national level. So much of
coordination and leveraging of resources is about
identifying and engaging the right people - and
getting them, of course, to talk to one another. This is
especially important when the activities are more
technical than political in nature.

Close cooperation at all levels between the CTC
and the Secretariat is as essential as that between the
CTC and Member States for maintaining the full
support needed to successfully enhance the work of the
CTC through the proposed Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate.

We can also make the CTC more action-oriented
by further enhancing its joint activities and interaction
with other organizations. To this end, we have
welcomed the CTC's increased outreach to
international, regional and functional organizations. We
look forward to the results of the 12 March meeting co-
hosted by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime.

We support the proposal to strengthen the CTC's
contacts and coordination with other United Nations
bodies. We consider the current collaboration between
the CTC and the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to be
exemplary. It is, indeed, a best practice.

Increased interaction of the CTC with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and other human rights organizations in matters
related to counter-terrorism would also be welcomed
by Canada. Like others who have spoken today, we
support the inclusion of a human rights expert on the
staff of the CTC, because we believe that the fight
against terrorism must be conducted in accordance with
international commitments on human rights and
fundamental freedoms.

In this regard, I want to stress that Canadian
counter-terrorism capacity-building assistance is
provided in a manner consistent with respect for
international human rights norms and standards, and
that specific human rights components are integrated
into counter-terrorism initiatives where possible.

As originally conceived, the CTC should do more
to ensure that it is the central clearing house for the
many needs assessments, evaluation mechanisms and
counter-terrorism action plans that are being conducted
in regional and functional organizations. In our view,
this information should be in one place and accessible
to donors, so that we may be in a position to respond.
As long as the CTC is not playing that central role,
some duplication is inevitable, creating additional and
unnecessary demands and burdens on developing
countries.

(spoke in French)

More can be done to improve information
exchange and communication with those major donor
States that, like Canada, are not members of the
Security Council. The demands on those donors to
provide assistance are increasing. However, we cannot
respond effectively if we do not have full access to the
information that our technical experts require in order
to meet the identified needs of recipient countries. For
our part, we are ready to expand our efforts to share
information about the assistance that we currently
provide.

(spoke in English)

In closing, let me underline again that Canada
supports the work of the United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Committee. We are pleased that the CTC
itself has taken practical steps towards revitalization so
as to ensure its continued relevance and central role in
the global fight against terrorism, drawing together all
Member States as active and full participants.

