I thank the briefers for their thorough update on the issue. The pandemic continues to pose a significant threat to the maintenance of international peace and security. This means that a potential increase in social unrest and violence, which would greatly undermine our ability to fight the disease, is still in the cards. On | July, we unanimously adopted resolution 2532 (2020), demanding an immediate cessation of hostilities in all situations on our agenda. In some countries, like my own, we have had time to deal with the various outcomes of the pandemic, but this cannot be said about many others. There are countries that are ravaged by conflicts, violence, human rights violations and so forth, which makes dealing with the pandemic nearly impossible. It is for these reasons that we must continue following the Secretary-General's call for a humanitarian ceasefire. Only then can countries effectively deal with the pandemic to protect their citizens, when all their effort is directed towards the number one enemy - the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Enabling safe, unhindered and sustained delivery of humanitarian assistance is as relevant now as it was a few months ago, especially regarding Syria. We have seen cases where COVID-19 has been used as a pretext for various ideas that are not serving the common good of the people in need or have little to no links to the pandemic, including the campaign for the lifting of restrictive measures, the rise in disinformation campaigns and attacks against the health-care sector, both physical and cyber. Some Governments have curbed United Nations peacekeepers' freedom of movement, which in turn curbs our ability to help the people in need. We must focus our efforts on dealing with the pandemic, not fighting. As I have said in my previous speeches on the issue - and I will not get tired of stressing it - the risks posed by the pandemic for the rights of women, including through gender-based violence and violations of human rights, are undeniable. Women's role in the societies' response to COVID-19, including in conflict and post-conflict situations, is crucial, as they represent the majority of health workers. To beat the pandemic, we need to show solidarity and trust. We need to be transparent with each other. Without a coordinated response, we cannot win.
