Mr. Aboul Gheit (spoke in Arabic): In my capacity as the representative of the League of Arab States, I address the Security Council following the League's ministerial meeting that took a collective decision on 1 February to reject the peace plan for Palestinians and Israelis proposed by the United States of America on 28 January. That rejection did not come out of the blue or without explanation. There have been well-known and established givens in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, primarily the significant imbalance of forces on the ground between a party under occupation and another party, namely, the occupying Power. That has been set out for decades, but it is not the entire issue. In fact, international legitimacy is on the side of the Palestinian people. As embodied by the Security Council, and more broadly by the United Nations, international law constitutes the primary support for the Palestinians in this protracted conflict, even before the support of their Arab brethren. The Palestinian people, even with the support of their Arab brethren, do not have a choice but to remain steadfast on their land first and then call for the Council's sense of justice and fairness. Direct negotiations, which should have led to a road map for a sovereign and independent Palestinian State along the 4 June 1967 borders, nearly 50 years ago, regrettably did not lead to anything. The presentation of the United States plan was preceded by many proactive measures, as mentioned by President Mahmoud Abbas, all of which would have a direct impact on the issues that were agreed upon in Oslo to be negotiated, such as Jerusalem and refugees. These measures are clearly geared towards settling those issues for the benefit of the Israeli side, prior to any negotiations. Then came the plan as if it were the outcome of negotiations between the mediator and Israel. Palestinians were not consulted, as we heard, much less informed about the content of the plan, which directly impacts their fate. It is now being demanded that they accept the plan and succumb, or subsequently be obligated in the near future to accept its unilateral implementation. It is as if the plan had been drafted to be rejected by the Palestinians, Arabs and Muslims, and then be imposed unilaterally, leaving us to face a new version of unilateral withdrawal plans promoted by the Israeli right but under the slogan of a permanent solution. All of this negates the basis of neutral mediation. In principle, we welcome the interest of the Government of the United States to seek a political settlement to this conflict. We welcome this initiative; but, unfortunately, we found that the proposed plan contravenes the principles that the United States itself set out as the basis for a lasting solution when it committed to a political settlement for the Israeli-Arab conflict 40 years ago. First and foremost among those principles is that of land for peace, which means ending the occupation versus achieving security, recognition and the beginning of peaceful relations in exchange. The proposed plan includes new parameters that can be summarized as follows: granting land, settlements, Jerusalem and security to Israel and then normalization and peace - also for Israel. As for the Palestinians,they will merely get a dismembered territory, without sovereignty or Jerusalem and without an acceptable solution to the problem of refugees. In short, this is not even tantamount to full autonomy, let alone an independent State. The plan does not propose the two-State solution, even if it mentions it. What it proposes falls well short of that. This is a plan that practically suggests the creation of a single State with two categories of people: citizens enjoying full-fledged citizenship and others with no rights. This is shameful, as has been echoed here in the Chamber, along with condemnation and denunciation. Will the international community accept a new apartheid in the Middle East? On the holy land? The Arab and Palestinian position is not rejection for the sake of rejection. Neither is it allowing an opportunity to slip away, as some might say repeatedly, as if we were pleased to live in an endless conflicts and crises. We Arabs have a peace proposal as well, based on the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative. It was a robust, clear and simple initiative presented to Israel, seeking normalization of relations with 22 Arab States - if Israel ended its occupation and allowed a Palestinian State to emerge along the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, accompanied with an agreed solution for the refugees issue. Those are the principles of the Arab solution. Our initiative does not include details because we do not want to impose details. We want to help both parties reach a solution through negotiations - I repeat, through negotiations - between the two parties concerned. Turning to the United States plan, it undermines the very meaning of negotiations. There was no need for the mediator to present a solution detailing what the lasting solution was to be, unless the two parties requested that. It should have been the outcome of direct negotiations. I have worked for decades towards achieving peace in the Middle East. I have learned an important lesson, namely, that there can be no lasting peace between two parties unless it is based on justice. There can be no peace in the Middle East if it means one party acknowledging defeat and forced to succumb. That would unfortunately lead to the continuation of the conflict. Dashing the national aspirations of the Palestinian people for freedom and independence while attempting to obliterate their national dream and push them to yield to an unfair settlement would be a major sin on an international level, were the international community to permit it. Perhaps the current balance of power today allows for ideas such as these to emerge. However, there is no doubt that such ideas cannot pave the way towards genuine security, lasting peace or a historic settlement to a conflict that has lasted for decades. We demand that the international community safeguard its credibility and uphold the principles it has established and called on the two parties to acknowledge. Those principles came to be required for a settlement, and most Palestinians believed in them and struggled for the last three decades to achieve them, since the signing of the Oslo Accords. If those principles are neglected, the credibility of the international community would be at stake and the position of the Palestinians, who haveembraced the path towards achieving just peace and political settlement, would be weakened. In conclusion, I was appalled to hear a while ago a clear call to exclude Palestinian President Abu Mazen, characterizing him as nota true partner in making peace. Such rhetoric demonstrates ill intentions vis-a-vis the Palestinian President and a real cause for concern. This way of thinking clearly reflects a personal problem, because I strongly believe that if Abu Mazen does not sign, no other Palestinian will sign. Those are the ambitions and rights of a people and not a leadership problem. I heard similar rhetoric 15 years ago, targeting another Palestinian President. Both of them rejected the proposal and did not give up. The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.
