Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/703) and his
Special Representative, Mr. Jan Kubis, for his briefing.
I also welcome the contribution of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, Mr. Zalmai Rassoul,
to today's debate.

I will focus my statement on three areas - the
recent Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan, progress on
transition and the strength of regional cooperation and
support to Afghanistan.

First, with regard to Tokyo, there has been
significant progress on development in Afghanistan
over the last decade. Millions more children attend
schools, and 85 per cent of the population now has
access to basic health care facilities. But Afghanistan
will need further support to maintain the progress. The
Tokyo Conference brought the international community
together to respond to the challenge. Maj or commitments
were made by international donors to demonstrate long-
term support for Afghanistan to a total of $16 billion
over four years. The United Kingdom has committed to
maintaining funding at current levels - £178 million a
year every year for five years.

The Afghan Government has acknowledged that it
must play its part in return. The Mutual Accountability
Framework adopted at Tokyo commits the Afghan
Government to improving governance, undertaking
electoral reforms, tackling corruption and promoting
human rights, especially those of women. We look
forward to working with the Afghan Government in
achieving those goals over the coming months and
years.

Secondly, with regard to transition, the transition of
responsibility for security arrangements to the Afghan
authorities is progressing well. Seventy-five per cent
of the Afghan population will soon live in regions
where the Afghan National Security Forces have taken

the lead for security arrangements. The fact that there
has been no significant deterioration of public order in
areas where transition has taken place is a testament to
the success of that programme.

The issue of so-called green on blue attacks has
featured prominently this week. The security of our
deployed forces in Afghanistan - or anywhere in
the world - remains a top priority, but that does not
imply any shift in the commitment of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to partnering with,
training, advising and assisting our counterparts in the
Afghan National Security Forces.

It is the tragedy of all conflicts that civilians often
carry the heaviest burden of suffering. The protection
of the Afghan civilian population remains at the core
of ISAF's military strategy. ISAF forces work hard to
minimize levels of civilian casualties. As the report of
the Secretary-General once again highlights, ISAF has
had considerable success in that respect. On the other
hand, the United Kingdom notes with grave concern
that the insurgency continues to target civilians
indiscriminately.

Thirdly, with respect to regional cooperation, the
United Kingdom welcomes the significant progress
made through the Istanbul process. The United
Kingdom is one of a number of countries supporting
the process, sharing expertise and providing technical
assistance where requested. The United Kingdom
Foreign Secretary participated in the Kabul ministerial
conference in June, where we offered our support for
confidence-building measures on disaster management,
counter-terrorism, counter-narcotics and for chambers
of commerce. Regional cooperation of that type will be
key in supporting the future stability of Afghanistan,
and it is reassuring to see such commitment from all
involved.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has a vital role to play,
both during and beyond transition, in coordinating
international efforts and supporting the Government
of Afghanistan as it delivers on its commitments. It is
important that we find the right level of funding for
UNAMA's activities, just as it is essential that clear
strategic criteria underpin decisions to find budget
efficiencies. Special Representative Kubis has our
full support in that regard, as he seeks to ensure that
UNAMA continues to implement its core mandate as
set out in resolution 2041 (2012).
Over the course of 2012, the Afghan Government
has made a number of significant undertakings. In
parallel, from the Chicago Summit in May to the
Kabul Ministerial Conference in June and the Tokyo
Conference on Afghanistan in July, the international
community has demonstrated that its commitment to
Afghanistan is for the long term. Let me conclude by
making clear that the United Kingdom will continue
to work with the people and the Government of
Afghanistan, as well as the international community, to
build a stable future for the country.

