I would like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. I would also like to express my appreciation for his efforts and dedication during his term in office. I wish him every success in his new and challenging job. We reiterate our call to the Israelis and the Palestinians to take steps towards solving the conflict and to re-engage in meaningful negotiations on all final-status issues. We urge both sides to engage with the members of the Middle East Quartet and other regional players in that regard. We believe that the normalization of relations between Israel and certain Arab States is a significant step, and we hope that development will also give impetus to reviving the Middle East peace process with the aim of achieving a two-State solution. The decision by the Palestinian Authority to resume civilian and security coordination with Israel is most welcome and will hopefully also improve prospects for resuming peace negotiations. Regarding the situation on the ground, we call on all parties to refrain from any unilateral steps that undermine the viability of the two-State solution. We call on Israel to halt the continued settlement expansion and demolitions in the occupied Palestinian territories, including in East Jerusalem and in sensitive areas such as Har Homa, Givat Hamatos and Area E-1. We also call upon all States to distinguish between the territory of the State of Israel and the territories occupied since 1967. We repeat our call for preventing all acts of violence against civilians, including acts of terror, incitement and provocation. We condemn the continued firing of rockets from Gaza towards Israel and any other form of violence targeting civilian populations. We encourage the Palestinian factions to commit to the intra-Palestinian reconciliation process and reach an agreement on holding presidential and legislative elections. We also share the concern mentioned in the report of the Secretary- General (S/2020/1234) about the continued arrest of human rights defenders and peace activists by all parties. We remind the parties of their obligation to respect the freedom of expression and assembly. Finally, I would also like to reiterate the important role that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) plays in terms of stability for the region. We also acknowledge the Agency's efforts aimed at mitigating the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic on Palestinian refugees. Estonia continues to support the work of UNRWA financially and urges all other countries to do the same.
