Mr. Manis (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Our fate is
to seek refuge yet again in the Council, the house and
citadel of legitimacy, the pulpit of the international
community where justice must be uniformly applied to
all without discrimination or nepotism.

In this, we have been disappointed time and
again. In the wake of every heinous crime, the Council
has proven itself unable to take a resolute decision on
the side of right, giving Israel a green light to
implement ever more atrocious crimes, such as
building its separation fence and attempting to murder
Palestinian President Abu Amar or to send him into
exile. Its State terrorism is most horrifically illustrated
in the liquidation and extrajudicial killings of the
symbols of Palestinian resistance. Peace-loving peoples
throughout the world were still reeling from the
assassination of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin when they
learned of yet another war crime, this one even more
flagrant: the murder of Abdel Aziz Al-Rantisi and his
bodyguards.

The Sudan condemns the unprecedented
organized State terrorism deployed by Israel. We recall
that we remain under the umbrella of this Organization
only because we uphold the principles of international
and humanitarian law and the Charter and its
guarantees, whose provisions ensure that the prestige
of the Organization and its machinery are only as
effective as the commitment of its members to
implementing them on an equal footing. Where is that
equality? A colonizing, usurping State, which has
violated all laws, norms and conventions - especially
the Fourth Geneva Convention - and has crossed the
line is now before the Council. What does the Council
do?

We have two choices: either we achieve
consensus in the Council and put an end to these
episodes of terrorism and extrajudicial killings, or we
give Israel another green light to commit yet another
crime that is even more heinous. People all over the
world are waiting, looking to us. What is the Council
doing besides talking about the road map, the Quartet
and other machinery and plans for peaceful settlement?
Let us stop the killing machine first. Talking about a
peaceful settlement under these circumstances is
comparable to looking for Never-Never Land.

