Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his presence and participation

in this meeting. Bolivia would also like to thank the
Russian Federation for its initiative in convening this
emergency meeting of the Security Council. Today is a
dark day in the history of the Council. Three permanent
members have made the decision, in violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, to take unilateral action
against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
another State Member of the Organization.

Bolivia would like to clearly and categorically
express its condemnation ofthe use ofchemical weapons
or the use of chemical substances as weapons, as it is
unjustifiable and criminal wherever and whenever it
happens, by whomever, given it constitutes a serious
crime against international law and international
peace and security. Those responsible for committing
such terrible and criminal acts must be identified,
investigated, prosecuted and punished with the utmost
rigour. Bolivia continues to demand a transparent
and impartial investigation to determine who the
culprits are.

Aside from that topic, the purpose of this meeting
is linked to the fact that, as I stated, three permanent
members of the Council have used force in breach
of the Charter. It is impossible to combat the alleged
violation of international law by violating international
law. Bolivia is surprised by the fact that, given that, they
have a greater a greater responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, the permanent
Council members bypass the United Nations when it
suits them. They advocate for multilateralism as long
as it serves their purposes and then simply discard it.
When multilateralism is no longer in their interest, it no
longer concerns them.

This is not the only case in which, sadly, unilateral
action has been used. We recall, and will not tire in
recalling, such use in Iraq in 2003 and in Libya in 2011.
Any such action must be authorized by the Security
Council under the Charter of the United Nations. All
unilateral actions run counter to international law, as
well as to the values and principles of the Charter. Bolivia
rejects the use and the threat of the use of force. Unilateral
actions not only respond to the specific interests of
those who carry them out, but are also measures that
are - allow me to use the word - imperialist. It so
happens that the empires that we mentioned earlier
consider themselves morally superior to the rest of
the world. They consider themselves exceptional and
indispensable, and therefore believe that they are above
the law and international law, but in reality the interest
of those who unilaterally use force and violate the
Charter is not to advance democracy or freedom or to
combat the use of chemical weapons. Their goal is to
expand their power and domination.

What we have witnessed over the past few hours
is an attack on the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism, which has not begun the work that was
scheduled to begin today. A unilateral attack is an attack
on multilateral organizations, such as the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. It is an
attack on the Council and its primary responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security. It is an
attack on the Charter, and it is an attack on the entire
international community. I wonder, with regard to the
permanent members that used force just a few hours
ago, how much money have they invested in arming
and training the armed groups in Syria? What natural
resources are they after? With what moral authority
will they be able invoke the Charter in the future?

Sadly, the history of violating the purposes and
principles of the Charter is a long one. We mentioned
Libya and Iraq, which were recent cases. The unilateral
decision concerning Jerusalem also sent another
absolutely clear signal of the lack of respect for
international law. Who are the ones selling weapons to
those who are bombing civilians in Yemen? Who are
the ones who rejected the Paris Agreement on climate
change? Who are the ones who stepped away from the
global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration?
Who are the ones who build walls?

We nevertheless believe that it is also important
to talk about history over the long term. Above all,
we have been experiencing the consequences of the
havoc wreaked by some of the colonialist Powers and
of their disdain for international law in the Middle
East that dates back over 100 years. We are currently
reliving the same scenario in Syria, characterized by
total disregard for international law. To a certain extent,
we relived it, for example, when the United Kingdom
refused to return the sovereignty of the Malvinas
islands to Argentina or when the Chagos Archipelago
issue was not resolved. I hope that the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice concerning that
matter will be respected. In other words, we are talking
about a whole range of policies that are detrimental to
international peace and security.

The Permanent Representative of the United States
said that the United States, her country, has its finger
on the trigger - "locked and loaded". Of course, we
clearly heard her words with a great deal of concern and
sadness. We know that the United States has aircraft
carriers, satellites, smart bombs and an arsenal of
nuclear weapons, and we also know that it has nothing
but scorn for international law. But we have this - we
have the purposes and principles of the Charter, and
ultimately, as history has shown time and again, those
principles will prevail.

