Mr. Owada (Japan): More than a year has passed
since the Security Council held extensive discussions and
issued a presidential statement on the agenda item we are
discussing today. We were very much aware then, as we
are now, that it is necessary for humanitarian
organizations - those within the United Nations system as
well as others, such as the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) - to conduct their operations on the
ground under difficult and dangerous circumstances. Thus,
we called upon all parties concerned to ensure the safety
and security of those personnel who are dedicated to
saving the lives of people in areas of conflict. It was our
hope then that there would be no more incidents where
the lives of such personnel were threatened, aid goods
and material looted, or entire humanitarian operations
jeopardized. Unfortunately, that has not been the case.
From many areas affected by conflict -
Afghanistan, Angola, Burundi, the northern Caucasus, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kosovo, Rwanda,
Sudan and Tajikistan - we have continued to receive
tragic reports of humanitarian personnel being attacked,
abducted or murdered, and humanitarian supplies looted.
The need for the international community to cope with
this situation is clearly ongoing and urgent. It is up to the
Security Council, in discharging its responsibilities for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to take
action in that effort.

The issue of the protection of humanitarian
assistance in conflict situations is a complex and
multidimensional one. Based on the discussions we had
in this Council last May, as well as the discussions of the
General Assembly, which led to its resolution 52/167,
together with the report of the First Periodical Meeting on
International Humanitarian Law, convened by the
Government of Switzerland in January at Geneva, which
discussed this issue in depth, and also the report of the
Secretary-General before us today, I believe that the
problem may be considered in the following three major
aspects.

First is the aspect of dissemination of awareness and
advocacy of the problem. The lack of respect for basic
human rights and international humanitarian law among
people in conflict-affected areas, including the leaders of
warring parties, has resulted in disregard among warring
factions for the basic principles on which those
humanitarian operations are based. An attempt to
annihilate certain social groups in opposition - whether
ethnic, religious or otherwise - sometimes becomes the
very purpose of the conflict and thus results in total
disregard for human rights. Under such circumstances, the
logic that those who give assistance to the enemy make
themselves the target of attack can come to prevail.

The second aspect is that of the legal framework for
protection. This concerns the adequacy of international
instruments in protecting humanitarian personnel. Among
the most important to be discussed in this regard is the

 

question of implementation of such instruments by the
international community through strict application of
relevant rules of law, including the prosecution of those
who violate them. This would send a clear signal by the
international community not to allow a culture of impunity.

The third aspect is in the area of practical measures
for protection. This includes such practical matters as
measures aimed at minimizing security risks and those
aimed at remedying any existing security risks.

As for the first aspect, the report of the Secretary-
General correctly points out that the advocacy of
humanitarian principles is critically important in avoiding
extreme situations where a humanitarian operation itself is
seen as a hostile act by one or the other warring party.
When tensions stemming from ethnic, religious or other
rivalries reach the level of conflicts of mutual annihilation,
it is impossible for humanitarian organizations to conduct
their operations without provoking hostile action against
them from one side or the other. The dissemination of
knowledge and understanding of basic human rights and
humanitarian principles, including the right of refugees and
other victims of war to live and to have access to basic
materials, is the most fundamental deterrent against such
situations.

The international community, including bodies within
the United Nations system such as the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the United Nations Children's Fund, as well as other
humanitarian organizations such as the ICRC, should
redouble in a coordinated manner its advocacy efforts,
especially in regions of potential conflict. The Security
Council, for its part, can strongly support those efforts by
urging Member States to respond positively to them and to
cooperate with them. It can also facilitate the process by
requesting the Secretary-General to promote cooperation
through more effective measures, for example through the
use of his special representatives and envoys for such
purposes.

With respect to the second aspect of the issue, the
adequacy of existing international instruments in providing
protection for humanitarian personnel is a problem we
should address in a more serious manner. Here I should like
to propose that the Council consider the possibility of
requesting the Secretary-General to conduct a thorough
study of this problem, including the possibility of a
comprehensive convention covering all aspects of
humanitarian assistance in the context of the changing
characteristics of today's conflicts. In the meantime,
however, as one of the first countries to become party to
the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel, Japan calls upon all Member States
to join it as soon as possible.

Ensuring a more effective implementation of
international humanitarian law is another critical
dimension of the legal aspect of the issue. In this context,
I wish to draw the attention of the Council to the
significance of the establishment of the International
Criminal Court. Under the Statute of this Court, which
was adopted in July this year, attacks against
humanitarian personnel constitute war crimes which
would come under the jurisdiction of the Court.

We must not ignore the fact that, even with the
establishment of the International Criminal Court, the
primary responsibility for prosecuting the perpetrators of
international humanitarian law lies with Member States.
The importance of the fight against the culture of
impunity at the national level through the prosecution of
perpetrators, therefore, should be emphasized in the
advocacy activities of various organizations, as well as in
any future actions of the Security Council on this issue.

The third aspect concerns a number of problems
which have to be addressed at the practical level in order
to enhance the security of refugees, as well as
humanitarian personnel. We must first of all consider how
to minimize the security risks to such personnel on the
ground. Ensuring the neutrality and security of refugee
camps by such means as separating combatants and
civilians is, in the view of Japan, a complicated but
essential task which has to be implemented with decisive
action. Stemming the illicit flow of arms to and in Africa
would also significantly improve the security of
personnel. Tackling these issues was recommended in the
report of the Secretary-General on peace and development
in Africa.

On this score, my delegation expresses its full
support to the delegation of the United States, the
coordinator of the working group on the security of
refugee camps, in achieving effective and practical results.
My delegation, as the coordinator of the working group
on illicit arms flows, expresses its own determination to
achieve concrete results in this area, taking into
consideration the views expressed at the ministerial
meeting of the Council held just last week.

 

The appropriate training of humanitarian personnel and
the adherence of humanitarian organizations to the principle
of strict impartiality are other factors which need to be
addressed in order to minimize the security risk on the
ground. Japan welcomes the development of the security
training package by the United Nations Security
Coordinator in collaboration with UNHCR. Japan reiterates
its commitment to make contributions of about $1 million
to the United Nations to support security measures for
United Nations personnel, and calls upon other States to
contribute to the Trust Fund that was formalized in June for
that purpose.

My delegation would also like to suggest that the
Council take into account in its future actions the code of
conduct for organizations participating in humanitarian
operations, developed by the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies.

Taking measures to protect humanitarian operations
from existing security risks is another important task. The
strict adherence of humanitarian organizations to the
recognized principles of humanitarian assistance continues
to be essential for ensuring the security of humanitarian
operations. For this reason, my delegation is of the View
that humanitarian operations should as much as possible
avoid relying on forces to protect their activities.

In reality, however, there has in recent years been a
trend for a humanitarian operation itself to become the
target of an armed attack, making the provision of armed
protection indispensable. Even in this situation, however,
such protection should be commensurate with the potential
threat. Against threats from bandits, protection by civilian
police could be more effective. Against threats of a military
nature, armed protection by military organizations may have
to be considered as an option, although the involvement of
armed force for the purpose of such protection can be
counter-productive. The Security Council, in deciding to
provide assistance to such humanitarian relief activities,
should carefully weigh this factor. It is the considered View
of my delegation that the following conditions should be
met when United Nations peacekeeping forces are to be
involved as an instrument for the protection of humanitarian
efforts.

First, the mandate of such an operation must be clearly
defined and its terms of reference precisely specified.

Secondly, the actual situation on the ground must be
such that under this mandate the mission of protection may
realistically be expected to be accomplished through the
means offered.

Thirdly, the operation must be equipped with the
necessary human and material resources to accomplish the
mission.

Lastly, the Security Council must closely monitor the
situation so that the operation can adapt to the rapidly
changing situation on the ground.

There are many more issues which I have not
touched upon today but which need to be addressed in
this area from the viewpoint of how to ensure the security
of humanitarian efforts. I wish to conclude my
intervention by reverting to the most fundamental point
that must be constantly kept in mind - namely, that the
problem of refugees and other humanitarian crises can
only be eradicated through attacking the underlying root
problems. It is therefore necessary for the international
community, and especially for the Security Council, to
tackle these situations as an organic and comprehensive
whole and to take a holistic approach to the conflict
through efforts to bring about a ceasefire, ensuring strict
observance of such a ceasefire and through engaging
already at an early stage in rehabilitation and reintegration
of the people involved.

