Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, I thank you, Madam President,
for giving me the opportunity to address the Council. I
should like also to take this opportunity to congratulate
you on the outstanding manner in which you have been
guiding the Council's work during the month of April
2012.

The Palestinian question is becoming
increasingly urgent as a major challenge to the world's
conscience. Those who think they can ignore it may
well face a rude awakening, given the growing
deterioration of the situation, both on the ground and
politically.

As settlements continue to undermine efforts
towards a two-State solution, the recent launching of
projects and bidding for the construction of 1,121
residential structures is the latest instalment in the
vicious circle of Israeli decision-making, which has
dashed the tentative hopes of those who are intent on
achieving a negotiated solution. Our Committee
therefore calls upon the Security Council to act
resolutely in order to put an end to the construction of
settlements in Palestinian territory and to dismantle
them. We support the fact-finding mission recently
authorized by the Human Rights Council for that
purpose, and we call for a revitalization of the work of
the high contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention.

This major concern is exacerbated by the fact that
the peace process has stalled, despite the exploratory
contacts made in Amman under Jordanian auspices.
While the setting for this enduring scene in the
diplomatic repertoire may vary with the circumstances,
the story, unfortunately, does not change at all.

Furthermore, the serious financial crisis affecting
the Palestinian Authority could stymie the progress
already made in its State-building efforts, unless an
outpouring of donor generosity can counter the policy
of economic strangulation it is facing. In addition, the
agreement on intra-Palestinian reconciliation signed in
Doha should be implemented, and Palestine's
application for membership in the United Nations
should be given proper and fair consideration.

It is easy to understand the deep frustration of the
Palestinian leaders, who cannot continue to accept the
unbearable status quo indefinitely. The international
community must therefore take bold and urgent action
to break the deadlock while the two-State solution can
still be salvaged. In addition, the Quartet and its
regional partners must remain firmly resolved to
enforce the deadline set for the end of 2012 to reach
the long-awaited agreement. We therefore call upon the
parties to return to the negotiating table, on the basis of
the guarantees clearly set out by the Quartet for a final
settlement based on the 1967 borders and minimal
confidence-building measures, including a complete
halt to settlement activities, the lifting of the blockade
against Gaza and the release of Palestinian political
prisoners.

The Committee, for its part, has continued to
make a constructive contribution to achieving our
shared aim of having two States living in peace and
security. In February, we convened in Cairo the
Seminar on Assistance to the Palestinian People with a
view to examining the cost of the Israeli occupation. It
was clearly shown that once there is an end to the
occupation, which costs at least $7 billion a year, the
Palestinian State will be economically independent and
will not become an assisted State or a bankrupt one.

The United Nations International Meeting on the
Question of Palestine, held in Geneva in April,
afforded an opportunity to review the humanitarian and
legal aspects of the critical problem of Palestinian
political prisoners held in Israeli prisons. It is
abundantly clear that no agreement will be possible
unless a just solution is found that will result in the
release of the 4,400 such prisoners. For that reason,
various remedies have been considered, including
appeals to the International Court of Justice and the
General Assembly to have them determine the status of
those prisoners under the Geneva Conventions, and the
sending of a United Nations fact-finding mission to
investigate the conditions of their detention. Indeed,
this problem - which remains in the headlines, as we
recently saw when 1,200 prisoners began a hunger
strike - will require the constant attention of the
United Nations, and in particular of the Security
Council.

