Mr. Gurirab (Namibia): First of all, I should like to
welcome Mr. Howard Wolpe, a personal friend of long
standing who continues to provide service to Africa
beyond his days in Washington as Chairman of the House
Subcommittee on Africa.

 

Before I proceed with my statement, let me say that a
Kenya Airways Airbus flight with 168 passengers and 10
crew members crashed into the sea en route from Abidjan,
Cote d'Ivoire, to Nairobi, via Lagos, Nigeria. Without a
passengers' manifest, we will not know for some time the
nationalities of all the people who perished. We are
shocked and saddened by this tragedy, and we express our
sympathy and condolences to the Government and people
of Kenya and to the other nations at this hour of grief and
sorrow.

As we conclude this unprecedented "Month of Africa",
dedicated to African issues and to the search for solutions
to them, we can look back with appreciation on the
immense efforts expended by the American presidency, at
many levels, in managing the meetings and organizing
various useful consultations that brought all the interested
parties together. It was your baby, Mr. President, and we
once again salute you for your brilliant leadership and
commend your dutiful associates for a job well done.
We are heartened to see that President Chiluba chose
to delay his departure in order to participate personally in
this wrap-up Council meeting. President Chiluba is
coordinating, with immense conviction, the peace process
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo and also,
in particular, spearheading the speedy implementation of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. His important statement this
morning has forcefully renewed the urgency of moving the
process forward and removing all the obstacles, so that we
can concentrate on the real problems of how to achieve
progress, instead of wasting time and resources on needless
political gamesmanship.

We are also happy to see here the Foreign Minister of
South Africa and the representative of the current Chairman
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), President
Bouteflika of Algeria. My sister, Ms. Zuma, celebrated her
birthday during this "Month of Africa" in New York, under
the frigid weather conditions, away from the tropical
sunshine, as did my brother, Mr. Salim. And, believe it or
not, yours truly did as well.

I know that they have been working hard during their
stay in New York with a View to accelerating the
implementation of the commitments collectively made here
by the African regional leaders and the Security Council.
The United Nations Secretary-General too has shared with
the leaders his road map for the effective deployment of the
United Nations peacekeeping force in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The presidential statement adopted last Wednesday
and the draft resolution that the Council will consider
must further strengthen the momentum as we proceed,
bearing in mind the forthcoming summit of regional
leaders in Lusaka, as a follow-up to the "Month of
Africa".

The unprecedented meeting that you, Mr. President,
convened on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo was attended by many African heads of State.
For the first time, heads of State parties to a conflict
addressed the Security Council. Indeed, these leaders once
again reiterated their commitment to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, which has created a momentum that will
encourage all of us to shoulder our collective
responsibilities for the full and speedy implementation of
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. Just as the leaders have
renewed their commitment, we expect that the Security
Council and the international community as a whole will
also commit themselves to doing the same.

With this in mind, we repeat our appeal to the
international community to provide the required material
assistance and political support to the Joint Military
Commission (JMC). To this end, we are strengthened in
our expectation by the pledges made by Canada, France,
the United States, the United Kingdom, Belgium, Japan
and other friendly countries to the JMC and towards
buttressing the inter-Congolese dialogue, under the able
direction of Sir Ketumile Masire. We thank them all for
this demonstrated generosity and call upon other friends
and partners to emulate them.

The leaders have done their part: they signed the
Ceasefire Agreement, continue to uphold it under difficult
conditions and travelled all the way to New York to
reaffirm their commitment to go forward. The Security
Council must not delay the authorization of the speedy
deployment of military observers, to be followed by a
full-fledged peacekeeping operation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Here we would like to emphasize
the importance of providing that peacekeeping force,
under a Chapter VII mandate, with logistical and financial
resources to deal with the situation on the ground and
hasten the achievement of peace, stability and
reconciliation in the country.

We will cooperate with your delegation, Mr.
President, and the other delegations in the Security
Council to ensure that unnecessary delay in authorizing
the deployment of the military observers and
peacekeepers is averted. We believe that Argentina will

 

start its presidency tomorrow on a firm foundation, and we
admire Ambassador Listre's personal attributes and
devotion to the principles and ideals of the United Nations
Charter.

We all agree that the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has internal and external
dimensions. Also, the economic and social problems
confronting the Congolese people today are a result of over
30 years of the cruellest dictatorship, abuse and neglect.
Therefore, the international community should assist that
people in their efforts to build and consolidate a new and
inclusive dispensation. While the Congolese people are
working towards democratizing their country, it is important
that other countries in the region should democratize
likewise.

In terms of the reconstruction of the Great Lakes
region and Central Africa, the proposal made by the
delegation of France for an international conference on
peace, stability, democracy and development in the region,
to be organized by the United Nations and the OAU is long
overdue, as it is critical for the security, development and
prosperity of all. Namibia supports this proposal fully. I
take note of the same position expressed by President
Chiluba.

In African culture, a homeless person is considered a
rootless, disoriented and alienated orphan. Homelessness is
a personal disgrace and a shame to one's lineage,
accompanied by huge mental trauma. It is therefore no
surprise that Africans, as well as, happily, many other
delegations and indeed, no less a person than the
indefatigable United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Mrs. Ogata - have called for urgent and
increased assistance to mitigate the inhuman and shameful
situation in which many millions of African refugees and
internally displaced persons find themselves. Generous and
sustained assistance in response to the United Nations Inter-
Agency Consolidated Appeals to help these unfortunate
fellow human beings is urgently required. These women,
men and children are helplessly trapped in armed conflict
and civil wars. They yearn for world solidarity.

Once again, it is imperative that the unceasing
provision of arms to rebel movements and other armed
groups in Africa end if the continent is to enjoy lasting
peace, security and stability. Arms-producing countries,
most of which are non-African, can assist us in this regard
by ensuring that this dangerous phenomenon is prevented.

On another troubled front, we have all heard the
statistics on HIV/AIDS in Africa and have been told
about its devastating effects. We call again on our
trustworthy friends and partners to work with us in
containing and eventually defeating this global pandemic,
which is worst in Africa.

Former President Mandela, with great passion,
expressed his vision for the Arusha peace process. These
are, in part, his words:

"The misery of the Burundian people affects us
all and diminishes the humanity of all of us.
The international community turns its attention
and its energy to this matter not as a favour to
that country or continent. The failure of those
responsible to provide conditions of security
and social development to the people of
Burundi does not represent some errant
occurrence on the periphery. It hits at the heart
of our common human obligation... These are
amongst the most sensitive issues in the
negotiations and will have to be faced squarely
if the process is to lead to a durable peace in
Burundi." (S/PV.4091, pp. 4-5)

Moreover, at the same meeting of the Council on
Burundi, it was recognized that it is important to provide
the Arusha peace process with abundant support. We are
hopeful that such support - political, logistical and
financial - will continue to be extended to President
Mandela to carry out his mandate successfully in the
shortest possible time. This, we know, is the burning wish
of the majority of the suffering people of Burundi. We
must avoid at all costs another human disaster in that
country.

Regarding the situation in Angola, the concerns
expressed in the Council were multiple, but the
humanitarian situation was at the top of the list of
priorities, with many thousands of refugees crossing into
the Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Zambia and Namibia in dire need of food, shelter and
health care. We expect that with the extension of State
administration throughout the territory, normalcy and
safety will soon be re-established. In this context, the
donor community should generously continue contributing
both financially and in kind to the United Nations
Inter-Agency Appeal for Angola to assist the relevant
agencies to do their life-saving work effectively.

 

We welcome the reiteration by the Angolan
Government of its commitment to the Lusaka Protocol. This
makes the task of the United Nations, the OAU and the
Southern African Development Community easier. It is also
noteworthy that the Government has ratified the Status-of-
Mission Agreement. This will, no doubt, be followed by
practical arrangements for the Mission to start its work in
earnest. We once again demand that UNITA comply with
its obligations under the Lusaka Protocol and Security
Council resolutions without any conditions.

In this context, we strongly applaud Ambassador
Robert Fowler for his imaginative and active Chairmanship
and for the excellent work being done by the sanctions
Committee on Angola. We await the consideration by the
Council of the full report and the recommendations on the
Violations of its sanctions imposed against UNITA. Member
States and all others must comply with their obligations in
stopping assistance to and collaboration with UNITA.

Let me conclude by stating that while human beings
are habitually linked to the past, our salvation is essentially
a function of how we prepare ourselves for the future.
Thus, as we move further into the twenty-first century,
rather than remaining for ever prisoners of the past, we
must, without forgetting the past, look to the future, armed
with determination and confidence; and as we leave this
memorable encounter in New York, we must act together
for the good of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Africa, the United Nations and the world at large. That will,
indeed, be the most precious gift that we can give to the
children of the world. So let us begin that difficult but
inevitably rewarding journey now.

