Mr. Akbaruddin (India): Ibegin by congratulating
you, Mr. President, and the other new members who
joined the Security Council earlier this month. I
also thank the Secretary-General for passionately
outlining his vision and ideas for furthering conflict
prevention and sustaining peace in his maiden address
to the Council.

Today's agenda relates to one of the primary
purposes in the Charter of the United Nations, one that
is listed in the first Article. We are therefore grateful
to the delegation of Sweden for proactively initiating
this debate and for preparing the useful concept note
(S/2017/6, annex).

The wisdom of the age-old adage, prevention is
better than cure, is self-evident. At the United Nations,
your compatriot, Mr. President, former Secretary-
General Dag Hammarskjold, is said to have been the
first to introduce the term "preventive diplomacy" more
than 50 years ago into our lexicon. The Agenda for
Peace of former Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-
Ghali, unveiled in the 1990s, comes to mind as another
milestone in that saga. Yet efforts at prevention have
failed to lay down firm institutional roots. That raises
the question therefore - why have we not got it right?
Is it because we do not have the right tools or is it that
we are using the right tools in the wrong way? It is from
that perspective that we offer a few of our views.

First, India believes that, for the United Nations
to develop a culture of conflict prevention, it needs to
recognize that the primary responsibility for sustaining
peace lies with Member States. The United Nations
can supplement what are essentially home-grown
processes. The emphasis on analytical instruments and
tools, such as fact-finding, agenda-setting, diplomatic
initiatives and peace operations, is valuable, but
represents too narrow an approach. Such efforts can, at
best, supplement the roles and situations of the Member
States concerned. Yet we provide too few resources to
strengthen the institutional inadequacies of Member
States, and instead we focus on strengthening the
institutional arrangements of the United Nations.

Secondly, prevention efforts can be effective only
if they are undertaken with the consent and cooperation
of the Member States concerned and are not seen as an
imposition. After all, such efforts are aimed at helping
the Member States concerned to do what can be done
and to understand how it can be done. As the saying
goes, you cannot shake hands with a clenched fist.

Thirdly, we need to remember that, while the
mandate provided in the Charter of the United Nations is
vast, the United Nations cannot do it all by itself. There
can be, and are, actors at the local, national, subregional
and regional levels that may be in a better position to
deal with a situation and can manage the issues better.
The United Nations needs to recognize and act after
taking into account the diversity of situations and the
availability of instruments. Fourthly, talk of promoting
sustainable peace and preventing conflicts will cut little
ice if there are no resources to back it. The sustaining
peace resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and
the Security Council in April last year (resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262) did not
lead to agreement, even on the allocation of 1 per cent
of the annual peacekeeping budget to those activities.
Are we now ready to change that mindset?

Fifthly, the established international order is being
upended through economic, political and technological
shifts. Even long-established States are unable to fully
respond to the new factors and forces that are being
unleashed. History teaches us that ungoverned swathes
often become grounds for competition, or become
storehouses for the germination of new threats. Ye,
we have no global governance architecture in frontier
areas, such as cyberspace, outer space and the oceans.
We ignore them at our peril.

Sixthly, while the world is changing, the institutional
architecture primarily responsible for the areas ofpeace
and security remains frozen. The Security Council,
which takes decisions on behalf of "we the peoples",
represents an increasingly small minority of the world's
population. If it is to make rules for "the peoples", it
needs to adequately reflect new realities. Addressing
the new issues, threats and challenges of the twenty-
first century requires an updated, not an outdated
instrument. A Security Council that has lost its
legitimacy cannot be an effective tool for addressing the
challenges of conflict prevention and sustaining peace.

Putting the sustaining peace agenda on a firm
footing requires a coherent and comprehensive strategy.
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate as
a contribution to that noble objective.

