Mr. M'Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank Ambassador Osorio for his 90-day report on the
activities of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006), as well as for his commendable
work at the head of the Committee.

We also take note of the latest report of the Board of
Governors (GOV/2012/55) of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) on the implementation of the
Islamic Republic of Iran's Safeguards Agreement to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
as well as the midterm report of the Panel of Experts
established by resolution 1929 (2010).

The efforts of the international community over
the past 12 months with respect to Iran's nuclear
programme have not led to success, despite the stepping
up of diplomatic initiatives such as the activities carried
out by the E3+3 group. In its resolution GOV/20ll/69,
the Board of Governors underscored the importance for
both Iran and the IAEA of intensifying their dialogue in
order to urgently resolve the most critical pending issues.
Iran was called upon to engage without preconditions
in talks aimed at re-establishing trust with respect to
the wholly peaceful nature of its programme. In the
final analysis, talks between the Agency and Iranian
authorities did not lead to the hoped for results.

The reports of both the IAEA and the Panel
of Experts note unequivocally that there has been
no agreement on a structured approach to resolve
questions relating to possible military dimensions of
Iran's nuclear programme, and that there has not been a
positive response from Iran with respect to the request
for access to the Parchin site.

Concerning this situation, which continues to
erode a climate of trust, Togo would like once again
to call on the Islamic Republic of Iran not only to
honour its commitments as a party to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons but also to
pursue good-faith negotiations with the E3+3.

We note to Iran's commitment, reiterated on
1 November, to hold a dialogue with the IAEA. We
hope that the meeting in Tehran being held with the
Agency today will allow for an advance in cooperation
between the two parties.

To conclude, I would like to acknowledge the work
of the Group of Experts established by resolution 1929
(2010), which, through consultations, inspections,
investigations and outreach, has reminded States of
the need to fulfil their obligations under the relevant
Security Council resolutions on the Iranian nuclear
issue, namely, the implementation of sanctions in
the areas of export controls, customs, sea and air
transportation, finance and a ban on travel, as well as
to provide reports on such measures.

Togo is particularly pleased that, in May 2013, it
will host the regional seminar mentioned in the final
paragraph of the report of the Group of Experts. That
event will allow the countries of Central and West Africa
to discuss the measures that should be taken to comply
with the sanctions regime of the United Nations on the
issue and to adopt the necessary recommendations.

