Mr. Barg (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): We are very pleased, Sir, to see you presiding
over this important emergency meeting of the Security
Council. We hope it will meet expectations and will be
commensurate with the gravity of the events that have
required its convening. My congratulations go to the
friendly delegation of Mexico on the skill with which it
guided the work ofthe Council last month.

The world is deeply concerned at the
developments in Palestine since dawn today, especially
at those in Ramallah, which has been completely taken
over by Israeli forces, including the headquarters of the
Palestinian Authority.

The Arab summit had just reaffirmed that peace is
the strategic option chosen by the Arab people, and this
is how Israel responded: with a terrorist Zionist tank
and bulldozer attack against towns and villages and
against the headquarters of the Palestinian Authority.
This is not only an attack on the Palestinian people and
on Mr. Arafat himself; it is also an attack on the
successes and achievements of the Beirut Arab summit.
All that remains is the Israeli strategic option, which is
war. This reflects the racist Zionist nature of that entity,
which is built on destruction and deportation.

Today's direct attacks against President Arafat,
the deployment of tanks at his headquarters and the
large number of dead and injured among his aides and
his guards prove that Mr. Sharon's policy continues to
be based on aggression and that Mr. Sharon is ignoring
all the appeals addressed to him by every country in the
world. It is a policy that turns its back on international
law. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya strongly condemns
this criminal Zionist attack, which will lead to further
bloodletting and to the killing of more innocents.

This is a patent example of State terrorism
practised by the Zionist entity against the defenceless
Palestinian people. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
reaffirms that the Security Council, the international
community and the peoples of the world must strongly
condemn this danger now threatening our entire region.
Responsibility for this criminal behaviour lies with the
Zionist entity, as well as with the Powers that enable it
to practise its policy of death and destruction. There is
blatant contempt for all humanitarian norms in these
barbarous acts, and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya calls
upon the Security Council to act in accordance with its
responsibilities by declaring that the Palestinian
question is a case of occupation first and foremost and
that that occupation must end. Any other kind of
decision is bound to fail, just as all the other
agreements and understandings have failed, from Oslo
to Camp David.

