Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you
personally, Madam President, for your impressive
words in commemoration of the victims of 9/11. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands has stood and will stand in
full solidarity with the United States. Our thoughts are
with all those who lost loved ones on that terrible day
17 years ago.

Let me thank the Russian delegation for providing
us with an update on the results of the third trilateral
summit of Astana guarantors in Tehran. I will focus on
three points: first, the risk ofrapid escalation; secondly,
the responsibility ofthe Astana guarantors; and, thirdly,
the need to protect civilians.

First, the risk of rapid escalation involving regional
and international players is great. The potential
consequences of an escalation of violence are horrific.
In our view, there is an urgent need for a real shift of
focus towards diplomacy at the negotiating table, with
the goal of bringing a non-military solution closer.
Only a political solution, in line with resolution 2254
(2016), can end the conflict in a sustainable and
peaceful manner.

Secondly, with regard to the responsibility of the
Astana guarantors and the need for a complete cessation
of hostilities, frankly speaking the Kingdom of the
Netherlands is disappointed with the results of the
Tehran summit. It is our view that it is the responsibility
of the Astana guarantors to uphold the ceasefire
and de-escalation arrangements to which they have
previously agreed, and to protect civilians as a matter
of priority. During the Tehran summit, the Astana
guarantors reiterated their pledge to seek a negotiated
solution to Syria's seven-year conflict, but in practice
we see that two of the three guarantors are instead
getting ready for a full-scale military offensive in Idlib.
On the day of the summit and over the weekend, we saw
escalation instead of de-escalation. It is a continuation
of the well-known pattern of fighting in de-escalation
zones that reminds us of eastern Ghouta and Dar'a
earlier this year.

Ifthe Russian Federation and Iran are serious about
a non-military solution and de-escalation, they need to
cease further military build-up around Idlib and stop
the aerial attacks immediately. It is crucial that the
de-escalation zone be upheld. There needs to be an
immediate and complete ceasefire. We share Turkish
concerns about escalating violence in Idlib and an
imminent humanitarian catastrophe. Turkey already
hosts 3.5 million Syrian refugees. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands appreciates and respects that and fully
shares Turkish concerns.

Thirdly, with regard to the urgent need for the
protection of civilians who encounter terrorism, in
our view all parties involved should exercise utmost
restraint, put the protection of civilians first and allow
unhindered humanitarian access. Civilians are not the
ones who should leave Idlib. We are sceptical about the
concept of corridors or protected evacuation routes,
not in the least because of the enormous number of
civilians in Idlib. For example, if medical evacuations
are attempted, they must be in line with the minimum
standards for humanitarian evacuations that have been
circulated by the United Nations. Parties need to uphold
international humanitarian law throughout Syria, and
in particular in Idlib.

Any measure to counter terrorism must comply with
obligations under international law, in particular human
rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law. Combating terrorism is no excuse
for attacking without distinction or proportionality.
Recent peaceful protests by the civilian population in
Idlib against violence and extremism show that Idlib is
not a hotbed of terrorism. That also became very clear
during the Arria Formula meeting last Friday, at which
Bassma Kodmani stated that civilians are a strong
asset in countering terrorism. As Special Envoy De
Mistura stated last Friday, there must be - and there

is - another way than all-out military escalation.

There are alternatives. We can and should prevent
a terrible tragedy and, at the same time, allow the issue
of Security Council-designated terrorist groups to be
addressed. We call on all actors to use their influence
on the warring parties in Idlib to put the protection
of civilians first. If separating Al-Nusra from armed
groups is the central issue in Idlib, then we need to
listen to the Special Envoy on how to operationalize it.
If the Astana guarantors want international support for
their efforts in that regard, then guarantors must also
be transparent about what exactly they are planning. I
repeat, any plan must put the protection ofcivilians first.

Let me also stress the importance of unimpeded
United Nations humanitarian aid and the protection of
hospitals, schools and humanitarian aid workers. We
are shocked by reports of White Helmets being targeted
once again over the weekend in so-called double-tap
strikes. Over the weekend, three hospitals were struck.
Two Syrian civil defence centres and an ambulance
system were hit. Their coordinates were well known
and deconfliction had taken place. Such developments
and actions are of extreme concern to us.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue
its efforts to achieve accountability for such crimes.
Impunity cannot prevail. In our view, referral of the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court
remains the best option.

