Mr. Radomski (Poland): I would like to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Oscar Naranjo, Vice-President of
the Republic of Colombia, to today's Council meeting.
Let me also thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean Arnault, for a very
informative briefing.

The presidential and legislative elections that
took place in May this year were Colombia's most
peaceful and inclusive in more than 50 years. We
congratulate President-elect Mr. Ivan Duque and hope
for productive, sincere and open cooperation between
the new Administration and the Council.

As the peace process remains an undeniable
success of Colombian society, we would also like to
acknowledge the unquestionable role of President
Santos Calderon and the leaders of the Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun (FARC), who
made it possible and turned an agreement from a piece
of paper into reality on the ground. It serves as a source
of inspiration worldwide and sends a message that
peace is possible, even if it seemed unimaginable just
a few years ago. Intense political will is still required
on both sides to drive the peace process forward. We
strongly believe that the parties will remain united. We
hope that despite the difficulties in the implementation
of the peace process, the general timetable for its
completion will be maintained. We take note of the
recently launched sixth cycle of talks with the National
Liberation Army in Havana and hope that it will bring
tangible results.

The acceptance by Congress of the rules of
procedure of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and its
first public hearings, along with the inauguration of the
new Congress with 10 representatives from the FARC
political party, sends a positive message.

The question of security remains an issue. We
are concerned about the continued insecurity in some
of the conflict-affected areas, including the increase
in the killings of human rights defenders and social
and community leaders. It fuels social mistrust of the
Government's willingness to fulfil its commitments.
The Government's Plan Horus, which has been
implemented in the most vulnerable municipalities, has
yet to produce the desired effect. Suffice it to say that
an additional 22 FARC members were killed during the
reporting period. Also, despite considerable efforts on
the part of the Government, coca cultivation is growing.
There is a close connection between drug trafficking
and the widespread insecurity in some regions near the
strategic drug-trafficking routes. We strongly believe
that the national pact rejecting violence signed on
9 July by outgoing President Santos and President-elect
Duque, as well as key State institutions and political
parties, is a major step towards ensuring that social
leaders will not fear for their lives.

The full political, legal and socioeconomic
reintegration of the former members of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) is essential. We strongly believe
that the adoption of the landmark decree enabling
access to land ownership for former combatants will
offer the strongest possible incentive for the majority
of former FARC-EP members, greatly assisting them
in the uneasy process of reintegration. We hope that it
will be implemented as quickly as possible now that the
election period has ended. The efforts that the National
Reintegration Council has made to ensure a more
gender-sensitive approach to economic reintegration
are visible and have been well received. Once again
we underline that a durable peace can be achieved
only when women and men are equally involved in the
peace process.

In conclusion, Poland fully supports the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, which
continues to play a vital role in facilitating the
implementation of the Peace Agreement. We also
commend the role of the country team and every United
Nations agency present on the ground. While the peace
process is making significant progress, further strong
involvement on the part of the United Nations in

Colombia remains crucially important.
