Mr. Eide: The current situation in Afghanistan is
certainly the most complex that we have witnessed in
many years. However, if managed well, I believe that it
could also become a turning point in our efforts to
bring the conflict to an end. The situation is complex
because we have to keep so many perspectives and
processes in mind at the same time, namely, the need to
ensure an election process that is credible and where
the result can be accepted by the people, the need to
stimulate promising and positive developments in
several sectors in spite of the noise from the election
campaign and an intense fighting season, and the need
to look beyond the elections and shape a more focused
agenda for the next five years, one that will have to
include a credible peace process as an integral part of
the overall strategy. I say we, but, of course, in all
those processes it is the Afghan institutions and the
Afghan people who will have to take the lead. As
always, the role of the international community must
be to provide full support.

The August elections are about more than
choosing Afghanistan's future leaders. They are about
strengthening the people's confidence in democratic
processes and about strengthening Afghanistan's
democratic institutions. They are not only about who
will lead, but also about the legitimacy of leadership. I
have therefore urged all candidates to campaign with
dignity and with fairness. An election campaign will
always be divisive, but in this country at this juncture it
is critically important that campaign disagreements are
managed and are replaced by unity of purpose in
building the country when the next presidential
inauguration takes place. All candidates must keep that
long-term perspective in mind.

I have called on Government institutions and
officials to maintain impartiality during all phases of
the election process. As the Council knows, the
President has issued a decree on non-interference by
State institutions. Ministers and heads of security
institutions have assured me, in my many discussions
with them, of their determination to protect the
integrity of their institutions. We will maintain a
09-38690
continuous dialogue with all of them to address cases
of interference if and when they occur.

I have also called on all candidates to avoid any
inflammatory language and to conduct campaigns
focused on their vision for Afghanistan's future. We
need campaigns that are focused not only on who will
lead the country but on where they will lead it. And I
have called on the international community to avoid
any interference or appearance of interference in the
election process. Any such interference would
undermine the legitimacy of the process, as well as
people's confidence in their future leaders. In
particular, it would harm the future Government's
ability to bring the Afghan people together in a
credible peace process. No one's interests can be
served by an election result that is disputed by the
people and affects the legitimacy of the future
Government.

Those elements - non-interference, a dignified
policy-oriented debate and total international
impartiality - are critical elements of the level playing
field that we all seek to establish. Of course, another
element is the ability of candidates to conduct their
campaigns. I am encouraged to see that the Afghan
media will hold a significant number of presidential
debates during the campaign. I appeal to all media,
including the public media, to ensure that candidates
have fair access. The Minister of the Interior has
offered to provide close protection to candidates during
their campaigning. The Minister of Defence has offered
transportation for candidates, within the limits of his
capabilities. Both measures will contribute to a
credible campaign.

Two weeks ago, I visited a so-called call centre,
where voters can call in to ask questions about the
elections. The centre now receives around 25,000 calls
every week from voters across the country, in
particular young voters. It is an important part of the
efforts of the Independent Election Commission's
outreach programme to mobilize voters. The United
Nations has and will continue to appeal to all voters to
take part in the election process. Such participation is
essential to the legitimacy of the election results and to
the future strength of democratically elected
institutions. Our call goes to all Afghans without any
exceptions.

The Secretary-General's report (8/2009/323)
describes some of the progress we have seen during
09-38690

recent months in strengthening security institutions,
reforming the agricultural and private sectors,
improving revenue collection and the Government's
internal coordination and developing comprehensive
civilian capacity-building programmes. I must say that
there is a totally new momentum in those areas. My
fear, however, is that the noise from the election
campaign and the fighting season will absorb so much
energy and attention that it will overshadow the
positive trends and affect the momentum that has now
developed. If we do not succeed in maintaining that
momentum, then I am afraid we will witness new
stagnation and more disillusionment among the public.

Those positive trends are of course primarily the
result of competent Afghan ministries. But they are
also a result of a strong and long-term commitment by
the international community. We must remain firm in
that long-term commitment, on which continued
progress will depend. However, progress will also
depend upon the short-term ability to respond to new
opportunities.

The work now under way in the Ministry of
Agriculture will result in a gap assessment and
proposals for how to reform the agricultural sector. The
work under way in the Ministry of Finance will result
in a list of priorities for civilian capacity-building
efforts. All those topics will be discussed in the Joint
Coordination Monitoring Board (JCMB) meeting to be
held in a few days' time. That work will also result in a
plan for more ambitious revenue collection. The efforts
under way by the Ministry of Interior and the
international community will result in proposals for a
stronger and reformed Afghan National Police. When
those proposals are presented to us, we must be able to
respond quickly and flexibly. It cannot be that we ask
Afghan authorities year after year to address our
concerns, but when a minister responds we reply that
this year's budget will not allow us to react. Let me
give one example.

This spring, the Ministry of Agriculture asked for
an urgent contribution of $5.5 million for the purchase
of wheat seed, to allow farmers to plant next year's
crop. In spite of a number of appeals, it has not been
possible to provide the resources required. We cannot
end up in a situation where we have to turn to Bill
Gates to meet urgent requirements of that nature. If we
respond quickly and effectively where encouraging
new developments occur, it will stimulate similar
developments in other sectors. But if we fail to
3
respond, then I fear that we could face setbacks even
where progress can now be seen.

But I must emphasize that we are also seeing
some new and promising trends in the international
community's performance. In particular, the review of
United States development policies over the past weeks
has produced important results. I welcome the
readiness to support the new national agriculture
programme and the Government's plans for civilian
capacity-building and for revenue collection. There is a
trend to support Afghan plans and Afghan priorities
much more generously than before. This could
represent a major shift and lead to greater aid
effectiveness and better donor coordination. The shift
in United States counter-narcotics policies, combined
with the new Afghan programme for the development
of alternative livelihoods, could also have a significant
impact on our efforts to combat poppy production.

However, the inequitable distribution of resources
within Afghanistan continues, making it easier for the
insurgency to destabilize previously stable provinces
and districts. There is still a serious lack of reporting
on how and where development resources are spent,
which complicates, of course, planning and
coordination. I hope that the ongoing gap assessment in
key sectors will lead donors to provide more
information about their spending and to a distribution
of resources that provides greater resources for under-
funded provinces.

The United Nations has of course worked closely
with the relevant ministries during the elaboration of
the new plans, which have now been presented. We
will continue this cooperation during the
implementation phase. We are already working with
other ministries to address serious imbalances, such as
the entire educational sector.

There is still much talk about the lack of
coordination, and it is justified. However, I do feel, on
this subject, that many are still discussing yesterday's
debate. The situation has changed over the past few
months, and I believe that we are now turning a corner.
The Afghan Government is better coordinated, there
are encouraging signs in the international community
of better coordination, and the ability of the United
Nations to carry out its coordination mandate has
improved.

More effective and coordinated development
efforts will enable us, of course, to meet the concerns
of the Afghan people and their legitimate demands for
greater economic and social justice, and it will enhance
the people's confidence in their own Government and
in the international community. Then we must also
strengthen our efforts to ensure that the military
engagement of the international community remains
supported by the Afghan people. In his report, the
Secretary-General appeals for a review of the
operations of special forces, which account by far for
the majority of civilian casualties caused by
pro-Government forces. He appeals for a review of the
use of air power in populated areas, which has led to
tragic loss of lives as the result of mistakes, and he
appeals for better training of international military
forces to prepare them better for the Afghan cultural
and political context in which they operate. It is my
view that the political costs of recent mistakes are
simply disproportionate to the military gains and that
such reviews are urgently required.

I therefore strongly welcome General
McChrystal's commitment to a fundamental shift in
attitude. That is an important statement. We all know
that it is impossible to fight the insurgency effectively
without maintaining the support of the population.
With additional international forces on the ground, that
challenge will become even more critical. The United
Nations will continue to monitor and address incidents
of civilian casualties in an independent manner, based
on our human rights mandate. But, more
importantly- or at least as importantly * we are
ready to work with the new commander in his reviews
to help avoid the loss of civilian lives in whatever way
we possibly can.

But let me repeat: the clear majority of civilian
casualties are caused by the insurgency, for whom the
casualties are not a result of tragic mistakes, but of
deliberate policy.

What I have just said is not aimed at presenting a
rosy picture of the overall situation in Afghanistan. The
prospects for progress are seriously undermined by the
ongoing conflict. The number of security incidents rose
beyond the 1,000 mark for the first time in May, and
the number of such incidents increased by 43 per cent
over the first four months of this year compared to the
same period last year. However, I should add that these
figures are not necessarily a good measurement of the
success or failure of the insurgency. There are more
incidents in parts of the country that, up to now, have
09-38690
been stable. This is, no doubt, the most intense fighting
season we have experienced.

It is also clear that the fight against widespread
corruption is still in its early stages. Institutions are
still weak, not only in human capacity, but in physical
infrastructure, particularly at the subnational level.
Allow me to mention that six provinces still do not
have offices for their governors. Only half of the
district governors have an office building, and 288 do
not have a vehicle. This has a tremendous impact on
their ability to administer the country and deliver
services to the people.

I mentioned in the opening of my speech that we
must also have a perspective that goes beyond the
elections. In Paris and at The Hague Conference, clear
priorities were set for our common efforts. We need a
common strategic vision for the post-election period, a
vision that can provide a clearer direction and guide us
over the next few years in support of a new
Government; a development strategy that can enable us
to move forward in a more disciplined and coordinated
way and that allows for greater Afghan ownership; a
security strategy that accelerates the build-up of
Afghan security forces and their role in ensuring the
stability of the country; and, finally, a political strategy
that includes a credible and inclusive peace process,
respects the rights of all Afghans - men, women and
children - and brings the various parts of the country
together in an inclusive manner. All these elements
must be integral parts of our vision for the post-
election period.

Two weeks ago, I addressed almost 1,000 Afghan
religious and intellectual leaders, including opposition
leaders, at an event dedicated to the need for an
inclusive peace process. My message to them was that
such a process must be Afghan-owned and Afghan-led.
But the United Nations must be prepared to be a
partner in such a process, and I am dedicated to helping
bring about that partnership.

However, a credible and successful peace process
can only take place if we have a Government that
enjoys the support of the people and has confidence in
itself, and that can only take place if we have an
international presence that enjoys the support of the
people and has confidence in itself.

This past week I was invited to attend the G8
meeting in Trieste. It was the last of a series of
meetings devoted to the regional aspects of and the

regional potential for the development of Afghanistan.
The need for closer regional cooperation on security
matters is absolutely obvious. However, the potential
goes much further. In the short term, experts from the
region who know the language, the culture and the
climate can often be more effective and less costly than
experts from further away and could make a valuable
contribution to the development of Afghan capacities.
In the longer term, key infrastructure programmes
could turn Afghanistan from being a barrier to trade to
becoming a corridor for regional economic activities.
Such infrastructure would also help Afghanistan to
exploit its own natural and human resources. Allow me
to say that Afghanistan is a very poor country, but it is
not destined to poverty. It has vast mineral resources,
such as the largest iron ore reserves in Asia.

Infrastructure, as agriculture, is seriously
underfunded. If we could concentrate on a very limited
number of strategic infrastructure projects, then the
impact on sustained economic growth, employment
and revenue collection would be tremendous.

A railway network from the Iranian border
through Herat and north-east to Central Asia and
China, as well as from the Pakistani border through
Jalalabad linking up in the north with the lines to
Central Asia and to the Iranian border, would stimulate
regional trade and would enable Afghanistan to exploit
and export its mineral resources. Agreements already
exist for building significant parts of this network.
There is a need to fill in the gaps. It would over time
have a great impact on Afghanistan's dependence on
foreign assistance. The expansion of the electricity
lines from Central Asia through Afghanistan would
have a similar impact and generate activities in a wide
range of economic areas. That dimension should also
be an important part of our vision for Afghanistan and
its region over the next few years.

Finally, a few words about the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA): its
mandate is multifaceted and ambitious - very
ambitious, I feel sometimes. The expectations of the
international community are high, and I am certainly
grateful for the additional resources given in December
last year that enabled us to expand the mission
significantly. However, the situation has evolved
significantly even in the six months that have passed
since the 2009 budget was adopted.
5

With rising expectations and rising opportunities
emerging on the ground, there is also a need for greater
resources: to fulfil our mandate in donor coordination;
to meet the new opportunities in capacity- and
institution-building; and to expand across the country,
as requested in Security Council resolutions. UNAMA
does not itself bring financial resources. However, a
country-wide presence of our mission could serve as a
magnet to other civilian organizations and gradually
draw development and governance efforts out of the
military context and into the civilian context where
they belong. And it could help to facilitate an
all-inclusive political process through a better civilian
outreach programme. I therefore appeal to the Council
to support us in our urgent need for additional
resources, and I will come back to address that subject
in more precise terms.

In the discussions in March, in the mandate given
to us, the Security Council asked the mission to
develop benchmarks for our activities. This work is
under way and will be finalized in time for the
Secretary-General's next report in September. It is not
an easy task, and not a task that we take lightly, since
UNAMA's efforts form an integral part of the efforts of
many others, both Afghan authorities and international
institutions. It is also hard to establish timelines and
means of measuring progress in political processes,
especially in a context as unpredictable and complex as
that of Afghanistan. Consultations are under way with
our partners, and I am confident that by September we
will be able to present the Council with a set of
meaningful benchmarks.

