Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the holding of this meeting and to
Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his important briefing.

Peru notes with concern the prospects for a political
solution in Syria following the recent meetings held by
the Special Envoy with key stakeholders, about which
he has informed us this morning. Only a few days ago,
in the Security Council (see S/PV.8373), we believed
that the auspicious agreement reached between Turkey
and the Russian Federation to establish a demilitarized
zone in Idlib created an environment more conducive to
achieving a political agreement, making it possible to
envisage a lasting peace in Syria. Today we would like
to reaffirm the urgent need to establish an inclusive and
representative constitutional committee pursuant to
what was agreed at the Congress of the Syrian National
Dialogue in Sochi nine months ago. We believe that
that important initiative, like the Astana process, is
required to complement the Geneva process. In that
regard, with full respect for the sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic, we
deem it important and urgent to form the constitutional
committee mentioned above and to define its
operational and decision-making mechanisms, with
a view to advancing the political process outlined in
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex). We are particularly concerned
about the possibility that further delays in establishing
the committee could affect the credibility of the process
and lead to greater divisions.

We emphasize the importance that all parties
engage constructively in the negotiations, while
showing flexibility, concern for the country's future
and national unity so as to build the necessary trust to
promote reconciliation and build sustainable peace in
Syria. Accordingly, we wish to express our full support
for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General in his
efforts to move forward in that direction, in particular
the way in which he approached the discussions in
Damascus and the work that he told us he would be
doing over the next several days.

In conclusion, we also would like to underline
how important it is that the Astana guarantors and
other countries with influence on the parties help to
ensure that the constitutional committee be convened
promptly, ideally in November.

