Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): I would like to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council, and particularly
on organizing this highly topical debate on working
relations and cooperation among the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and police-contributing countries (PCCs). I
would also like to thank Mr. Jean Pierre Lacroix and
the two other briefers.

Triangular cooperation was, of course, partially
institutionalized with the establishment of the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations in 2001.
As mentioned earlier by our colleague from Kuwait,
there have been a number of additional resolutions
and presidential statements adopted to promote
understanding among those three elements. The report
of the High-level Independent Panel on United Nations
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) recommended that
the Security Council institutionalize a framework
to bring in troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat early in the process. There is no doubt that
a collective commitment to peacekeeping, based on a
shared understanding of the objectives and mandates,
remains critical to successful peacekeeping missions.

Today, missions are deployed in an increasingly
complex operating environment and with significantly
increased security risks. That underlines the
importance of a collective commitment and the need
for a continuous and meaningful dialogue among those
who create, coordinate, implement and finance peace
operations. That also emphasizes the importance of the
further institutionalization of coordination to ensure
policy and operational coherence across all United
Nations systems. It is indeed absolutely essential that
the Security Council, the troop-contributing countries
and the Secretariat now work to streamline and
coordinate their activities in the increasingly complex
environment of peacekeeping.

In that context, I would like to make a number of
suggestions to encourage the spirit of partnership and
interdependence and to animate stronger cooperation
and confidence-building among those three elements:
the Security Council, the TCCs and the Secretariat.

First, we need to see greater involvement on the
part of troop- and police-contributing countries in
the mandating process. In its presidential statement
of December 2015 (S/PRST/2015/26), the Security
Council itself recognized that consultations among the
three stakeholders were not working effectively. The
Council recognized that, in principle, the experience
and expertise of the troop-contributing countries could
greatly assist in the planning of operations. That would
especially be the case where political processes are
weak or non-existent and the environment is dangerous
and difficult. The Council also recognized that a
sense of ownership over the mandate and the planning
processes among troop-contributing countries offered a
direct link to performance.

However, it is still the Secretariat and the resolution
penholders - and not those who will be involved on the
ground -that present analyses of the political, security
and humanitarian situations for a mission. Informal
meetings may take place, but there is plenty of room
for further input from troop-contributing countries.
Indeed, if triangular cooperation is to be strengthened,
that is imperative.

Secondly, the lack of participation in the process
of mandate preparation or renewal certainly affects
performance, and negatively so. It damages the trust
among the Security Council, the troop-contributing
countries and the Secretariat. Peacekeepers need to
know that authorized mandates have been set up as
a result of full consultation and candid discussions,
as well as further consultations on the challenges to
be faced. It might be added that this would also help
to improve the perception of financers, which often
seem to believe that countries are not doing enough to
ensure efficiency.

Such painful exclusion has created a sense of that
life is compromised for money, which, unfortunately,
is now prevailing in the situation of peacekeeping
operations. I would also recall that United Nations
peacekeeping operations would not be possible without
the participation of troop-contributing countries. It is
only common sense to guarantee their full involvement
in planning and organizing, which would provide
equality and fair treatment.

Thirdly, I would suggest that there is still plenty
of room for the further development of links within
triangular cooperation. For example, the Security
Council is not effectively represented at the field level
of missions. Earlier, Ambassador Heusgen mentioned
the importance of field Visits, where one feels the
heat and sees the challenges to and opportunities for
peacekeeping. But the Security Council still takes
decisions on the basis of reports, which are sometimes
based on perception rather than reality. For successful
mandate operations, it is necessary that the Security
Council institutionalize regular consultations with
the stakeholders. That must cover not just the mandates
of operation, but also include areas such as the safety
and security of peacekeepers, strategic force generation
and gender, conduct and discipline.

Proper consultations and institutionalization of
this kind would also allow the resolution of disputes
over mandate capabilities or national caveats. Equally,
such discussions should not be confined to formal talks
in New York. There should be field-level informal
discussions that could address shortfalls in information
flows and institutional arrangements. In this context,
penholders should make it a priority to consult with
TCCs in good faith and not overlook the significance
of institutional arrangements. As our colleague from
the United Kingdom mentioned earlier regarding the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), we have
held thorough consultations with troop-contributing
countries and I believe that has created ample
opportunity for us to understand each other, as well as
for the United Kingdom to take into consideration some
of the challenges AMISOM. has faced in the field.

It would also be sensible to strengthen the
contribution of other mechanisms for effective mandate
delivery. It is very clear, as the Security Council has
recognized, that successful peacekeeping operations
will increasingly require strong collaboration and
dynamic consultation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations, including
the African Union. Continuous engagement and
consultation with relevant actors - particularly the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and
the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly, which
significantly influence the standard and deployment of
capabilities in the field - is indeed imperative.

In conclusion, the deployment of peacekeeping
missions in the context of escalating levels of violence
and increasing asymmetrical threats has resulted in
growing numbers of Blue Helmets paying the ultimate
sacrifice. This should forcefully underline the necessity
of putting an end to unnecessary competition for roles
in peace operation decision-making. It is very clear
that the Security Council, TCCs and the Secretariat,
as well as other major stakeholders, must work closely
together to strengthen the system of United Nations
peace operations.

The Security Council and the Secretariat must
listen properly to the experiences of the troop- and
police-contributing countries. Regular, high-level
meetings of all three elements, with conclusions being
taken into account in any mission planning, must be
a requirement. This is the first and most obvious step
towards achieving the more effective and safer delivery
ofUnited Nations peacekeeping missions and mandates.
It needs to happen urgently.

