Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): First, let me thank you,
Madam President, for the able manner in which you
have conducted the affairs of the Council this month.
This wrap-up session provides us with an opportunity
to assess the work of the Council during Argentina's
presidency.

We are pleased to note that several country-specific
briefings were held in the Council Chamber, thereby
affording concerned delegations the opportunity to
participate and speak under rule 37. Briefings by the
Chairs of the Sanctions Committee were also held in
public, providing interested delegations a chance to
gain first-hand experience or knowledge of the issues
under discussion. We see that as going a long way
towards increasing transparency in the work of the
Council, and allowing for greater engagement, not
just with the wider membership but indeed with civil
society, non-governmental organizations and private
individuals as well.

The briefing by the United Nations Force
Commanders afforded Council members and the wider
United Nations membership an opportunity to hear
directly from the individuals responsible for carrying
out the peacekeeping mandates authorized by the
Council. The Force Commanders briefed us on three
very important topics: the protection of civilians, the
expectations for military contingents under a changed
security environment, and the accomplishment of
traditional mandates under that changed environment.
The interactive nature of the meetings proved very
useful, as Council members had the opportunity to ask
questions and receive clarifications on operational and
related peacekeeping issues.

The adoption of the Council's annual report covering
the period 1 August 2013 to 31 July 2014 (A/69/2) was
another significant development during the month. We
commend the delegation of Rwanda for the tremendous
effort that it put into preparing the report. We look
forward to its presentation to the General Assembly on
19 November, and we will be interested in hearing the
views of the wider membership on it.

Strengthening the rule of law is a necessary
corollary to the maintenance of international peace
and security. Dialogue with international judicial
institutions, particularly the International Court of
Justice and the International Criminal Court, afforded
Council members the opportunity not only to discuss
the administration of justice, but also to appreciate
the various roles such judicial institutions play in
complementing the work of the Council.

On country-specific issues, we welcome the
conclusion of the Joint Mission of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the
United Nations on the elimination of Syrian chemical
weapons. It proves that, when united, the Council can
achieve positive results. Still on Syria, we welcome the
first briefing by Special Envoy Staffan De Mistura. It
helped to bring the attention of the Council back to the
political situation in Syria. We restate our conviction
that the conflict in Syria and the humanitarian crisis it
has triggered can be resolved only through negotiations
leading to a political solution.

With regard to Lebanon, we note that 10 years after
the adoption ofresolution 1559 (2004), the disarmament
of all militias is yet to be achieved. The situation
poses a threat to the peace, stability and sovereignty
of Lebanon. It is critically important that all militias
disarm, in line with the provisions of resolution 1559
(2004) and their obligations under the Taif Agreement.

This being the last scheduled meeting under the
presidency of Argentina, I would like i on behalf of
the Nigerian delegation, particularly on behalf of my
Ambassador and Permanent Representative Mrs. Joy
ngu, - to congratulate you personally, Madam
President, and your very able team, led by its political
coordinator Mario Oyarzabal, for the courageous and
diligent manner you have managed your tenure this
month. It has indeed been a very busy but productive
month for you and for all of us. We would also like
to take this opportunity to extend our best wishes
to Australia, a Commonwealth country with which
we share many things in common, and to give our
support to its delegation when it prepares to assume the
presidency of the Council in November.

