Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2451 (2018) by the Security Council and
thank the permanent delegation of the United Kingdom
for its tireless efforts as penholder on the issue of
Yemen. We also commend the flexibility shown by the
delegation during the negotiations on the resolution.

We voted in favour of the resolution despite the
fact that it does not cover some of the concerns that
we expressed during the negotiations. There are several
reasons for that, most notably the need to preserve the
unity of the Security Council on the issue of Yemen.
We hope that such unity will be preserved and applied
also to other agenda items of the Council.

We also voted in favour as a response to the
sensitive and important nature of this articulated stage,
when there is a ray of hope and a real possibility of
reaching a peaceful solution to the crisis, which has
brought terrible destruction to that dear Arab country
with its deep-rooted civilization, threatening its unity
and stability as well as the security and stability of the
region. Our support for resolution 2451 (2018) reflects
our support for the efforts of the Secretary-General and
his Special Envoy and for the Stockholm agreement
reached by the Yemeni parties during the most recent
cycle of consultations, hosted by the Government
of the Kingdom of Sweden, concerning the city of
Al-Hudaydah, its ports and prisoner exchange. We also
support the declaration of understanding on Taiz.

We hope that all parties will fully implement
the agreement with a view to supporting the efforts
of the Special Envoy, Mr. Martin Griffiths, leading
to the upcoming round of negotiations on a political
settlement based on the three agreed terms of reference,
namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative and its
implementation mechanism, the outcome of the National
Dialogue Conference, and the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council, especially resolution 2216 (2015).
That would result in ending the crisis in brotherly
Yemen, maintain its independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity, and ensure non-interference in its
internal affairs.

We also welcome the Secretary-General's intention
to convene in Geneva on 26 February an international
pledging conference in support ofthe 2019 humanitarian
response plan. The State of Kuwait is eager to
participate in the conference so as to continue to ease
the humanitarian situation in Yemen and alleviate the
suffering of its brotherly people.

