Mr. Kalomoh: It is my pleasure to be here today
as the Council considers the Secretary-General's letter
dated 10 November 2003 addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2003/1077), by which the
Secretary-General submitted to the Council the interim
report of the multidisciplinary assessment mission to
the Central African subregion.

Last June, I had the privilege to head the
multidisciplinary assessment mission that the
Secretary-General dispatched to the Central African
subregion pursuant to a request by the Security Council
contained in the final paragraph of its presidential
statement of 31 October 2002 (S/PRST/2002/31) to
explore ways to implement

a;

a comprehensive, integrated and resolute
approach to the issues of peace, security and
development in Central Africa."

I am glad to report that the mission was well
received in all 11 member States of the Economic
Community for Central African States (ECCAS). We
met with heads of State and of Government and with
other senior Government officials. We also held
extensive consultations with leaders of main political
parties, representatives of civil society and of non-
governmental organizations, business and religious
leaders and members of the diplomatic community in
each of the countries we visited, as well as United
Nations agencies, programmes and peace-building and
peacekeeping missions.

The mission submitted its report to the Secretary-
General on 10 September 2003. In line with its
mandate, the mission identified the priority needs and
challenges in various areas in the subregion, including
peace and security, economic and social development,
humanitarian affairs, human rights, HIV/AIDS,
subregional institutions, United Nations activities in
the subregion, and regional integration.

The mission's report stressed the need for the
United Nations to help the subregion implement
subregional policies and to support efforts directed at
addressing cross-cutting challenges, including the
promotion of good governance.

The mission emphasized that, as a result of the
interlinkages between poverty and conflict, it is
essential for the United Nations and its agencies to
develop a holistic and integrated approach to the
problem of Central Africa in order to address conflicts
at their core and to enhance the ability of national,
subregional and international actors to be more
proactive in identifying and preventing future threats.
As indicated in his letter to the President of the
Security Council, the Secretary-General is in general
agreement with the assessment made by the mission.
However, the Secretary-General believes that there is a
need to undertake further examination of the root
causes of the conflicts that have plagued some of the
countries in the subregion. Thus, he has requested a
thorough review of United Nations programmes with a
view to enhancing their coherence and effectiveness.
With regard to the strong desire expressed by
most Government leaders in the subregion, for an
enhanced United Nations presence, including through
the establishment of a United Nations office headed by
a special representative, the Secretary-General has
indicated in his letter to the President of the Council
that there are already a number of United Nations
structures in the subregion, including three offices
headed by special representatives of the Secretary-
General. The Secretary-General noted that there are
also numerous initiatives that encompass a larger
number of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) member States. Against this
background, the Secretary-General has proposed to
appoint a special envoy who would be available as
required to work closely on political issues with
Governments in the subregion and who would also
interface with United Nations entities involved in
development and humanitarian activities in the Central
African subregion. We stressed in the mission report
that while the restoration and consolidation of lasting
peace in some of the countries of the Central African
subregion remain the primary responsibility of the
Governments and peoples of the subregion, the United
Nations and the rest of the international community
should continue to be supportive in order for the peace
to be sustainable.

We therefore wish to call upon the international
community to continue to support the efforts of the
ECCAS countries so as to promote sustainable peace
and development and enable them to effectively curb
widespread circulation of weapons and gangs of
mercenaries in the subregion. In this connection, the
Security Council's continued attention to the
developments in the Central African subregion -
which has significantly contributed to creating greater
awareness of and understanding for the need for
immediate and effective action to stabilize the situation
in the area and which led to the dispatch of the mission
to the Central African subregion - is essential and
should be continued.

It is also important for the international
community to support the economic stabilization of the
Central African countries, which are emerging from
conflict and embarking on the road to democratic
reform.

As stressed in our report, we strongly believe that
policies to promote respect for human rights and the
rule of law and the development of inclusive and
responsive Governments would facilitate the
consolidation of peace and stability in the countries of
the Central African subregion.

The Central African subregion has been blessed
with enormous human and natural resources. Thus, a
climate of sustainable peace backed by constructive
national and subregional policies and supportive
international cooperation would help direct those
resources towards the improvement of conditions for
the people of the subregion.

On behalf of the Secretary-General, I wish to
reassure the participants gathered here today that the
United Nations will continue to work with the
countries and the peoples of the Central African
subregion to help them build a more peaceful and
prosperous subregion.

