Mr. De Mistura: I wish to thank the Secretary-
General for his strong and supportive introduction to
this debate.

It is precisely the immensity of the human
suffering as just described by the Secretary-General,
and yesterday by our colleague Under-Secretary-
General O'Brien, that commands us to seek out even
the remotest possibility of a political solution, even
if - and we heard it, sadly - the logic of assuming
a military victory by anyone, which is impossible,
continues, and barrel bombs and other indiscriminate
weapons continue to kill Syrian civilians.

On 5 May, based on instructions from the Secretary-
General, we unrolled the Geneva consultations. This
is a new form of avoiding getting cornered into a
conference which then gets us straitjacketed. It is a
set of structured, separate discussions with Syrian
and non-Syrian players aimed at stress-testing any
willingness, if there is any, to narrow the gaps in the
interpretation of the principles contained in the Geneva
communique, which is still, let us be frank, the only
internationally recognized framework for a settlement,
even if it is still ambiguous in some parts.

To date, consultations with 216 individuals, Syrian
and non-Syrian, in Geneva and in capitals, reveal a
generally shared sense of urgency, given in particular
the recent gains made by Daesh and the Al-Nusra
Front and the talk of some de facto fragmentation,
radicalization and sectarianism. There is thus a growing
reference to the need for a managed, phased, gradual,
controlled transition to avoid a repetition of what no
one in the Council would like to see: the problems we
have had in Libya and in Iraq.

Consultations, too, have reaffirmed that most
Syrians and international actors agree on what Syria
should look like in general and on the relevance of the
principles and content of the Geneva communique.
It was three years ago, but it is still valid. Syrians
overall emphasize their own vision for a united,
sovereign, independent - they are a very proud
people - non-sectarian, multi-confessional, all-
inclusive State with territorial integrity; and preserved
but reformed State institutions, such as ministries * for
as we saw in Iraq, that was the biggest problem we
faced, when many institutions disappeared suddenly
at the time of the change - including in the political,
security and judiciary sectors, led by those who can
inspire public confidence and trust.

Yet there is still disagreement - the Secretary-
General said it very clearly - on how to get there,
much of it based on different narratives; one is the
root causes of the conflict and emerging priorities.
The fear of black flags over Damascus is driving many
to consider reassessing their own early positions. Yet
many continue also to consider that the conflict needs
to be about the Arab Spring calls for change. There is
a firm recognition of the fact that counter-terrorism
is now definitely a priority. However, many - both
Syrians and Member States - are also considering that
in order to assert that type of counter-terrorism, there is
a need for a credible new Government with which they
can partner in that effort.

While common ground exists, the question of
the devolution of executive authority to a transitional
body - let us be honest with ourselves - remains the
most polarized element of the communique. For some,
that means that the transitional governing body is an
instrument to hand over power. Some political and
armed opposition groups generally reject any notion
of power-sharing with the current Government in
Damascus. The Syrian Government has accepted, in
theory, to discuss the transitional governing body at
the Geneva II conference, but continues to reject the
concept as unconstitutional.

It is still broadly understood that, whatever the
solution, it should ensure the meaningfulness and
irreversibility of any transition, in a widely acceptable
process, without causing an abrupt jolt, shock, trauma
or catastrophe to the system in Syria. We cannot afford
that. It should also include assurances for Syrian
communities, the many minorities who have been
threatened and the regional stakeholders. It should
also have guarantees that the Syrian people, especially
women, are included in the decision-making. In our
Geneva consultations, we met remarkable Syrian
women who have provided the most powerful concepts
and analysis we have yet heard.

Sadly, there is still no consensus on the way forward
on the communique or even a formalized negotiation.
If there were, we would not be discussing it in the
Council; we would be working on the negotiations. At
the same time, given the deep and deepening tragedy,
the United Nations and all of us are obliged to keep the
issue alive and not leave any stone unturned. We must
also be attuned to the ongoing serious conversations
and discussions taking place - we are hearing them
around the region and beyond - which may require
more time and be linked to developments the Secretary-
General just referred to. We have thus tried to develop
recommendations guided by the views and analysis
shared with us during the consultations. This is the first
time, by the way, that the Syrian people have been given
a chance, as they told us, to be deeply and intensely
consulted. After all, we always ask: Is it Syrian-led
and Syrian involved? Well, this was the opportunity.
Our recommendations are predicated on the need for
regional and international consensus and sustained
engagement on the way forward.

In response to the Secretary-General's instructions
that we should try to operationalize the Geneva
communique, my team and I have consulted widely,
inside and outside, to verify whether there exists a
critical mass for common action. Ultimately, we have
tried to visualize from a technical point of view the
implementation of the Geneva communique in all its
aspects, including a transitional governing body. We
have come up with a detailed formula for the phased
implementation of the Geneva communique, so that
there will be no excuses when a political consensus is
reached, including on a transitional governing body,
which could assume the functions of a Government;
a definition of mutual consent noted in the Geneva
communique; the functioning of a military council and
a Syrian national congress for national dialogue in a
constitutional form, combined with confidence-building
measures.

Ours is a straightforward interpretation formula for
the implementation of the communique. Regrettably,
the consultations also confirmed that achieving an
agreement on this will be difficult in the current Syrian
context. In fact, many have also urged us not to convene
a third Geneva conference because we are not yet there.
But we cannotjust let the situation in Syria continue to
drift. That is why, based on the appeal and the urging of
the Secretary-General, we need to move in a direction
where Syrians come together to stop the violence and
to set out on an irreversible path towards a genuine
political transition.

That leads us to the main recommendations. The
Geneva consultation got Syrians to again begin talking
to each other - sometimes indirectly through us,
but they did. What I am proposing today is actually a
deepening - going much deeper into those issues in
the Geneva communique' that are not so controversial
and analysing those that can be controversial.

I now intend to invite Syrians to parallel
simultaneous thematic discussions through an
intra-Syrian working group, addressing the key aspects
of the Geneva communique as identified by them in
the first phase of the consultations, which will involve
ensuring safety and protection for all, ending sieges
and figuring out how do so, ensuring medical access
and releasing detainees. The second phase will address
political and constitutional issues, including the
essential principles, the transitional governing body
and elections. The third phase will concern military
and security issues, including combating terrorism in
an effective, inclusive way, ceasefires and integration.
The fourth phase will involve public institutions,
construction and development, which means that, as
we said, we should try to avoid what happened in Iraq
and elsewhere when institutions suddenly disappeared
and the country got into major difficulties. Those
institutions should continue to deliver public services
under a top leadership acceptable to all and acting in
accordance with the principles of good governance and
human rights.

We believe that the working groups will start
generating movement towards a Syrian-owned
framework document on the implementation of the
Geneva communique, and those efforts can build on
the very useful meetings that took place in Moscow,
Cairo, Paris and even Astana recently, and many track-
two initiatives. The effort should be led by a steering
committee, and the framework document should
also provide for a transitional governing body idea,
a procedure for a national dialogue and so on. Such
an international initiative will require the support of
a contact group, and we will get to that at the right
time. In all of these matters, I shall seek the Council's
support, and, as the Secretary-General said, stand ready
to regularly report to the Council and to the Secretary-
General on the progress or challenges that we will
definitely face.

The consultations have gone some way towards
identifying existing common ground. They also still
hold the promise that a set of formula negotiations could
convene after preparing the ground, if there is political
will. The Geneva consultations have been loud and clear
on the profound risk of failing to act now, including
the increasing risk of a multigenerational conflict that,
with each passing month, reduces the prospects of ever
restoring Syria as a unified State, let alone making it
even harder to establish a political process.

In closing, let me again thank the Secretary-General
for being with us today, showing a strong commitment
to the issue before us, and I thank the Secretariat and
the members of the Security Council for their continued
support in our difficult uphill but needed mission. I am
obviously ready to go into more detail in a separate
meeting later.

