Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): First, with respect to the
passing away of Mr. Yasser Arafat, the President of the
Palestinian Authority and the Chairman of the
Executive Committee of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, I would like to express my sincerest
condolences to the bereaved family, to the Palestinian
Authority and to the Palestinians. Mr. Arafat was
indeed a pioneer who laid the foundation for the
establishment of a Palestinian State. I pray that his soul
will rest in peace and sincerely hope that Palestinians
will overcome their sorrow and will continue their
struggle to achieve peace and prosperity in the region.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this public meeting concerning the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I also wish to
offer my thanks to the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Lord Paddy Ashdown, for his
comprehensive briefing.

Almost nine years have passed since the signing
of the Dayton Accord, during which time the tasks set
out in the context of the peace process have been
steadily carried out in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Among

the achievements, my Government particularly
appreciates the unification of the city of Mostar under
a single city government and the establishment of the
Ministry of Defence and the Intelligence and Security
Agency at the State level. We are particularly
appreciative of the efforts made by the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina and his
staff.

Nevertheless, there is still much to be done in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is necessary to resolve the
remaining problems so that Bosnia and Herzegovina
can stand on its own feet as a stable, multi-ethnic
nation, integrated into Europe. To that end, we expect
the political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to take
the initiative to make further progress on those urgent
tasks, which include the consolidation of the rule of
law, the further reform of the economy and the
strengthening of State institutions, with the cooperation
of the international community.

The Government of Japan is of the view that a
resolution of the war crimes issue is essential for the
true achievement of peace in the former Yugoslavia.
We therefore call upon the relevant authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to fully support the activities
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and to extradite every indicted individual to
the Tribunal. At the same time, we wish to underscore
the importance of enhancing the capacity of the War
Crimes Chamber so as to enable it to prosecute less
serious war crimes. In this connection, Japan is now
considering a proposal to provide support for a United
Nations Development Programme project to train staff
for the Chamber.

Japan values highly the role of the Stabilization
Force in the implementation of the peace process
through the maintenance of security in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In December this year, it is planned that
the European Union-led peacekeeping force, EUFOR,
will replace the NATO mission. The Government of
Japan welcomes this handover and expects it to be
implemented smoothly.

Japan has been an active member of the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council. We have
pledged $500 million in support of rehabilitation and
reconstruction in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and have
been steadily implementing that assistance. This April
in Tokyo, Japan co-chaired, with the European Union
presidency, the Ministerial Conference on Peace
Consolidation and the Economic Development of the
Western Balkans. At the Conference we expressed our
View that, in order to ensure that the stabilization and
development of the region is irreversible, regional
efforts should be made focusing on the following three
key elements: the consolidation of peace; economic
development; and regional cooperation. We are
providing support in each of those areas. Assistance for
the War Crimes Chamber, fostering a better investment
climate through the dispatching of advisers and the
holding of a workshop on the promotion of tourism are
examples of that.

Japan, in cooperation with the international
community, intends to adhere to its commitment to
help the region to achieve stability and prosperity
through various activities, including follow-up of the
Tokyo Ministerial Conference. It is our firm belief that
the stabilization of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is essential for the stability of the whole
of South-Eastern Europe.

