Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): At
the outset, I would like to express my delegation's
appreciation to you and your delegation, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting and for circulating the
concept note (S/2016/969, annex). I would also like
to express my gratitude to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, the Global High-Level Panel on Water and
Peace, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and the Strategic Foresight Group for their inputs at
this debate.

Water is a natural resource that not only has a
determining impact on the wealth and welfare of all
nations, but also holds major sway over their stability
in the twenty-first century. Approximately 1.7 billion
people currently lack fresh water and are below the
threshold of true scarcity established by the United
Nations. That number is expected to increase to
2.4 billion in 2025.

More than 260 rivers are shared in one way or
another by 148 countries, and therefore water-related
issues can affect regional peace in a very significant
way. It is particularly disturbing that there are no
cooperation frameworks for 158 of the 263 international
watercourses. Incremental competition between States
over transboundary water resources has led to regional
instability in many places, and that will continue and
become exacerbated in the future.

With unprecedented population growth, new
emerging economies and the effects of climate change,
pressures on our finite freshwater resources are
increasing. Meanwhile, the ability of some nations
to secure their water-related requirements is being
severely challenged, thus causing great and legitimate
concern that tensions around water hotspots will
intensify among water users. Yet water holds immense
potential for cooperation, which should be explored
and utilized. An increasingly strong and coordinated
response is therefore expected from the international
community in order to raise awareness and build
cooperation on the growing challenges for sovereign
States posed by water.

Water and water resources are increasingly
becoming a matter of national security, and therefore,
as the concept note (S/2016/969, annex) describes, a
potential driver for conflicts. Fierce competition for
fresh water may well become a source of conflict in the
future, in the same way that land and energy have led to
conflicts in the past - if the international community
fails to install efficient and effective water management
structures at the regional level. As stated in the 2015
World Water Development Report,

"[i]nter-state and regional conflicts may
also emerge due to water scarcity and poor
management structures."

Water diplomacy is needed - a new approach
to managing complex water issues and networks,
innovative approaches to water managing that should
replace outdated zero-sum battles over water. That
new approach would serve to promote both short-
and longer-term cooperation through shared benefits,
inclusive multi-stakeholder agreements and sustainable
transboundary institution-building.

To meet those challenges, the international
community needs to accentuate its political will
to promote transboundary water cooperation by
negotiating, designing, agreeing and implementing
custom-made and appropriate water-sharing plans and
access to water. We need to encourage countries that
are facing water-related issues to develop cooperation
frameworks to address their respective needs in
order to prevent water-related confrontations in the
future. Upon request by the States concerned, the
relevant bodies of the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations can also play a useful role
in those efforts, particularly in the areas of capacity-
building, sharing experiences and setting models.
