Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): My
country also welcomes the presence in the Council
today of Minister Zalmai Rassoul and we thank him for
his important statement.

We would like to also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, for his briefing on the situation in Afghanistan
on the basis of the report (S/2011/590) before us.

We share the strong condemnations expressed by
the international community following the
assassination of former President Burhanuddin
Rabbani. Gabon commends his efforts as Chair of the
High Peace Council and the Government. Once again, I
hope that the Afghan people will continue his efforts in
the passionate quest for peace.

My delegation welcomes the resolve of the
Afghan authorities in seeking to rebuild confidence
following this great loss. The political process of
transition must run its course so that all programmes
can be implemented before the 2014 deadline.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/590)
that is under consideration underscores the significant
developments that have held our attention in terms of
dialogue and reconciliation, the political process,
security, the humanitarian and human rights situation,
governance and the rule of law and regional
cooperation.

At the last debate in the Council, we naturally
emphasized the importance of dialogue and
reconciliation in this process (see S/PV.6574). That
dialogue must continue to build on confidence-building
measures, and should be inclusive and participatory,
particularly at this crucial time, when the negotiating
terms with all the parties involved must be reviewed.
To that end, my delegation welcomes the Afghan
Government's readiness, as expressed in the last
general debate, to finally include the Taliban in the
transition process, so that they may play a constructive
role in that process. We therefore call on them to
respond to the hand extended to them. We welcome the
measures adopted by the authorities in the political
arena since the administration's inauguration in
January. We of course encourage the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative in their support for
those efforts.

The humanitarian situation continues to be a
cause for concern, given the security issues and other
aggravating factors, such as the drought, which
undermine the significant improvements made in this
area. We call on the United Nations and the
international community as a whole to continue to pay
particular attention to this situation.

In order to build on the gains established through
dialogue and reconciliation, it is important that we
continue to work towards the goals of strengthening
governance and the rule of law in the context of the
Kabul Process. Here we welcome the information we
have received from the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul. We also commend the efforts that
have been made in terms of regional cooperation, as
well as the initiatives taken in that area, particularly the
Afghanistan-Pakistan Joint Commission for Reconciliation
and Peace, and, of course, the two conferences to be
held at the end of the year in Istanbul and Bonn.

That said, the terrorist threat persists, and the
protection of everyone involved ~ civilians, the
political authorities and personnel from international
forces, such as the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) or the United Nations
itself - remains a priority. The situation on the ground
still requires a military and police presence in the form
of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
as well as the Afghan National Security Forces. ISAF's
mandate is coming to an end and must be renewed. The
tasks it will be assigned for the period to come will of
course take into account the Afghan security forces'
new strategies for securing the territory, strategies
whose preparation we encourage so that effective joint
counter-terrorism operations can be conducted with
ISAF through upstream military action and involve the
judicial system in which the perpetrators of these
crimes can be brought to justice.

I would like to conclude by once again expressing
our support and appreciation of UNAMA and NATO
for their important role in supporting a Government
dealing with so many challenges. And naturally we
endorse the Secretary-General's words of satisfaction
and encouragement to his Special Representative,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and to all the personnel at
UNAMA and the United Nations team for their work
on the ground. Finally, I also commend the
Governments of Turkey and Germany for convening
the conferences to be held in Istanbul and Bonn at the
end of this year.

