Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to express
my sincere appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting on the situation in the Middle
East. As this is the first time that I address the Security
Council this year, I would like to congratulate the five
newly elected members on their membership in the
Council and to wish them good luck in their work in
the Council.

The Gaza conflict that occurred in July 2014 was the
third major conflict in six years. The ensuing tensions
on the ground have served to underscore the need for a
just, durable and comprehensive peace between Israel
and Palestine based on a two-State solution.

Faced with that difficult situation, the international
community has not stood idly by. The Gaza
reconstruction conference hosted by Egypt and Norway
in October 2014 demonstrated the strong international
commitment to reconstruction. Japan, for its part, has
already disbursed the $20 million it pledged at the
conference. That is part ofthe $200 million commitment
announced by Foreign Minister Kishida in March 2014.
Furthermore, starting tomorrow, my Prime
Minister, Mr. Shinzo Abe, will embark on a visit to the
Middle East. In Israel and Palestine, Prime Minister
Abe will call on the leaders of both sides to work
towards a resumption of the peace negotiations. In a
policy speech to be made on 17 January in Cairo, he
will also confirm Japan's commitment to assist with the
attainment of peace and prosperity in the region.

I would like to mention with great appreciation
the concerted efforts that the United States has been
making towards the resumption of peace negotiations.
However, the recent series of events have made the
prospects for the resumption ofpeace talks increasingly
precarious.

The Middle East peace process will only be
successful once a consensual and negotiated agreement
is reached between the parties. Nonetheless, in the
light of the impasse on the ground, we welcome and
value the efforts of a number of Member States seeking
to bring the Security Council to play a constructive
role. Although the Council was not able to convey a
concerted message two weeks ago, we look forward
to the Council engaging constructively in the peace
process as appropriate and when necessary.

No amount of support by the international
community, including the Security Council, can
substitute for Israel and Palestine's own efforts
and political will to achieve peace. To that end, we
underscore the need for both sides to nurture an
environment propitious to the resumption of peace
negotiations.

Unilateral measures and punitive countermeasures
lead only to a vicious cycle of mistrust. We therefore
call on Israel to resume the transfer of tax revenues
to the Palestinian Authority, as agreed to under the
Paris Protocol of 1994. We also reiterate our call to
completely cease settlement activities, which are illegal
under international law. In turn, we call on Palestine
to refrain from taking any unilateral measures that
could undermine efforts for the resumption of peace
negotiations.

The current impasse and tensions on the ground
should not dissuade us from looking ahead. Efforts to
build a sustainable economy in Palestine and promote
mutual trust between the two peoples will reinforce
the political process, and therefore must continue. In
the light of that, Japan has been steadfast in providing
support in those areas from a mid- and long-term
perspective.

Due to time limitations, I will not go into the
details of our efforts, which are reflected in the written
text of my statement, which I believe has already been
distributed to the Council.

I would also like to refer to the situations in Iraq
and Syria, which are of great concern. But for the same
reason, I would refer members to the written text of my
statement.

Japan is mindful of the unique and constructive
role it can play in assisting countries in the region
to achieve peace and prosperity. We stand ready to
continue our cooperation with the United Nations and
the international community in that regard.

