Mr. Cekuolis: I would like to thank the Belgian
Government for taking the initiative on this very
important issue.

The economic and environmental dimensions of
conflict are sometimes overlooked, but they should
never be underestimated. Today's timely debate on the
nexus between natural resources and conflicts serves as
an important step in advancing a broad understanding
of how Governments, the appropriate multilateral
bodies and businesses can improve the management of
natural resources and contribute to peacebuilding
efforts and the maintenance of peace and security.

Access to natural resources has been a source of
conflict throughout human history. In the modern
world, the State has aimed to mitigate its potential for
causing conflict by regulating access to, and trade in,
natural resources. That, however, is a complicated
endeavour. The exploitation of natural resources can
evolve into a cause of conflict, fuelling and prolonging
it in a complex cycle. The twin role of natural
resources in fuelling and motivating conflicts is being
increasingly recognized in strategies for conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
However, at the same time, we recognize that every
conflict, be it communal or nationwide, ethnic or
separatist, has its own dynamics and social, political
and economic circumstances.

The mechanisms through which natural resources
induce conflicts are often deeply rooted in economic
and social structures and call for integrated approaches
in addressing peace and development. Natural
resources cut across various other sectors and require
multidisciplinary responses that address inequality,
including gender inequality, governance, financing,
economic policies and international trade. An effective
framework for natural resources, conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and development needs to address those
and many other dimensions.

Single-commodity economies especially, mostly
in the developing world, can become overdependent on
revenues from a particular natural resource. In a world
of fluctuating prices and currency exchange rates,
combined with potential security threats, such
dependency can lead to political, social and economic
instability. Certain environments tend to be still more
conflict-prone, especially in places where the economy
performs poorly and where checks and balances are
weak. That leads to less accountable Governments,
which may facilitate the spread of corruption and
increasing poverty rates. Those features have been
shown to be contributing factors to conflicts.

In post-conflict or peacebuilding contexts, the
complex nature of challenges may require innovative
approaches to deal with the exploitation of natural
resources. Success in developing and diversifying
export sectors can do much to achieve the growth that
provides better livelihoods and generates rising
revenues for State-building. But another important and
often neglected dimension is how conflict countries
integrate themselves into the global economy, doing so
in ways that strengthen the hands of peacemakers,
nation-building efforts and poor communities.

It is important to understand in conflict and post-
conflict situations how the United Nations system can
support timely action that can effectively break the
nexus between natural resources and nascent ongoing
conflicts - namely, by making natural resources a
factor of stability and a source of development, by
promoting diversification of the economy and by
helping to build a strong and accountable Government.
Such improved management of natural resources would
need to be made into a central element of State-
building efforts within a peacebuilding or national
development strategy.

In line with Article 65 of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council could consider, on an ad hoc basis,
the establishment of a format to discuss development-
oriented approaches to the use of natural resources.
Such a forum could be useful for advancing our
understanding of the link between natural resources
and security.

The oversight role of the Economic and Social
Council in matters of development cooperation and
humanitarian assistance can also be of particular value
in those situations by promoting better integration
between the relevant policy and operational dimensions
and by promoting the concept of an integrated
approach, including with the International Monetary
Fund and the World Bank.

Finally, particular concerns about the growing
number of conflicts in oil-producing regions may
warrant specific focus on the energy sector, with
attention to greater transparency and accountability.

The key operational challenge for us is to
transform what we often refer to by the shorthand term
"war economies", which are fuelled and sustained by
natural resources, into "peace economies", in which
resources can provide a source of conflict prevention
and human security.

