Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I thank the Secretary-
General for his report on the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and Mr. Annabi for the additional information that he
has provided.

I wish to begin my statement by addressing the
significant assessment, in paragraph 62 of the report,
which falls under the heading, "Humanitarian affairs",
that "the immediate emergency is considered over" and
that a country-wide review of the humanitarian
operation concluded that

"humanitarian assistance had been delivered in a
timely and effective manner."

If we recall the widespread destruction of last year and
the humanitarian catastrophe that was unfolding in East
Timor, we see that the present situation is testimony to
what can be achieved to address such situations if the
international community summons the political will to
launch concerted efforts to address situations of
potentially catastrophic proportions.

UNTAET can, indeed, look with satisfaction on
what it has achieved so far, especially ifjudged by the
daunting tasks it faced at deployment and is still
facing. My delegation is, however, convinced that
many of the successes resulted from the professional
and often ingenious manner in which Mr. Vieira de
Mello and his staff took on their challenges. I should
like to refer to some of the methods adopted that will
play a major role in the eventual final success of the
UNTAET mandate.

First, Mr. Vieira de Mello made the decision to
remain at all times in close consultation with the East
Timorese people in the decision-making process. This
was mainly achieved through the establishment of the
National Consultative Council, which has now become
the National Council, to allow for the broader
participation of the East Timorese and ensure that they
become the major stakeholders in their own system of
government and public administration.

Secondly, it was decided to establish a
transitional Cabinet, with the East Timorese holding
the portfolios of administration, infrastructure,
economy and social affairs. This move will provide the
East Timorese with excellent preparation for their
future governmental responsibilities.

Thirdly, a continuous effort has been made to
promote national reconciliation in East Timor.

My delegation also welcomes the ongoing efforts
to normalize relations between East Timor and
Indonesia: the value of mutual visits in strengthening
bilateral relations cannot be over-emphasized. This
process remains essential for future regional
cooperation between the two countries.

With regard to the ongoing rebuilding and
rehabilitation process in East Timor, my delegation
wishes to stress the importance of the private sector's
becoming involved in the creation of employment
opportunities, because of the temporary nature of the
successful quick-impact projects. We also strongly
support the number of projects in progress geared
towards human resource development, and my
delegation looks forward to the reopening of the
national university of East Timor in October.

My delegation is also concerned about the
situation of Falintil, which is currently under
cantonment, with no clear idea about its future. We
therefore support any outcome of the studies under way
which would put Falintil at the core of a future national
security force.

My delegation welcomes the continuing
repatriation of East Timorese refugees from West
Timor and would like to reiterate its satisfaction at the
smooth reintegration of returning refugees into their
original communities. We are, however, concerned
about the fate of the refugees who remain in the camps
in West Timor, and hope that their repatriation to East
Timor will take place as soon as possible. We deplore
the ongoing acts of intimidation and violence by
militias against refugees and relief workers. We trust
that urgent measures will be taken to ensure their
safety and that UNHCR will be allowed to continue its
work without hindrance.

The number of border incidents decreased
following the signing of the Memorandum of
Understanding regarding tactical coordination in the
border area between UNTAET and Indonesia.
However, the tragic event of 24 July, when Private
Manning was killed, stressed the urgent need for
further effective steps to disarm and disband militia
groups. In this connection, I wish to extend our
sympathy and heartfelt condolences to the Government
of New Zealand and the bereaved family.

My delegation notes the opposite situation that
prevails in the eastern sector, which prompted the
Secretary-General's intention to begin troop reduction.
We support that intention and the proposed reduction of
military observers.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to express its
appreciation to Mr. Vieira de Mello and his staff for a
job well done.

