Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to join my colleagues in thanking
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for his valuable briefing and recent report
on the implementation ofthe Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina (S/2018/974, annex). I also want to
underline our full support to the High Representative
in implementing his mandate and in his efforts to assist
the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to overcome
the challenges they are facing.

We commend the efforts to maintain stability and
unity in Bosnia and Herzegovina for all its racial and
cultural components. We also recognize and appreciate
the important role of the European Union-led
multinational stabilization force in achieving that goal.
We also welcome the Council's unanimous adoption
today of resolution 2443 (2018), which sends a strong
message from the international community to the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina that we are committed to
maintaining security and stability there and determined
to continue providing the support needed to enhance
the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

The General Framework Agreement for Peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, signed more than two
decades ago, continues to represent the cornerstone
of institutional stability and to serve as a constant
reference point for sustainable peace in the country. We
are therefore concerned about the ongoing escalation
of divisive and inflammatory rhetoric, and we call on
all political leaders to prioritize the national interests
of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina above all
other considerations and to disregard any narrow
racial or political interests that could undermine the
chances for progress and stability. They must also
work constructively to implement the results of the
7 October elections, including the formation of the
Government, in order to make further progress in the
political process as soon as possible. The Parliament
must also intensify its efforts to adopt new legislation
to provide the judicial system with the necessary tools
for combating organized crime, corruption, terrorism
and extremism, which constitute a direct threat to the
rule of law and hinder efforts to achieve economic and
social development and accomplish integration with the
European Union.

As the report states, these events are happening
at a time when limited progress is being made in
implementing the 5-1-2 agenda established for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative,
especially where the registration of defence property
in the Republika Srpska is concerned. In that regard,
we reiterate our full support to the Office of the
High Representative, pursuant to the Dayton Peace
Agreement and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. We call on him to intensify his efforts to fully
implement the plan.

We are concerned about the increase in the number
of refugees and displaced persons who returned to
Bosnia and Herzegovina since the beginning ofthe year.
Their number had grown to nearly 18,000 by October,
whereas last year it stood at 758. Aid agencies have
warned that this could potentially lead to thousands of
people being left without adequate shelter.

In conclusion, Kuwait underlines the importance of
respecting the unity, stability and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. All stakeholders must
respect its national Constitution and all the judgments
rendered by its judicial bodies to strengthen the pillars
of stability in the country. We call on all parties in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to make concerted efforts
to implement the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to respect the
mandate of the High Representative, pursuant to annex
10 of that Agreement and the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.

