Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to extend our thanks to the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for
his comprehensive briefing.

Jordan expresses its concern vis-a-Vis the accelerating
deterioration of the situation in Ukraine. The crisis
has reached dangerous proportions, and the Security
Council and the international community must
therefore work harder than ever before to resolve the
crisis. More than 4,700 people have died so far and
more than 1 million have been displaced to other
regions within Ukraine and neighbouring countries as
a result of the conflict in the east and the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation there, especially in basic
economic and health services. This is in addition to the
flagrant and systemic violations of human rights being
committed. We do not need to reiterate them at every
meeting, but to affirm that they must come to an end.

That is why we call on all parties to show self-
restraint and to immediately stop using force so as to
salvage the peace process through a return to peaceful
negotiations in order to avert any further escalation,
which would only lead to more violence among the
parties to the conflict.

We reiterate that there is a need to stop the
escalating use of provocative language among the
parties so as to give reason and dialogue a chance.
Jordan reiterates its belief that it is important to respect
the borders of Ukraine as well as its sovereignty and
territorial integrity, not to interfere in its internal
affairs, to restore security and calm to the border areas,
and to stem the flow of foreign fighters and weapons to
the separatists.

Instability in Ukraine will be bad not only for
Ukraine but also for all the countries of the region and
beyond, and the negative political and economic impact
will affect the whole region. That is why we feel that we
must take practical steps to comprehensively implement
the Minsk accord for peace both in letter and in spirit.
That is the political framework that was agreed by all
parties with a View to achieving a comprehensive peace.

We also call on the Ukrainian Government to
continue with its reform programmes, especially in the
public andjustice sectors, and to see thatjustice is done
by holding accountable those who have committed
crimes, including those who have used explosive
weapons, and bringing them to justice, as well as
completing e the trials that were begun for some of
them.

We affirm the need to take every possible measure
to protect civilians, provide basic services for citizens
and implement the human rights strategy that was
charted out for the next five years.

Finally, Jordan values and supports all efforts to
bring about peace and to restore stability and security
to Ukraine, including the efforts made by European
leaders and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and its observers, as well as the
efforts of Kazakhstan to host a Quartet summit at the
end of this month. Jordan looks forward to that summit
and to the urgent meeting of the Minsk Contact Group.
We hope that the two meetings will lead to a positive
outcome and that a solution will be reached that is
satisfactory to all parties.

We also call on the parties to show a genuine
commitment to use this opportunity to work to pacify
the situation in Ukraine and to bring about lasting
peace.

