Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): The Charter gives
the Security Council primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. By
exercising this global role, the Security Council can
promote the observance of international law, which
guides the conduct of States.
As a small State, Singapore has an interest in
strengthening the role of international law and thus in a
strong and effective Security Council. This includes the
implementation of all - I repeat, all - Security
Council resolutions, including those fulfilling the
Council's obligation to protect civilians in armed
conflict, as declared in several resolutions and
presidential statements, including resolution 1314
(2000) of 11 August 2000. The Council should live up
to the standards that it has set for itself. Most
importantly, resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as
well as the most recent resolution on this item,
resolution 1322 (2000), must be implemented.

Yesterday, the Security Council had the
opportunity of meeting with the Israeli Deputy Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister, Mr. Shimon Peres, and
the Permanent Observer of Palestine in separate private
meetings. We welcome this acknowledgement of the
Security Council's role. At these meetings, Council
members sent a clear message about their concerns
over the mounting and continuing violence, particularly
Israel's widespread use of disproportionate force and
the blockade of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip,
which, as several speakers have noted today, have had
profound effects on the Palestinian people. It is
therefore timely for the Security Council to now listen
to the views of the other members of the international
community.

Over the long term, the protection of civilians in
the Gaza Strip and the West Bank can be granted only
if peace negotiations are put back on track. We
welcome the assurances of Deputy Prime Minister
Shimon Peres and the Permanent Observer of Palestine,
Ambassador Nasser Al-Kidwa, that peace remains their
strategic objective. We hope that many of the elements
of previous attempts at peace negotiations can be
picked up from where they were left off.

To make this possible, our immediate priority
must be to stop the violence. Having chosen peace as
their strategic objective, we call on all parties to
renounce violence. The primary responsibility for
stopping the violence and for creating conditions
conducive to peace negotiations being resumed as soon
as possible clearly falls on the parties involved. The
Security Council can help them to fulfil this
responsibility by introducing neutral and objective
confidence-building measures.

One of the proposals that the Security Council is
actively discussing is the establishment of a United
Nations observer force. We believe that an impartial
and neutral international presence can serve as a
confidence-building measure to change the
psychological atmosphere in the occupied territories
and help to neutralize the environment. As Ambassador
Richard Ryan of Ireland noted earlier, we said
yesterday that such a force can play a vital catalytic
role by reducing the level of violence and by changing
the chemistry of the troubled region. We note that the
Ambassador of Colombia also referred to the possible
catalytic role of such a force. We believe that such a
force will complement the role that Secretary-General
Kofl Annan and his representatives on the ground, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the Mitchell fact-finding commission established
by the Sharm el-Sheikh agreement can all play in
trying to defuse the immediate crisis.

Singapore would therefore like the Council to
further explore how such a proposal for an observer
force can be operationalized. One way of doing so is to
task the Secretary-General with consulting with all the
parties. Another possibility is for the Security Council
to despatch its own mission to the region. Since the
Security Council has hosted visits by both President
Yasser Arafat and Deputy Prime Minister Shimon Peres
in recent months, it should reciprocate these gestures
by sending its own team to continue these useful and
constructive dialogue.

Now more than ever, we believe that all the
parties involved and the international community
should take bold steps towards putting the Middle East
back on the road of peace. We should build on existing
peace agreements and the truce framework, and not
undermine them. Every accord that we have reached on
the Middle East - the Camp David accords, the
Madrid Conference, the Oslo peace agreements -
represents crucial a step forward. We have some strong
foundations and we should build on them.

