Italy aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union (see annex 18), as well as with the statement submitted by the Group of Friends of Climate and Security (see annex 21), and would like to add the following remarks in its national capacity. Today's discussion follows a series of various types of meetings - open debates, open briefings and Arria Formula meetings - organized by Security Council members since 2007, on the increasing interrelation between climate and security. Italy did its part in 2017 by organizing an Arria Formula meeting on preparing for the security implications of rising temperatures. In that regard, we very much appreciate the fact that, almost nine years after the milestone presidential statement S/PRST/2011/15, Germany is carrying on the discussion with today's open debate on climate and security, as well as constantly spearheading the discussion within the Group of Friends of Climate and Security, co-Chaired with Nauru. We also commend the other co-sponsors for having been proactive, over these years, in bringing those topics to the attention of the Council. We hope that future Council members will also take the baton. Continuity is indeed key. The latest World Meteorological Organization (WMO) Global Annual to Decadal Climate Update report predicts that there is a is a 70 per cent chance that multiple months in the coming five years will be 1.5째C warmer than pre-industrial levels and a 20 per cent chance that the annual mean global temperature increase will exceed 1.5째C in at least one year. The world is clearly not on track to limiting global temperature rise to 1.5째C, as outlined in the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. Although the report does not explicitly focus on the security impact of climate change, it clearly underscores that a warming world will increase the risk of State fragility and instability. Climate-related risks to health, livelihoods, food security, water supply, human security and economic growth are projected to dramatically increase with global warming above 1.5째C. The climate-related multidimensional challenges are exponentially more difficult in certain areas of the world. Africa is responsible for only 4 per cent of global carbon emissions. Yet, 57 per cent of the countries facing climate exposure and political fragility risks are located in sub-Saharan Africa. The Sahel and the Lake Chad basin are a glaring example of how climate change impacts security. The shrinking of the lake by 90 per cent since the 1960s has increased the competition for water and scarce resources, fuelling mass migration, trafficking and terrorism, with a multiplying effect that risks destabilizing the sub-Saharan and Mediterranean regions. Small island developing States also face the brunt of catastrophic events related to climate change. Climate hazards such as tropical storms and hurricanes, sea-level rise and ocean acidification, when superimposed on existing economic and security vulnerabilities, can lead to crises well beyond the capacities of Governments to manage. Climate change did not pause because of coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Instead, while there are no known direct links between climate change and COVID-19, we will likely see an increase in the spread of vector-borne diseases as climate change intensifies. As temperatures increase, those species will be able to survive in countries and regions in which they previously could not. Climate change also poses a direct threat to our health, and epidemics and pandemics are a trigger for increased instability. In the light of that scenario, we stress the need for intensifying and accelerating international action against climate change. Climate mitigation, adaptation and resilience efforts are increasingly urgent if we are to avert the significant security consequences of climate change. In response to the pressing calls of the Secretary-General, we should redouble our efforts to ensure a prompt and effective implementation of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change by building up political momentum as we mark its fifth anniversary and by effectively promoting ambitious nationally determined contributions and enhanced financial commitments on the road to the events in Milan from 30 September to 2 October 2021, prior to the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Milan and a successful Conference in Glasgow in November 2021. Future regional security conferences that explore the climate and security dimensions and take place before Glasgow could play an important role in putting into focus relevant issues related to climate and security. Greater involvement of foreign and defence ministers in overall climate action could also more beneficially and specifically address the interrelations between climate and security. Italy will aim at enhancing synergies among the different multilateral forums and processes, leveraging its role as incoming President of the Group of Twenty. Although fragile regions face the most severe consequences in the short term, the security risks related to climate change are global and interconnected. Nobody gets to hide to weather this storm. On the eve of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, many modern security challenges do not fit neatly into the original constructs of the international security and governance architecture that was born after the Second World War. Environmental degradation and, most prominently, climate change defy national borders. The world must therefore plan for concerted, coordinated action to predict, prevent and prepare against those foreseeable cross-border threats. Predicting requires the technical capacity to anticipate the most serious consequences of climate change through reliable information and relevant science and technology. In that regard, much progress has been made over the years, notably through the deployment of satellite technology to better monitor weather changes, rainfall patterns, soil moisture, humidity, glacier-mass balance and river flows, thus enabling a precise assessment. The WMO report, for example, is based on the data collected through the Copernicus Climate Change Service managed by the European Union (EU). Another example is the Galileo programme, a global navigation system created by the EU, to which Italy actively contributes and which has ground-operation centres in Italy and Germany. Preventing means being proactive in defusing climate-related threats - in other words, passing from risk identification and risk assessment to action. The Climate Security Mechanism launched by the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, with the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Environment Programme, is a very timely and effective means to incorporate in a systematic way the analysis of climate-related security risks and promoting a supportive response. But preventing is still, by far, the most difficult part, as it requires the capacity and willingness to invest resources with a long-term perspective and gender mainstreaming by addressing the root causes of conflict and effectively using the tools of preventive diplomacy and enhancing or repurposing development assistance to climate-proof vulnerable areas that are likely hotspots of instability. That is a much harder task as the world focuses full tilt on the COVID-19 emergency response and socioeconomic recovery. Preparing also means using the available information to strengthen risk analysis and risk assessment. It implies incorporating risk assessment of climate-related threats into strategic-level policy decisions at multilateral, regional and national levels - mapping the areas where risks are higher and trying to routinize, institutionalize, integrate and elevate the response. Our Arria Formula meeting in 2017 was mostly dedicated to that dimension. We were also particularly active on those aspects in the course of our 2017 presidency of the Group of Seven (G-7), when we presided over the G-7 Working Group on Climate Change and Fragility. As we have seen first-hand with the COVID-19 crisis, global shocks are abrupt. With climate change, we have a clear scientific warning that a potential global shock could have consequences far more devastating than the COVID-19 pandemic. We are in a position, therefore, to predict, prevent and prepare.
