Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I wish to welcome
Mr. Boris Tadie, President of the Republic of Serbia, to
this debate and to thank him for his statement. I also
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for his briefing on the situation
in Kosovo. I also thank Mr. Hyseni for his statement.

We have noted the successes scored so far in the
UNMIK reconfiguration process and the eventual
process of drawing down UNMIK forces, as
recommended by the Secretary-General in his previous
reports. But we have also noted the challenges the
Mission faces in fulfilling its mandate as envisaged in
resolution 1244 (1999). All efforts need to be
undertaken to ensure that the deployment of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) goes forward smoothly.

It is encouraging to note that, in line with the
statement by the President of the Security Council of
26 November (S/PRST/2008/44), EULEX has assumed
full operational responsibility in the area of rule of law
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999) and
under the overall authority of the United Nations. In
that regard, the acceptance of the deployment of
EULEX by the Government of Serbia and the
cooperation between UNMIK police and EULEX are
encouraging.

My delegation appreciates the efforts made by the
Government of Serbia and the Kosovo authorities in
maintaining a working relationship with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We are,
however, concerned that, as pointed out in the report
(S/2009/149), the new laws passed by the Kosovo
authorities make no reference to the powers of the
Secretary-General's Special Representative. This
further increases the challenge to the functioning of
UNMIK. We therefore call upon both parties to offer
unhindered and full cooperation to UNMIK in order to
enable it to fulfil its mandate as envisaged in resolution
1244 (1999).

Uganda commends UNMIK's continued efforts in
working towards the advancement of regional stability
and prosperity, in close coordination and cooperation
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the authorities in Pristina and Belgrade. We
commend them for the proactive steps that have been
taken to facilitate dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade. In that regard, we note that the best possible
option for addressing the Kosovo issue is for both
parties to pursue pacific methods characterized by
continued engagement, mutual respect during the
negotiations, and inter-party dialogue. We therefore
call upon both parties to abide by and respect the
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999).

Although it appears that the overall security
situation in Kosovo during the reporting period
remained stable, Uganda is particularly concerned
about the incidents of inter-ethnic violence involving
Kosovo Serbs and Kosovo Albanians in the region of
Mitrovica. We call upon both parties to exercise
restraint, mutual respect and tolerance in order to
harmoniously live together in the interest of peace. We
salute the prompt intervention of UNMIK formed
police units and the efforts they have made to improve
security in the region, which will in the long term
provide the stability needed for the next phase of post-
conflict reconstruction.

Finally, we urge the Security Council and the
international community to continue to lend the
necessary support to UNMIK, which is critical to
ensuring that the Mission is successful in implementing
its reconfiguration and that it continues to play a
positive role in maintaining peace and stability on the
ground.

