Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of Egypt has read the report of the Secretary-
General on the role of peacekeeping in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants,
contained in document S/2000/ 101, which was submitted
at the request of the Council pursuant to the presidential
statement of 8 July 1999 on this subject. We would like
to extend our thanks to the Secretary-General for
preparing the report and to offer some observations on the
handling of this question in the Security Council.

First, the delegation of Egypt takes note of the
enhanced mandates given to peacekeeping operations by
the Council in the area of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants. In this
respect, we would like to state that any mandate of this
kind should be carried out with the full cooperation and
agreement of the parties to the conflict, as their agreement
is the sole basis on which the implementation of these
activities can begin. Such agreement is an indication of
the necessary political will to proceed with the
implementation of these activities. We cannot impose the
 

implementation of these activities without the agreement of
the parties concerned.

Secondly, my delegation believes that in cases where
the Security Council gives special mandates to
peacekeeping operations to carry out these activities, it
should ensure the adequacy of the resources provided to the
Members of the United Nations and their forces who are
asked to implement the mandate and supervise such
activities. This is particularly necessary with regard to the
disarmament and demobilization component if we are to
avoid any dangerous problems that may arise from a lack
or insufficiency of resources. In this connection, I cannot
fail to mention the reference in paragraph 64 of the
Secretary-General's report to the failure to demobilize
combatants in Angola during the United Nations Angola
Verification Missions because of the inadequacy of human
and material resources at the time.

Thirdly, we recognize the danger by small arms,
which are widely used in internal conflicts and civil wars.
We are also aware that the Security Council sometimes
faces cases in which it must tackle the spread of these
weapons in conflict zones. However, we believe that this
question should primarily be dealt with in the relevant
forums, particularly the General Assembly. Addressing the
issue of small arms in the Security Council should therefore
be limited to the operational aspects related to the
disarmament of combatants within the framework of
peacekeeping operations; it should not extend into other
aspects arising from central and conceptual aspects of the
problem of small arms.

Along these lines, I would also like to point out that
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants are long-term programmes that are part of a
continuum, as the Secretary-General's report indicates.
Many United Nations bodies and agencies working in the
post-conflict peace-building process also deal with these
matters, including the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council. The peace-building process should be
tackled comprehensively, given the interrelated nature of its
elements. In this regard, I must refer to the importance of
coordination between all United Nations bodies and
agencies working in this field in avoiding any conflict
where negative results might affect the successful
implementation of a mission's mandate.

Fourthly, it is important to pay tribute to the important
role played by some non-governmental organizations in
carrying out the demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants in some States. Egypt welcomes that role as
long as those organizations abide by the basic conditions
of their work in this sensitive area, seeking the agreement
of the Government concerned and respecting its national
rules and regulations.

I would now like to move from general points to
two more specific examples: the cases of Congo and
Sierra Leone. I would like to point out that the problem
of armed groups in eastern Congo that are not parties to
the Lusaka Agreement represents a great source of
destabilization in the Congo and neighbouring countries.
They add a dangerous dimension to the already
complicated, difficult and multifaceted conflict in that
country. The international community cannot support the
implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement
without reaching a permanent solution to the problem of
these armed groups. The United Nations cannot establish
and deploy an entire peacekeeping operation without
drawing up and implementing a general and
comprehensive programme to disarm, demobilize and
reintegrate these groups into civilian life.

It is our hope that the Joint Military Commission
will be able to set up a plan in cooperation and
coordination with the United Nations to proceed with the
implementation of this part of the Ceasefire Agreement in
the near future, so as to help pave the way for the other
military aspects of the Lusaka Agreement. Agreeing on an
ambitious plan to disarm, demobilize and reintegrate the
so-called negative forces in eastern Congo will not
contribute in itself to solving the dangerous problem
posed by those armed groups. What is required is the
coordination of the efforts of the United Nations, the
Organization of African Unity, the Joint Military
Commission and the parties to the conflict themselves to
ensure the successful implementation of such a plan after
its drafting and ratification. Undoubtedly, the World Bank
can play a pivotal role in preparing and implementing
such a programme in cooperation with the United Nations
and other parties concerned. This will, of course, require
vast financial resources, which we hope the donor
countries will provide.

Finally, we would like to say that the peacekeeping
operation in Sierra Leone, which will be the largest
peacekeeping operation in the world once it is fully
deployed, is a clear example of the pivotal role that the
international Organization could carry out in the field of
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
combatants, particularly child soldiers. The successful
implementation of this programme in Sierra Leone will
undoubtedly contribute to a great extent to laying the

 

security, political, economic and social basis that is
necessary to achieving peace and stability in that country,
which has suffered the scourge of civil war since 1991.
While we call upon all parties to participate in the
disarmament and demobilization of combatants and upon
the leaders of the Revolutionary United Front and the
former military regime to cooperate fully with the efforts of
the United Nations and the Secretary-General's Special
Representative on Sierra Leone in this respect, we hope
that the donor countries will start providing the financial
resources necessary to implement this programme,
particularly through their contribution to the Trust Fund
established by the World Bank for that purpose. We hope
that the international conference to be held in London on
27 March will lead to positive results in this respect.

