Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Mission in Colombia Jean
Arnault for his comprehensive briefing and commend
his and the United Nations Mission's contribution
to the successful completion of the first stage of the
Final Peace Agreement. Kazakhstan welcomes all
positive recent developments and major milestones
and achievements that occurred in fulfilling the peace
process in Colombia.

The transition of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia (FARC) from a rebel group to a political party
with a new leadership and new logo is a promising sign
to ending the decades-long conflict. The finalization of
the extraction of FARC weapons has nearly completed
the last stage in the process of laying down arms. We
welcome the extension of the mandate of the current
United Nations Mission for an additional two weeks to
conduct operations verifying the destruction of arms
caches until the Government of Colombia takes over
that task on 15 September.

Kazakhstan commends the recent announcement
of the ceasefire and cessation of hostilities between the
Government of Colombia and the National Liberation
Army. We believe that that will result in a longer-term
and more firm ceasefire leading to a lasting settlement
in Colombia. We hope that following the historic
bilateral ceasefire, the National Liberation Army will
cease its acts ofkidnapping, attacks on oil pipelines and

atrocities committed against the civilian population,
while the Government of Columbia will do its best to
improve living conditions for the civilian population in
conflict areas and ensure the security of activist leaders
and citizens.

We join the Secretary-General in commending the
role of the guarantors, Brazil, Chile, Cuba, Ecuador,
Norway and Venezuela, as well as the Catholic Church
in supporting the much needed negotiations. We
believe that it is very important to ensure the successful
implementation of certain provisions of the Final Peace
Agreement, such as the political, economic and social
reintegration of former FARC rebels, personal and
collective security guarantees and comprehensive
programmes on security protection measures for
communities and organizations in conflict-affected
areas. We therefore emphasize the need for both parties
to continue to fulfil their obligations and commitments
under the provisions of the Final Agreement. We are of
the View that the United Nations Verification Mission
will ensure the full implementation ofthe peace accords
and secure the irreversibility of the peace process. It is
worth noting that the Verification Mission has taken
into account all of the shortcomings and drawbacks
encountered during the implementation of the first
mandate so as to ensure the success and efficiency of
the second mission.

We agree that recruiting a larger number of women
for the implementation of the peace process and further
deepening collaboration with the United Nations
country team to ensure a whole-of-United Nations
approach in Colombia are crucial for the efficiency
of the Verification Mechanism. We fully endorse the
Secretary-General's recommendations with regard
to the effective deployment of the second mission in
Colombia in terms of geographical representation,
staffing and the mandate's structure. Kazakhstan
extended its full support for the mandate of the second
mission when it co-sponsored resolution 2366 (2017)
reiterating its commitment to support the parties in
implementing the historic Final Peace Agreement
(see S/PV.7997).

Lastly, we realize that the Colombian peace process
is not only a guarantee of security and stability in the
western hemisphere, it is also a positive example to
countries around the world facing similar challenges
in the form of long, protracted conflicts. The fact
that the Government and the FARC approached the
United Nations about helping them to verify the Peace
Agreements' accomplishments makes us confident
that the parties are united in their desire to bring a
brighter future to Colombia and its people. Kazakhstan
would therefore like to congratulate the Government of
Colombia on its success in bringing peace and stability
to the country and to express its strong support for the
parties involved. We stand ready to join the multilateral
and regional efforts to accelerate the momentum of a
peace process that will ultimately result in stability,
progress and prosperity for all Colombians.

Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia)
(Spoke in Spanish): We would like thank Mr. Jean
Arnault, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Mission in
Colombia, for sharing with the Security Council the
Secretary-General's report on the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia (S/2017/745).

In the past few months, the Security Council, and
the international community as a whole, have seen the
peace process in Colombia make extraordinary progress.
The ceasefire has been consolidated, culminating
in the laying down of arms by the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP), followed this week by the destruction of
weapons caches. We note that both sides have taken
visible steps towards fulfilling the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace and have shown that they are determined to stay
the course, which gives us hope that this long-desired
peace can be achieved. We would like to once again
commend the Government and the leaders of the FARC
for the political leadership they have shown in achieving
this goal, and we should not neglect to mention the
third corner of this virtuous triangle, that is, the active
participation of the victims of the armed conflict. That
leadership, along with a bold approach and a spirit of
reconciliation, has made this an exemplary process for
the whole world.

We would also like to thank and pay tribute to
the United Nations Mission in Colombia, including
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and his entire team, for what they have achieved in a
short space of time. There can be no question that the
tripartite Monitoring and Verification Mechanism has
been fundamental to maintaining and strengthening
confidence between the Government and the FARC-EP
and could definitely be a model for conflict resolution
in other parts of the world.

The men and women who have served as observers
in the Mechanism since its launch in 2016 have done
an impeccable job, for which we would also like to
pay them a sincere tribute - and, if I may, I would
like to single out the more than 50 Bolivian soldiers
who participated in the first mission. However, we
should not forget that there is still much work to be
done in response to one of the main focuses of the
Peace Agreement - transforming the standard of
living of the most vulnerable sectors affected by the
conflict and reducing the gap between rural and urban
areas. We welcome the efforts that the Government is
making in that regard by deploying security forces,
establishing the rule oflaw, promoting the provision of
goods and services to the affected areas and creating
a special new jurisdiction for peace. We also believe
that it will be very important to address the issues of
formalizing titles to land in rural areas and improving
social security coverage for farmers and peasants. We
hope that the international community can provide the
necessary cooperation.

As we know, the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia - the country's second Mission - will be
responsible for verifying the political, economic and
social reintegration of the FARC's more than 10,000
members, as well as the implementation ofmeasures for
their safety and security, in accordance with paragraphs
3.2, 3.4 and 6.3 of the Final Agreement, which is
unquestionably a complicated part of the process.
Bolivia believes that the achievement of sustainable and
lasting peace in Colombia depends upon successfully
reintegrating the FARC-EP into civilian life. We believe
that both the Colombian Government and the FARC will
continue to demonstrate political leadership and firm
resolve to comply with the agreements and bring peace
to their country. For that, it will be essential to ensure
that the Security Council is united in support of the
Colombian process. In that regard, we have welcomed
the Secretary-General's efforts and taken note of the
recommendations made for the second Mission. The
Council will meet in the next few days to discuss the
information in the report, and I am sure that we will
continue to work in the same spirit of unity.

Bolivia would like to take this opportunity
to welcome the new political party formed by the
FARC-EP, which represents a historic step for them
as they now legally enter political life. As President
Evo Morales Ayma said when we welcomed its
founding congress, we support peace, socialjustice and
sovereignty for Colombia. Today, our revolutions are
democratic, achieved with votes, not weapons. We also
welcome the agreement reached between the Colombian
Government and the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional on
implementing a temporary bilateral ceasefire, recently
announced at the Quito public peace dialogue table.

In conclusion, I would to recall the message of
reconciliation that Pope Francis dedicated to the young
people of Colombia during his recent visit there, when
he said that they can help to be

"the promise of a new beginning for Colombia that
leaves behind the floods of discord and violence,
a Colombia that wants to bear abundant fruits of
justice and peace".

