Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank you, Sir, for
organizing this meeting on a subject of the greatest
importance and whose incidences constitute a great
deal of the daily workload of the Security Council.

The issue of peacekeeping operations is
undoubtedly one of the most delicate facing the
Security Council. Before taking decisions on
peacekeeping operations, which must be very carefully
weighed, the Council must analyse crisis situations in
all their variables. It must obtain the unanimous
political support of its members and of the
international community. It must be able to mobilize
the needed resources - human, financial and
logistical - so that, when the decision to launch a
peacekeeping operation is taken and despite the risks
that such an endeavour always involves, the Council
and the international community can face the situation
with confidence and the greatest possible assurances of
success, because failure brings disaster in its wake, the
worsening of the situation the operation was expected
to contribute to solving and meagre prospects of a
sustained solution in the foreseeable future.

It is clear that, in the very first stages of
considering a crisis issue, the Security Council must
determine whether peacekeeping is the appropriate
option to resolve a given crisis situation. The Council
must be sure that there is indeed a peace to keep - to
paraphrase the Brahimi report - and that the parties to
the conflict agree to pursue their objectives by political
means and agree to United Nations involvement. In the
event such conditions are met, the Security Council -
and especially its permanent members - must show
resolve and a clear sense of purpose and must lend
their unreserved political support to the decision to
launch a peacekeeping operation.

The core question with regard to such an
operation is the mandate entrusted to it. That
mandate - as suggested in the background paper
prepared by the Syrian presidency - should be clear,
credible, realistic and achievable. A clear mandate
translates the Security Council's unity of purpose,
establishing clear guidelines while formulating the
goals and missions of the peacekeeping operation. It is
credible if it translates the identity of the goals and
missions of the operation, if there is unreserved
political support for it and if the requisite resources are
provided for the accomplishment of the operation. It is
realistic if the goals and missions entrusted to the
operation are in line with the wishes and expectations
of the recipient country and of all the involved parties,
particularly the neighbouring countries. Finally, it is
achievable if the appropriate number of adequately
trained and equipped troops are deployed and if it is
made flexible enough by combining a robust military
capacity, prepared for the contingency of a worst-case
scenario, with a strong element of deterrence in order
to send a clear message to spoilers tempted to
destabilize the peace process.

Concerning the question of appropriate rules of
engagement and their uniform application within
missions, it is established that the restrained use of
force is one of the most important principles of
international peacekeeping operations, with very strict
rules for caring for and storing weapons and for the
justifiable use of force. The concept of peacekeeping
operations with a robust military capacity overtakes, in
large measure, the traditional concept of the rules of
engagement for peacekeeping operations. Such was the
case with the deployment in strength of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), which is
viewed as having given concrete meaning to the
concept of robust peacekeeping - that is, a
peacekeeping force deployed, not to wage war, but
prepared to exercise the option of war. The case of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - where the United
Nations Mission was entrusted with a robust mandate
and where its military capacity was strongly
reinforced - also represents a change in the traditional
rules of engagement of peacekeeping operations. Thus,
we do not see the need to apply uniform rules of
engagement to all missions, it being our view that the
question must be seen with a certain degree of
flexibility and in accordance with the specific mandate
entrusted to a mission.

United Nations peacekeeping operations must be
part of a comprehensive strategy to help resolve
conflict. Humanitarian aid, economic and technical
assistance, security-sector reform, institution-building,
the promotion of good governance, promotion of and
respect for human rights, adherence to the rule of law
and the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of former combatants are some of the crucial elements
of a comprehensive strategy to deal with the root
causes of conflict and to ensure a sustainable and
lasting peace.

We should like to highlight the importance of
supporting peacekeeping missions with a regional
strategy. The meeting that the Council held yesterday
with the delegation of the Economic Community of
West African States on the situation in Liberia showed
the important role that regional organizations can play
when they are committed to dealing with issues that
have the potential to affect a whole region. Cooperation
between the Security Council and regional and
subregional organizations - which the Charter of the
United Nations recognizes and encourages - has
enormous potential that must be developed and
strengthened to enhance the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations.

Before concluding, I should like to underline the
issue of security for personnel in peacekeeping
operations. That issue was raised with renewed
intensity by the recent criminal terrorist attack against
the United Nations in Baghdad - a development that
was translated into the recent adoption by the Security
Council, led by the Syrian presidency, of resolution
1502 (2003) as an expression of the concern and
resolve of the international community to address that
important issue.

Finally, we should like to congratulate the Syrian
delegation on its great competence in presiding over
the work of the Security Council during this month. In
the short period of time that my delegation has sat on
the Council, Mr. President, we have learned to
appreciate your competence and wisdom. We
particularly appreciate your resolve and conviction in
the defence of your country's positions under
extremely difficult circumstances. Please accept our
expression of admiration and our best wishes as you
carry out your new responsibilities.

