Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): We
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this meeting. We are also grateful to Ambassador
Mayoral, Ambassador Loj and Ambassador Burian for
their insightful briefings regarding their respective
Committees.

My delegation notes with satisfaction that since
the last briefing, in May 2006 (see S/PV.5446), the
three Committees have achieved commendable
progress, particularly in the areas of outreach activities
to Member States, promoting compliance, facilitating
implementation and enhancing reporting capacity. We
are also encouraged by their programmes of work
covering the period from now until 31 December 2006.

Tanzania attaches great importance to the
cooperation that exists among the 1267 Committee, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the 1540
Committee. Their three groups of experts have shared
information on their activities and have made joint
travel arrangements to avoid duplication of the
information sought from Member States.
We have noted with a sense of gratification the
timely coordinated efforts by the expert groups to try
and come up with practical measures to address the
long-standing problem of non- and late-reporting
States. What is more encouraging to us is their clear
understanding of the underlying cause of the problem
they are grappling with, which is a lack of capacity
rather than of will to take responsibility.

The three Committees have proved to be
important tools of the Security Council in its fight
against terrorism. It is for that reason that the Council
must continue to render close cooperation and
guidance to the Committees and offer them full support
in their recommendations. It is also a moral duty and
obligation for Member States to increase cooperation
and ensure the necessary collective cooperation in their
respective contributions to the work of the
Committees. The recent adoption of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy illustrates the
strong determination of the international community to
fight terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.

My delegation appreciates the outline provided
by the Chairman of the 1540 Committee, Ambassador
Burian, on the most recent activities undertaken by the
Committee and its future efforts to promote compliance
in order to achieve the implementation requirements.
The first seminar on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) in the Asia/Pacific region - held on
12 and 13 July, 2006, in Beijing, China - was well
attended. We expect the same of upcoming similar
seminars scheduled for November this year in Ghana
and Peru. Tanzania has confirmed its participation in
the Accra seminar. We encourage other members to
have wider participation, while not forgetting the
Vienna workshop on 8 November 2006.

We are satisfied with the efforts made to increase
the reporting level to a substantial one and call upon
the remaining States to submit their first report before
the end of 2006. We agree that there is still a need to
give priority to outreach activities and seek additional
information for those reporting States in order to speed
up the implementation of resolutions 1540 (2004) and
1673 (2006), including the dispatching of the matrix
and legislative database to Member States reporting for
the first time.

Regarding the Committee's official web-site
efforts, developed to promote information sharing and
the provision of updates on legislative issues, we
believe that it is a huge achievement and will greatly
assist States enacting national implementation laws and
measures, as it contains background information and

legislative advice provided by international
organizations. It is gratifying to hear that the
Committee will from now on direct its efforts at
identifying national practices in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004).

The review provided by the Chairperson of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, Ambassador Loj, has
greatly increased our understanding of the Committee's
activities to date and what is in store.

The main focus has been geared at steps to
address the problem of incitement to terrorism,
including conducting dialogue with Member States on
their efforts leading to the implementation of resolution
1624 (2005) and assisting in capacity-building and
promoting the exchange of information. Besides the
low level of reporting, the Committee has made quite
an extensive analysis to be able to conclude that States
are aware of the steps that may be taken to prohibit and
prevent incitement. Twenty-one of the 69 reporting
States informed the Committee that incitement to
commit a terrorist act or acts was expressly prohibited
in their criminal laws.

We are encouraged to observe that the Committee
will continue to focus its work on enhancing its tools,
including by revising the reporting regime, on how to
enhance the facilitation of technical assistance for
States in need, and on how to enhance relations with
the international, regional and subregional
organizations.

The agreement reached by the 1373 Committee
on an update of its web page regarding basic
indications of best practices accumulated up to now
provides another milestone in the work of the
Committee. It is encouraging to note that States now
use the information contained on the web page as a
source of guidance in their continuous efforts to
implement the provisions of resolution 1373 (2001).

The Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions Committee,
led by Ambassador Cesar Mayoral, has made
remarkable progress. Tanzania understands its
obligation to freeze the assets of individuals and
entities on the Consolidated List in accordance with
resolution 1373 (2001), despite some delays owing to
the sensitive nature of the matter, fair investigation
requirements and the need to ensure transparency in the
entire process. Tanzania is of the view that any
confrontational approach that includes naming and
shaming could sometimes be counterproductive.
In the case of Tanzania, assets of the charitable
organization Al-Haramain Islamic Foundation, which
had 14 branches worldwide, managed to slip through
the net because the listing of the branches by the
Committee was done in stages. In view of that,
Tanzania wants to urge the Committee to work on a
new modality that will address all delays in the
freezing of assets of entities with tentacles worldwide.
Tanzania, like other members of Interpol,
acknowledges with appreciation the remarkable
achievements of the cooperation between the
Committee and Interpol. Within its short existence,
Member States have provided valuable information on
listed persons. We wish to encourage the Council to
consolidate those gains and explore other avenues of
cooperation with Interpol.

We acknowledge that Member States have made
impressive progress in the fight against terrorist
financing, particularly in the areas of financial crime
and money-laundering. Nevertheless, we believe that
the Committee and Members States need to exert
greater effort in the area of the informal sector.
Developing countries, where the informal sector
thrives more, are inadvertently providing the
infrastructure needed for raising finances for terrorist
activities. We call upon the Council to give attention to
the issue by providing assistance to such States and to
address it in the forthcoming resolution.

Finally, one of the Monitoring Team's initiatives
that have enriched the Committees' and Member
States' understanding of the situation on the ground is
the convening of regular meetings of the regional
chiefs and senior officials of national intelligence and
security services. Tanzania has been invited to attend
the forthcoming Eastern Africa meeting in Khartoum,
the Sudan. The Monitoring Team should also
encourage interregional cooperation.

