Judge Joensen: I would like to begin by extending
my congratulations to the representative of Malaysia,
His Excellency Ramlan Bin Ibrahim, whose country's
delegation is presiding over the Security Council
in June. I also seize this opportunity to welcome the
representatives of Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Spain and Venezuela, which have joined the Council
since my last briefing in December 2014 (see S/PV.7332). I wish them all the best for a successful
term of duty. On behalf of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), I would also like to
express the gratitude of the entire Tribunal to all of the
Governments of the Council for the support they have
provided as we approach the completion of our mandate
and closure of the Tribunal.

Please allow me to once again express my sincere
appreciation to the United Nations Legal Counsel,
Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares; the Assistant Secretary-
General for Legal Affairs, Mr. Stephen Mathias; and
the staff of the Office of the Legal Counsel for the
continued support they provide as a liaison between the
Tribunal and the Security Council.

It remains an immense honour for me to provide
the members of the Security Council with an update on
the progress towards the completion of our mandate,
especially as it is expected that this may be my
penultimate briefing before the Council.

First, I will provide an update on the progress of
the judicial work. I am happy to report that the Appeals
Chamber has now completed its work with respect
to all appeals from Tribunal trial judgements, with
the exception of one case, the Nyiramasuhuko et a].
(Butare) case concerning six persons.

Following the oral hearings that took place in April,
the Butare case is now in its final stage, judgement
drafting. As previously reported, the scope and
complexity of the appeals in the Butare case combined
with the continued departures of experienced staff and
the need to rule on voluminous pre-appeal litigation
prior to the oral hearings has plagued the appeals team
and caused considerable strain on their workload.
Nonetheless, the delivery of the Butare appeal
judgement remains projected for later this year, and
more precisely, we expect the judgement to be delivered
in the fourth quarter of 2015. The formal closure of
the Tribunal is still expected to occur before the end
of 2015, following the rendering of the judgement. I
commend the judges and all of their support staff for
the tremendous work that they continue to do to ensure
that the extremely large and complex Butare appeal is
completed as projected.
I would also like to note that in December 2014,
in light of the projected time line for the completion of
the Butare appeal and considering the current Judges'
involvement in cases before the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, I requested that the
Secretary-General convey my request for the extension
ofthe terms of office ofthe ICTR Judges to the Council.
On behalf of the Tribunal and my fellow Judges, please
allow me to express our gratitude for the support shown
by Member States in resolution 2194 (20l4), which
granted the requested extensions.

Considering the significant work that the Appeals
Chamber continues to undertake and bearing in mind
their commitment to finalizing our sole remaining
appeals case without delay, I feel that it is important for
me and for the Council to acknowledge the dedication
and commitment demonstrated by all the Judges and
staff of the Tribunal in The Hague and in Arusha, who
work under extremely tight deadlines to ensure that
we meet our completion strategy goals. I would also
like to commend President Meron for his leadership of
the ICTR Appeals Chamber and to thank him for the
assistance he provides with respect to the transition
of functions to the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals and to me in my role as Duty
Judge of the Arusha branch of the Mechanism. It is also
important to recognize the work of Prosecutor Jallow
and Registrars Mr. Majola and Mr. Hocking as well as
the work of their respective Offices, all of which have
been instrumental in our progress towards completion
and the transition to the Mechanism.

As I have done in the past, I would now like to
briefly update the Council on the issue of reparations
for victims. As previously reported to the Council,
the International Organization for Migration has
completed and submitted a draft assessment study to
the Government of Rwanda on the issue of reparations
and possible ways forward. Once the report is finalized,
which should occur in the coming months, it shall be
transmitted to relevant stakeholders and follow-up
activities will be planned. I should like to take this
opportunity to renew my praise for the efforts being
undertaken to ensure that the project continues to move
forward.

I now return to the very troubling issue of relocating
those persons who were acquitted or convicted and
released who are still residing in Arusha. The issue of
relocation remains a daunting one, and the challenges
that the ICTR have faced with relocating these persons,
some of whom have been residing in a United Nations
safe house for over a decade, have been brought to
the Council's attention on numerous occasions. As
the ICTR makes preparations to close its doors, it is
only appropriate that it passes that important duty onto
the Mechanism, which has assumed responsibility for
the relocation and care of the acquitted and released
persons in Arusha on 1 January. However, until its
closure, the ICTR remains committed to providing any
support and assistance that the Mechanism requests. In
that regard, we once again call for the urgent assistance
of the Security Council to find a sustainable solution to
the issue.

I now turn to the subject of the transition to the
Mechanism. 1 am proud to report that reliance by
the Mechanism on the ICTR for administrative and
other services has been significantly reduced, and
the Mechanism continues to assume responsibilities,
pursuant to resolution l966 (2010) and in line with the
transitional arrangements. The monitoring of all ICTR
cases referred to national jurisdictions is now fully the
responsibility of the Mechanism; however, the ICTR
continues to assist the Mechanism by providing interim
monitors in the French cases.

I would also like to draw the attention ofthe Council
and the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals to several cases of contempt/false testimony
before the Tribunal. In May, as part of an exhaustive
review of judicial work being in transition to the
Mechanism, it was determined that there were, in
fact, four cases of contempt/false testimony before
the Tribunal. Those indictments were confirmed
prior to 1 July 2012 and, pursuant to the transitional
arrangements in annex 2 of resolution 1966 (2010),
remain the responsibility of the ICTR. Considering
that all of the suspects remain at large and that even
if the trials were to commence today, the ICTR would
likely be unable to complete them prior to closure, I
have assigned benches to review the indictments and
ascertain whether any action is necessary prior to
closure of the ICTR in order to preserve the possibility
of those cases being prosecuted by the Mechanism.

With respect to the Tribunal's archives, the
ICTR remains devoted to ensuring that records are
prepared in a manner that will facilitate their effective
management after being transferred to the Mechanism.
I am pleased to report that as of 5 May, the Tribunal had
transferred to the Mechanism more than 1,700 linear
metres of records comprising more than 75 per cent
of physical records anticipated for transfer. Judicial
records relating to the Butare case have been separated
for transfer following the appeals judgement, while all
other records have been transferred, or are scheduled
for transfer, before the Tribunal closes. Despite the
challenges presented by the volume and nature of the
records and the downsizing of human resources, the
Tribunal is hopeful that the preparation and transfer of
its records will be completed on time.

As I anticipate briefing the Council as President of
the ICTR only one more time after today, I would like
to conclude my remarks with a word on the Tribunal's
legacy. Apart from the judicial work that continues to
consume most of our attention, the Tribunal has taken
its impending closure as an opportunity to ensure
that the lessons learned in the creation, operation and
closure of an ad hoc international criminal tribunal are
preserved for posterity and shared with those Courts,
both international and domestic, that will succeed the
ICTR.

The twentieth anniversary of the ICTR provided the
Tribunal with one such opportunity as representatives
from various Courts and academia travelled to Arusha,
The Hague and New York in November and December
2014 to reflect on the Tribunal's impact on peace
and reconciliation in Rwanda. Those events allowed
for discussions on the initiatives that the ICTR has
created to share developed practices with continuing
judicial institutions, as well as other initiatives, such
as the best practices manuals created by the Office
of the Prosecutor, the aim of which is assisting other
international and national courts to build on the
experience of the ICTR.

Most recently, a workshop on the best practices and
lessons learnt in Chambers was held at the International
Criminal Court (ICC), where representatives from the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon, the ICC, the ICTR, the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the Mechanism engaged in discussions on the technical
aspects of providing legal assistance to the judiciary
during the pre-trial, trial and appellate phases. The
workshop also facilitated discussions about what
else can be done to ensure that the lessons learned in
managing trials at the ICTR are not lost with its closure.

Iwish to commend all ofthose involved in organizing
those workshops, which I hope will continue, as they
provide an important forum to learn from the past by
examining what works, what needs improvement and
how judicial institutions can continue to evolve.

It is, as always, a distinct privilege to address the
Council and on behalf of the Tribunal I wish to express
our gratitude for the support that the Governments of
Council members continue to provide. As we make
arrangements for closure, their continued assistance
remains crucial to the efforts that we are making
to ensure that the Tribunal closes its doors with its
mandate completed and its legacy secured.

