Mr. Salander (Sweden): Despite all efforts, the
Angolan peace process has made no significant progress
in recent months. Both parties must show their
commitment to implementing the Lusaka Protocol fully
and without reservation. However, the main responsibility
for delaying the peace process lies with UNITA.

In resolution 1127 (1997) of 28 August 1997, the
Council sent a clear message to UNITA that the
international community would no longer tolerate its
obstructions. The Council decided to impose additional
measures unless the UNITA leadership took concrete and
irreversible steps to comply with its obligations under the
Lusaka Protocol. Last month, the Council afforded the
UNITA leadership additional time to comply with the
Lusaka Protocol. In spite of this, UNITA has still not
fulfilled its obligations. The Security Council must
therefore act accordingly.

Decisions under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter are necessary in serious circumstances.

 

Unfortunately, this is once again the case in Angola. The
measures which will come into effect today are specifically
aimed at the UNITA leadership. They will not negatively
affect the Angolan people. Exemptions are made for
humanitarian purposes. Furthermore, the conditions for
lifting the sanctions are made clear. The Sanctions
Committee for Angola needs to ensure that the sanctions
regime is implemented correctly, with the cooperation of all
States Members of the United Nations.

The draft resolution leaves no doubt about the firm
determination of the Security Council to help to bring
lasting peace to Angola. The sanctions are not an end in
themselves, but a means to convince the UNITA leadership
that there is no alternative but to comply with the Lusaka
Protocol.

The United Nations continues to play a vital role in
the peace process in Angola. Sweden fully supports today's
decision to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) for a further three
months. Given the tense security situation in Angola, it
remains important that the drawdown of the military
component of the mission be carried out taking into account
developments on the ground. The Mission must be able to
fulfil its mandate without harassment or obstruction.

Vital military elements of the peace process still
remain to be fulfilled. We hope that the next few months
will also, however, show progress in the implementation of
MONUA's crucial civilian mandate, not least in the human
rights and political field. In the area of human rights, we
look in particular to the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights to assist MONUA in strengthening the
mission's human rights component and in the fulfilment of
its human rights mandate. We agree with the Secretary-
General about the essential role of United Nations civilian
police in the peace process, especially during the extension
of state administration.

Sweden will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us. Sweden would also like to take this opportunity
to urge both parties to ensure that all Angolan forces are
immediately withdrawn from the Republic of the Congo.
This is a necessary step in order to create relations of
mutual trust and confidence in the region, as well as in
Angola itself. We urge the Government to notify MONUA
of any troop movements, in accordance with the Lusaka
Protocol.

Sweden would like to express its appreciation for the
continuous efforts carried out by the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative, Maitre Blondin Beye, the three
observer States - Portugal, the Russian Federation and
the United States - as well as to the personnel of
MONUA. These efforts remain essential for the
advancement of the peace process and the achievement of
national reconciliation.

