Mr. Mulet: Before I start, I would like to confirm
to the Council the very sad news of the death this
morning of the Deputy Force Commander of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS), Brigadier
Ahmed Moinuddin, who was shot down in Islamabad
while on leave in his home country of Pakistan. He had
taken over his responsibilities as Deputy Force
Commander of UNMIS in the Sudan on 24 June.

(spoke in French)

I thank the Council for the opportunity to update
it on the situation in eastern Chad and the north-east
Central African Republic. The Secretary-General's
quarterly report (8/2009/535) on the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT) is before the Council. I take this
opportunity to highlight a number of points of
particular interest, as well as the most significant
2
developments that have taken place since the report
was issued.

As the report indicates, MINURCAT continues to
train, advise and monitor the Detachement integre de
securite (DIS), the Chadian community police force
tasked with preserving law and order in refugee camps,
internally displaced persons sites and the main cities in
the East of the country, as well as with assisting in
creating a security environment conducive to carrying
out humanitarian activities. If it is to continue this
support and to finance new programmes in the justice
and prison sectors, the MINURCAT Trust Fund will
requires $21.7 million for 2010. To this end, pledges
totalling $14.5 million were made at a donor meeting
held in Brussels on 2 October. These pledges, from the
European Commission, France, Luxembourg, Norway
and the United States, demonstrate donors' firm
commitment to DIS, which is acknowledged and highly
appreciated.

Nonetheless, given the $7.2 million still to be
mobilized, we invite members of the Council to assist
us in generating additional pledges from other donors.
MINURCAT's support for DIS is essential to achieving
some of the objectives relating to the fulfilment of the
Mission's mandate, especially the strengthening of
Chad's capacity to ensure the security of refugees,
displaced persons, civilians and humanitarian workers,
to maintain law and order and ensure respect for
human rights.

With DIS now deployed, efforts are currently
focused on improving its training and capacities.
MINURCAT and the Government of Chad will soon
reach a critical stage in that process with the gradual
transition towards national ownership and financing of
DIS. While the Chadian Government remains
committed to assuming responsibility for this vital
national force, the backing of the international
community during this transition remains essential.

(spoke in English)

As of 19 October, MINURCAT comprised 2,750
troops, representing 53 per cent of its authorized strength.
We continue to do everything possible to expedite the
deployment of all pledged contingents. However, the
expansion of the force has been impeded by difficulties
experienced by some troop-contributing countries in
acquiring and transporting equipment, which is all the
more critical given the impending departure of some
contingents. Meanwhile, the impending Withdrawal of
existing transport and engineering units will also
constrain the Mission prior to the arrival of new
09-57164
contingents between December 2009 and March 2010.
While MINURCAT is developing measures to ensure the
continuation of operations in all sectors, the capacities
of the force will be stretched in the coming months.

In some cases, the deployment of the
MINURCAT force has also been delayed as a result of
legal matters, including disputes over the payment of
taxes on goods and supplies imported by MINURCAT
contractors or provided by troop-contributing countries
under letter-of-assist arrangements. In this regard, I am
pleased to report that on 15 October, the Government
of Chad and MINURCAT signed an addendum to the
status of mission agreement to incorporate the military
component. We hope that, with this very welcome
development, past disputes concerning charges
inconsistent with the agreement will not be repeated.

Despite these challenges, I am pleased to report
that the MINURCAT force, within its current strength
and capacities, has continued to build confidence,
including through a series of high-profile operations
designed to deter criminality and provide a security
umbrella. Improved coordination between DIS, the
national police and the gendarmerie has also enhanced
security for humanitarian efforts.

On 17 October, a campaign to unite to end violence
against women was launched in Chad as part of a United
Nations initiative to combat sexual and gender-based
violence by promoting the adoption and enforcement of
national legislation in line with international human rights
standards, the implementation of national and local action
plans, and awareness-raising campaigns. However, as the
rainy season abates, we remain concerned by
unconfirmed reports, denied by the Government of Chad,
of the ongoing presence of forces of the Justice and
Equality Movement in border locations in the North-East,
and by similar reports of Chadian armed opposition
groups on the Sudanese side of the border.

In this regard, however, we are encouraged by a
statement made by the Governments of Chad and the
Sudan on 11 October, following a meeting in
N'Djamena between Chadian President Deby and
Sudanese presidential adviser Ghazi Salah Al-Din,
stressing their desire to restore confidence between the
two Governments. In recent days, President Deby has
also publicly committed to working with the Sudan on
a number o£ confidence-building measures. During his
recent visit to N'Djamena for discussions on the Darfur
political process, the African Union-United Nations
Joint Chief Mediator Djibril Bassole encouraged the
Government of Chad to continue this dialogue, since
09-57164
an improvement in Chad-Sudan relations would have a
direct and positive impact on efforts to achieve peace
in Darfur. The Government of Chad's stated intention
to relocate the Oure Cassoni refugee camp away from
the border could also be a positive development for
Chad-Sudan relations.

As we have stated on many previous occasions,
progress to normalize relations between Chad and the
Sudan must be matched by efforts to address the internal
conflicts prevailing in both the Sudan and Chad. In this
regard, we welcome progress made in the
implementation of the 13 August agreement, including
the establishment of an independent electoral body to
oversee legislative and presidential elections in Chad
and the recent announcement of the census results.

Following a request by the National Electoral
Commission, a needs assessment mission was sent to
Chad in late August by the Department of Political
Affairs, in collaboration with the United Nations
Development Programme. The team has finalized its
report and will shortly begin discussions with the
Government of Chad on the electoral process.

In the meantime, we encourage the Government
and political opposition to fully implement governance
aspects of the 13 August agreement, sponsored by the
European Union, to promote the transparent functioning
of administrative, judicial and military institutions. We
also call on armed groups in Chad to relinquish their
arms and for all parties to engage towards a
comprehensive process of national reconciliation.

(spoke in French)

I should like in conclusion to touch on the
situation in north-eastern Central African Republic,
which to some extent has stabilized since my most
recent briefing to the Council. The situation remains
unpredictable, however, and the underlying sources of
insecurity, including inter-ethnic tensions, have yet to be
resolved. We encourage the Government of the Central
African Republic to step up its efforts to facilitate inter-
community dialogue and to launch a credible
disarmament process in the region.

