Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to begin by welcoming Her Excellency Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, President of Chile, and by thanking the
briefers for their valuable.

Many examples in modern history demonstrate the
relationship between development and security, and in
particular the relationship between development and
armed conflicts. Nevertheless, that relationship has not
been accorded priority, either in academic literature
or in practical implementation. In our View, that
might be attributable to many traditional factors, the
most salient being the lack of communication among
decision-making circles working in development
and security, whether inside Governments or among
international organizations involved in development. A
lack of communication also exists among the latter and
other organizations interested in security with regard to
embracing new concepts like human security and other
multifaceted, complicated security-related phenomena,
such as terrorism and epidemics.

We would like to thank Chile for shedding light on
this important topic and for focusing on some aspects
that we believe have been absent in the discussion on
security and development: inclusivity, peacebuilding
and combating the threat of extremism. We hope that we
can build on the discussions that are taking place today
and on the presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/2) that
was recently adopted, which Jordan fully supports.

The United Nations must address the relationship
between security and peace through integrated policies
and programmes, particularly peacebuilding operations.
Post-conflict assistance to countries should be based on
a comprehensive, integrated approach that addresses
the interrelatedness among political and development
activities, human rights and the rule of law. Jordan
agrees with the contents of the concept note (S/2015/6, annex) circulated by Chile on the role of inclusive
development in the maintenance of international peace
and security. We support the idea of concentrating on
the importance of inclusivity in development as a factor
in maintaining peace and in building peace. That is a
primary aspect of the Jordanian position vis-a-vis the
conflicts on the Security Council's agenda.

Jordan rejects the marginalization and exclusion
of any segment of society, and warns of the spillover
effect of such an approach on political stability,
security, development and national sovereignty. Jordan
stresses the importance of addressing the concept of
national ownership in achieving sustainable peace. The
primary responsibility falls on national authorities in
deciding the priorities in post-conflict peacebuilding.
Such policies should be both specific and realistic, and
the goals attainable through well-planned coordination
among national societies and all stakeholders at
the local level. That can also be achieved through a
realistic assessment that takes into consideration the
specific needs of societies emerging from conflict and
their circumstances, as well as available resources for
implementing those policies.

Donors have the responsibilty of providing the
necessary development support for States in post-
conflict peacebuilding. That should not be understood
to mean that donor countries or relevant organizations
are the catalysts of change in those societies. Rather,
change must be intrinsic to that society, take local
knowledge into consideration and not ignore the
internal dynamics of such societies.

Gender relations in society play an important role
in establishing the basis on which peace is built. We
must therefore focus on including women at all stages
of peacebuilding and development projects and on
empowering them during conflict and in post-conflict
situations.

Peace and security are interlinked. Guaranteeing
their sustainability in post-conflict situations requires
addressing the root causes ofinternal conflicts, themes
that previous speakers at this meeting addressed. In
many situations, those may have social, economic,
ethnic, religious or tribal roots. Guaranteeing the
sustainability of peace and development must not only
be based on the absence of war, but also on replacing
the structures that led to inequality and insecurity.
Countries in post-conflict stages must be assisted
in building new structures, or in restructuring them,
so that we can instil the concepts of justice and
equality, particularly in societies that experienced war
crimes, genocide and all kinds of discrimination and
marginalization.

In conclusion, we believe that successful
development policies based on inclusiveness contribute
to addressing social and economic imbalances and the
sense of injustice that extremist groups could use to
recruit, particularly among young people. Development
policies must therefore focus on empowering young
people, building their future, unlocking their potential
and finding job opportunities for them.

