The President: We now begin the second session
of the workshop, which is on developing a coordinated
action plan for the Mano River Union.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Sir Kieran
Prendergast, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs.

It is so decided. I invite Sir Kieran to take a seat
at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Abdoulaye Mar
Dieye, Director for West Africa of the United Nations
Development Programme.

It is so decided. I invite Mr. Dieye to take a seat
at the Council table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 15 July 2002 from the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom to
the United Nations, which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that the
Security Council extend an invitation to General
Chekh Omar Diarra, Deputy Executive Secretary
of the Economic Community of West African
States, to address the Security Council under rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Council, during its consideration of the Mano
River Union on 18 July 2002".

This letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2002/760.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees on an invitation under rule 39 to
General Chekh Omar Diarra.

There being no objection, it is so decided. I invite
General Diarra to take a seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Florian Fichtl,
Senior Social Protection Specialist for Regional Human
Development ofthe World Bank.

It is so decided. I invite Mr. Fichtl to take a seat
at the Council table. We will now start our second
session. We have three keynote speakers, and I should
like to give the floor to Sir Kieran Prendergast, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

