Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): Armenia would like to
thank the Swedish presidency for organizing the open
debate on children and armed conflict. We appreciate
the high importance that Sweden attaches to the issue,
as was exemplified by His Excellency the Prime
Minister in presiding over the Council earlier today. We
also thank the Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba; the Executive
Director of UNICEF, Ms. Henrietta Fore, and the civil
society representative, Ms. Yenny Londofio, for their
insightful briefings.

We welcome and support the adoption of resolution
2427 (2018), which was drafted by Sweden, aimed at
further enhancing the protection children from Violence.

The annual report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2018/465) highlights
an alarming increase in the number of violations. The
report is a stark reminder of the gravity of the situation
faced by children in many conflict areas. There is a
pressing need to scale up collective efforts to ensure
that all children, whether in situations of armed
conflict or in peace, live free of violence, exploitation
and coercion.

The mandate of the Special Representative plays
an important role in helping prevent grave violations
and identifying the key challenges and complexities
in implementing effective protection mechanisms on
the ground. In that context, we welcome the efforts
of the Special Representative to establish capacity for
enhanced synergies among United Nations agencies,
international, regional and subregional organizations,
and local non-governmental entities.

Armenia continues to prioritize the protection
of children's rights, in accordance with our national
policies and the frameworks of international cooperation
we has embraced. Armenia's commitment to promoting
the safety of children in armed conflict is also reflected
in our endorsement of the Safe Schools Declaration, the
Paris Principles and Paris Commitments, as well as the
Vancouver Principles. Armenia is also a signatory to
the Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in
armed conflict, and we encourage Member States who
have not yet done so to join those important instruments.

Today's open debate once again reminds us about
the tragic impact of conflicts on children living in
affected areas and the daily risks they face. We strongly
condemn violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, including and in
particular when they concern the rights and the lives
of children.

Effective protection of children in situations of
armed conflicts requires a strengthened commitment
to the implementation of relevant international
instruments. As a consistent supporter and promoter
of the concept and practice of prevention, Armenia
prioritizes the focus on the early action. Supporting
impartiality and independence in humanitarian action
and providing unimpeded humanitarian access is
crucial to preventing and alleviating the sufferings of
children caught in conflict.

In our region, as a result of the aggression of
Azerbaijan against the people of Nagorno Karabakh,
we have been observing deliberate, indiscriminate
targeting of civilian populations and infrastructure,
including schools and hospitals, in which civilians
and schoolchildren were killed and injured. Placing
military installations in civilian settlements and using
them as launch pads for shelling along the borders is a
clear violation of international humanitarian law.

The reports of instances of appalling violations
against children are deeply alarming. No less
disturbing, however, are certain practices, whereby
children - vulnerable as they are - are deliberately
exposed to hate propaganda, which fuels ethnic hatred
and incites violence and intolerance. Such practices are
incompatible with norms and principles of international
human rights and humanitarian law and must be
identified, condemned and eradicated on every level,
without reservation.

