Mr. Moungara-Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in F rench): Mr. President, my delegation would like to say
again how grateful we are to your country for organizing
this debate on the situation in Africa and specifically,
today, on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Your presence with us this morning eloquently
reflects your country's enormous interest in the ills
afflicting countries in Africa.
I should also like to thank Mr. Miyet for his
statement and for the useful and detailed information he
gave us. Also, like others, I would like to welcome
progress made in the activities of the Joint Military
Commission, given the resources available to it.

I welcome the appointment of former President
Masire of Botswana as the facilitator for the inter-
Congolese dialogue. It is a good choice. As we have seen,
he has been accepted by all the parties. However, for the
dialogue to occur in an appropriate atmosphere there are
some basic requirements, and the disturbing reports about
ceasefire violations hardly reassure us that the dialogue
will begin soon in a way that can lead to national
reconciliation.

As the situation is extremely fragile, the Security
Council must act quickly to avoid a continuation of the
vacuum - for which the Council has often been
criticized - which could be exploited by the parties in
order to resume hostilities on an even broader scale. After
the investment of so much effort, and after so many
debates, to achieve a negotiated, lasting settlement of the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
think that is not what the Council wants to see happen.

We are aware of the difficulties, but remain
convinced that with a firm commitment by everyone,
including the parties themselves, we will be able to arrive
at a settlement of the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We believe that the Security Council
should focus on its will to settle the conflict rather than
on the difficulties, of which we are all aware.

 

Someone rightly said here in the Chamber that it
would not be realistic to want to obtain absolute security
guarantees. We believe that is completely true. It has not
been a requirement in other situations, and we see no
reason why it should be in the case of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The Security Council has rightly always been
concerned with human rights and the suffering of civilians
in armed conflict. Taking swift action to resolve the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo could
spare the Congolese people further suffering as a result of
the fighting.

Africa can no longer be satisfied with words from the
Security Council. It expects real, immediate action in the
difficult situations it is experiencing, such as that in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and has already waited
too long since the signing of the Lusaka Agreement last
July. The Security Council must shoulder its
responsibilities. It would also be desirable to continue to
exert pressure on the parties to ensure that they comply
with their commitments under the Lusaka Agreement.

