Mr. Mercado (Philippines): We thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this important meeting to
discuss the outcome of the recent Security Council
mission to West Africa. We join other delegations in
commending Ambassador Emyr Jones Parry for his
able leadership of that productive mission, which
visited seven countries in 10 days.

West Africa is a region that faces many
challenges, but it is also a region of great potential.
That potential, however, has not been realized in past
years. It is in that light that the Security Council
continues to remain actively seized of the issues of the
region. The Security Council's visits last year and last
month were not only a clear manifestation of the
Council's keen interest in the promotion of peace and
security in West Africa, but also, and equally
important, the Council's strongest medium for
delivering its message to the concerned parties in the
region. The main themes, which cut across the seven
countries visited by the mission, were the unbreakable
link between peace and security on the one hand and
economic development on the other, and the need to
employ a regional approach in addressing complex
crises and conflicts in the region.

Bearing those themes in mind, we welcome the
report of the mission (S/2004/525) and would like to
highlight the following points.

First, inasmuch as security and development go
hand in hand, the United Nations should harness and
use all of its resources in planning and implementing
its conflict-prevention, conflict-resolution and post-
conflict peace-building strategies. That entails
interdependence, cooperation and coordination among
United Nations organs whose mandates have an impact
on the attainment of sustainable peace. The
collaborative work undertaken by the Economic and
Social Council's Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-
Bissau and the Security Council's Ad Hoc Working
Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa
in monitoring and supporting the political, economic
and social developments in Guinea-Bissau have
resulted in appreciable progress in carrying out a
peaceful transition in that country. That collaboration
should continue, and it should be encouraged for other
countries in the region.

Secondly, the Security Council should also be
guided by the economic aspects of its interventions
when planning its exit strategies for peacekeeping
operations. A case in point is Sierra Leone. While its
gross domestic product has been growing by an
average of 6.5 per cent for the past three years, it
cannot be denied that the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) is an important contributor
to the Sierra Leone economy. The departure of
UNAMSIL in 2005 would have a negative impact on
the country's economy, at least in the short term. That
means a shift of focus from security-sector reform -
which should still be pursued - to creating jobs and
stimulating private investment to sustain economic
growth. Inasmuch as Sierra Leone is now in the post-
conflict peace-building stage, greater attention should
be given to economic concerns.

Another lesson learned from this situation is that
the economic impact of the drawdown of successful
peacekeeping operations should be factored into
withdrawal decisions. In view of that, economic
indicators could be used as one of the benchmarks in
drafting future drawdown plans for peacekeeping
operations.

Thirdly, the Security Council should continue to
exert its influence in creating a constructive
environment for these post-conflict countries to receive
aid and get investments. It cannot be denied that the
Security Council's positive engagement in a country
can encourage donors to provide financial assistance
and persuade entities to invest. Since peace and
security are the paramount considerations of investors,
the Council's imprimatur can convince investors to
bring in their resources - for example, to rebuild
physical infrastructure, which is an important
requirement for long-term economic development in
Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau.

In the same vein, the Council should also strongly
encourage those countries to improve their business
climates for investor confidence, as institutional
stability is the second main concern of investors, after
peace and security. That can be done by assuring
transparency and accountability in governance.

My delegation would finally like to underscore
the important role of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) in the West African
equation. ECOWAS is the regional organization most
capable of helping the countries of West Africa achieve
peace and development. ECOWAS still faces serious
challenges, but it is growing in effectiveness.
ECOWAS needs the continued strong support of both
the Security Council and the international community
in order to achieve its goals and objectives.

We recognize the recent efforts of ECOWAS in
attaining economic integration. As post-conflict peace-
building looms on the horizon, it may be time for
ECOWAS to give attention to the economic
considerations of the region, which was the original
purpose of its existence. The establishment of the
Abidjan-Lagos highway corridor, the construction of
the Lagos-Accra pipeline and plans for a West African
power grid system are initiatives with far-reaching
consequences that should be actively pursued.

Much work lies ahead of us in operationalizing
the various recommendations contained in the
mission's report. The problems of West Africa continue
even as we speak. We have no other option but to
proceed to implement the courses of action we have
agreed upon. My delegation looks forward to the day
when the Security Council need not send its members
to the field to assess the situation and find solutions to
problems in the region. When that day arrives, it will
mean that we have done our job.

