Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too extend our condolences to our Chinese
colleagues in the light of the incident that occurred at
a preschool in the east of the country. We extend our
sympathy to the families of the victims and wish the
injured a speedy recovery.

We thank the briefers for their comprehensive
statements. We agree with the approach of Secretary-
General Anto'nio Guterres. It is important to develop
and strengthen cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union and African subregional
organizations. The potential for closer cooperation
exists and the challenges faced by both Africa and the
international community dictate the need to pool efforts
and harness the organizations' comparative advantages.

We welcome the efforts of our African partners
in settling crises in Africa. We note that the African
Union and other subregional organizations have
stepped up their efforts and initiatives considerably in
that sphere, including through the establishment of a
continent-wide peace and security architecture. We are
confident that in order to effectively overcome crises
in Africa, we need an approach that brings together,
above all, the leadership of Africans themselves to
determine the paths to settling disputes, and effective
international support for such efforts. We support the
African solutions to African issues approach.

We would like to draw attention to the fact that
cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union must be rooted in Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations and include key provisions such
as the alignment of regional players' initiatives for the
maintenance of peace and security with the purposes
and principles ofthe Charter, while prioritizing peaceful
dispute settlement, Security Council authorization
for any coercive measures and reporting before the
Council. We trust that the Secretary-General's proposed
algorithms will fully take those issues into account.

Furthermore, it is important for a unique crisis
solution to be tailored in each instance in a manner that
reflects the specific situations of local communities.
We believe that in most instances, regional actors are
more familiar with the situations in areas within their
purview. Yet, given the main responsibility of the
Security Council - the maintenance of international
peace and security - we do not believe that the Council
can fully opt out of addressing such issues. They cannot
be left solely to the discretion of African organizations,
especially if we seek to apply all requisite measures.

It is important to enhance predictability, reliability
and flexibility in financing African operations andjoint
missions. As a matter of principle, we do not object to
considering the possible expansion of United Nations
participation in such missions. We stand ready to
engage in further constructive dialogue in that regard.
However, we believe that regardless of the options
chosen, it is critical to retain the current procedure
followed by the United Nations in considering and
approving relevant budget requet requests to ensure
transparency and accountability in the allocation
and disbursement of funds and to provide for United
Nations staff participation in all planning stages and
for the effective implementation of the goals set forth.

Furthermore, we note the importance of further study
of the Secretary-General's ideas, with representatives
of the African Union Commission. In that context, we
must have a clear picture of the degree to which African
partners are ready to strengthen cooperation, including
financially and for peacekeeping and security. It is clear
that enhanced cooperation between our organizations
will inevitably entail greater regional ownership, which
they must be fully willing to undertake.

