Dr. Nabarro: As for Ms. Chan, it is a privilege for
me to be here on this historic occasion. I will give my
quick feedback on the messages in the many remarks
I have heard today that I am taking home, as we go on
with our important tasks.

First, all those who spoke, in their different ways,
really appreciate the seriousness of this challenge as
a major public-health crisis that has multiple other
impacts with the potential for wider effects regionally
and internationally. Secondly, this was a demonstration
of powerful solidarity with the countries that are
currently affected, with an appreciation for what they are
doing through their civil society groups, Governments
and their partnerships with others. We see increased
signs of willingness to open or maintain air links and
other trading links, and strong indications of solidarity
among African nations and between Africa and the rest
of the world. Thirdly, I am personally gratified to see
how the work of the various parts of the United Nations
system is recognized, with a valuation not only of the
role of the World Health Organization (WHO) as the
world's health leader but also of other United Nations
agencies, as Ms. Chan identified just now.

Several Governments used today's meeting as an
opportunity to offer generous commitments. Some
of those are from within Africa, offering significant
contributions to the international response. Others are
more traditional donors. But what I saw today was an
extraordinary outpouring of support, big and small,
from all over the world - a real global coalition. I
also heard Governments saying that they were willing
to be coordinated and expressing trust in the capacity
of the United Nations to act as the coordinating body.
As the Senior United Nations System Coordinator
for Ebola, that is really refreshing for me to hear. I
noted widespread support from virtually all speakers
for the historic plan of the Secretary-General and the
Director-General of WHO to establish an exceptional The President: There are no more speakers on
public-health mission, the United Nations Mission for the list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
Emergency Ebola Response. Finally, I simply feel that present stage of its consideration of the item on its
everyone here wants us all to get going and do more, so agenda.

With that I Will shut up and get on. The meeiing rose at 7.50pm.
