Mr. Zambrana Torrelio (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we welcome the presence of
Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
and and Regional Integration of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mr. Le'onard She Okitundu. We
also appreciate the briefing by Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO). We wish her success in her post.

The most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/174) notes that the political situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo remains
tense, particularly with regard to the elections and
confidence-building measures. In that regard, Bolivia
reiterates that, in order to ease such tensions, the
parties must implement the 31 December 2016 Political
Agreement for the effective holding of peaceful,
credible, inclusive and timely elections that lead to a
peaceful transfer of power and ease political tensions.

We urge the signatories to the Agreement to
implement it, including the confidence-building
measures contained therein. That is why we support
the initiatives and the good offices of the Special
Representative in that regard. However, we reiterate
and call on the parties not to overlook the principles
of preventive diplomacy and good offices aimed at a
negotiated political solution. In that connection, we
welcome the progress made towards the implementation
of the electoral calendar made by the Independent
National Electoral Commission and the conclusion by
that body of the registration of 46 million potential
voters, of whom 47 per cent are women.

We commend the work of the regional organizations,
such as the Southern African Development Community
and the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union, for their support to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in the holding of presidential and legislative
elections on 23 December. In that context, we welcome
the meeting held on 14 February, which was attended by
the Presidents of the Republic of the Congo, Angola and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and at which a
communique was issued calling for the implementation
of the Nairobi declarations of 12 December 2013 and
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.

We would like to emphasize the joint work of the
Head of MONUSCO and the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region on the
preparation of the elections. We highlight their work on
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, as
well as the repatriation, resettlement and reintegration
of the members of the various insurgent groups, both
Congolese and foreign, operating in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We encourage the Mission to
continue to expand the community violence reduction
programme and to promote peaceful coexistence among
communities, in coordination with the Government and
armed forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
in accordance with its mandate.

We believe that the implementation of such
measures would be better complemented by the
deployment of the Intervention Brigade, which is
essential both to supporting the electoral process and
to protecting civilians, so that, in coordination with
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the political and security challenges facing the
country can be overcome. The most recent report paints
a sombre picture of the security situation and gives a
comprehensive account of the continuing violence,
which includes disputes over natural resources,
conflicts between armed groups and intercommunal
and ethnic violence. That is why it is estimated that this
year, more than 13 million people will need protection
and humanitarian assistance. That is an increase of
50 per cent as compared to 2017.

MONUSCO has been present in the country for 20
years. In the light of the renewal of its mandate, we
believe that it is imperative to re-evaluate its priorities.
We believe that it is important to reflect on the current
needs of the Congolese, whether there is a joint
strategy with the Government or if the root causes of
the conflict, such as the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, have really been addressed. It is important
to support the decisions of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in the context of respect for its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity in order to
achieve long-term peace and stability.

