I am grateful for this opportunity to contribute to this important discussion. Building on the statements of Under-Secretary-Generals Lacroix and DiCarlo, I will focus my remarks on the operational support aspects of the possible drawdown and closure of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the continuing start-up of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS). In doing so, I will highlight a number of key issues warranting the Council's attention. UNAMID has long operated as a tripartite partnership between the United Nations and the African Union, working closely with the Government of the Sudan. That cooperation will never be as important as during the tasks involved in a safe and orderly drawdown and closure of the mission. In the best of circumstances, drawing down and closing one of the largest operations ever conducted under the auspices of the United Nations would be a major undertaking. UNAMID continues to deploy well over 6,000 military and police personnel, most of them within 22 contingents. The more than 1,500 remaining civilian staff include some 700 international staff. Together, they are spread across the logistics and operations base in El Fasher, mission headquarters in Zalingei and 13 team sites in Darfur, as well as in Khartoum and Port Sudan. The 22 contingents represent immeasurable value in equipment deployed by contributing countries. In addition, more than 10,000 mission assets plus inventory remain. The orderly and safe drawdown of the personnel of a mission of this size is clearly an endeavour of no less than six months, to be followed by a 9 to 12 month period of asset disposal and liquidation, with the ongoing full cooperation of the Government of the Sudan and local authorities. A compressed timeline and the inherent logistical challenges of closing the various team sites, repatriating uniformed personnel and their equipment, separating or reassigning remaining staff and properly disposing of the mission's assets will be an enormous task. As the Council is aware, Darfur is a landlocked area, and the mission relies on a single, medium-sized runway to support strategic passenger movements. Furthermore, the movement of equipment and inventories across vast distances, both within Darfur and from Darfur to Port Sudan, will become paramount to the success of the drawdown. The mission currently relies on force protection provided by contingents as the backbone of its security arrangements. In the event of a drawdown, UNAMID would therefore increasingly rely on the Government of the Sudan to provide security to the staff and assets of the mission. Past experiences in the drawdown of UNAMID also demonstrate the need for the proper provision of security by the Government of the Sudan. Recognizing those imperatives, the Security Council may wish to consider options for maintaining a modest, inwardly focused guard unit capability during the drawdown. That may be especially important given the need for Sudanese security forces to focus on the protection of civilians. In addition, we are committed to the regulatory requirements of the Government of the Sudan under the status-of-mission agreement, where applicable, but coordinated and responsive approvals will be equally important. That includes efforts to ensure environmental restoration in each of our sites. Furthermore, visas for staff who are critical to the drawdown, along with some additional surge capacities, remain essential. The challenges ahead increase the strategic risks of a protracted drawdown and closure. Following the Tripartite Coordination Mechanism meeting in October, my Department and the mission jointly reviewed and updated UNAMID drawdown and closure planning to prepare for the expiration of the UNAMID mandate on 31 December 2020. Through briefings and discussion with the Government of the Sudan, we dedicated one day to establishing a coordination mechanism, for which officials visited El Fasher. The challenge remains daunting. My hope is that a streamlined coordination mechanism will provide a basis for addressing the challenges I have outlined today, but it must be augmented by ongoing engagement with the Government at the political level. The leadership of remaining United Nations personnel and the full cooperation of troop- and police-contributing countries, will also be important ingredients for a safe and orderly drawdown and handover of programmatic responsibilities to UNITAMS, the country team and Government institutions. Similarly, the Government's ongoing and full cooperation will be critical in establishing UNITAMS in parallel to the closure of UNAMID. Almost 30 staff members have been recruited on a temporary basis for the new mission, and we continue to rely on the Government of the Sudan for the prompt processing of visa requests so as to allow them to take up their duties. In addition, the transfer of UNAMID facilities and equipment to support the establishment of UNITAMS and the work of the country team remains critical. Lastly, I would like to express my gratitude to the African Union, which has been our partner in this endeavour. I also commend the efforts of the mission to prepare for a responsible and accountable drawdown and closure so as to safeguard the legacy of the mission and the Organization. I count on the Council's support in its forthcoming resolution.
