Mrs. Odera (Kenya): My delegation welcomes this
opportunity to express its outrage and condemnation of
the criminal and unjustified terrorists bombings which
occurred almost simultaneously in Nairobi and Dar-es-
Salaam on 7 August 1998. Terrorist acts are by design
ruthlessly indiscriminate, and the bomb blast in Nairobi,
which occurred at one of the busiest locations in terms of
human traffic and commercial activities, was no
exception. It has so far claimed over 250 lives, and the
death toll continues to rise. Many are either in critical
condition in hospital or unaccounted for. Over 300 are
still hospitalized, while some 4,500 innocent civilians
have been treated for injuries suffered from the blast.
 

The bombs caused damage estimated at over $500
million to property. One seven-storey building was
completely destroyed. Several others within the vicinity
suffered extensive damage. A total of 67 buildings received
collateral damage.

Nothing can be more brutal and horrifying than this
act which wiped out an entire classroom of students who
were waiting for their final exams. This is what the
perpetrators of this despicable crime did when they blew up
and flattened Ufundi Cooperative House.

The bombings in Nairobi and Dar-es-Salaam brought
mayhem and terror of an untold magnitude to two countries
that had hitherto considered themselves secure and far
removed from threats and dangers posed by acts of
terrorism. Alas, we were wrong. The two incidents make it
abundantly clear that nobody is safe from or unaffected by
this heinous practice. The extension of these activities to
our otherwise peaceful countries exemplifies the expanding
reach and growing menace of the perpetrators of terrorist
acts.

Today's meeting of the Council, which has been
convened in response to the two terrorist bombings, is a
demonstration by the international community that such acts
- regardless of whom they are directed at, wherever and
by whomever they are committed - cannot be tolerated.
The resolution just adopted is a resounding statement of
condemnation and abhorrence of acts carried out against
innocent people. The Government of the Republic of
Kenya, on its part, will not rest until those responsible are
convicted. We appeal to Member States to cooperate with
the ongoing investigations, in Kenya and Tanzania and
outside, aimed at bringing the culprits to justice.

Finally, let me take this opportunity on behalf of the
Government of Kenya to express gratitude for the generous
assistance and support promptly made available in the
rescue efforts by Governments, international organizations
and volunteers who came from far and wide.

