Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, Bolivia would like
to express its deepest condolences to the members
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), who have
lost three of their own in recent days. We also extend
our condolences to the people and the Government
of Chad.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2017/869) and His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye
Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs, International
Cooperation and African Integration of Mali, for his
statement on behalf of the countries of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).

Iwould also like to thank Mr. MoussaFaki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, and
Mr. Angel Losada Fernandez, the European Union
Special Representative for the Sahel. Bolivia also
welcomes the presence in this Chamber today of the
Foreign Ministers of Burkino Faso, Chad, Mauritania
and the Niger. We wish to express our gratitude to the
presidency of France for organizing not only today's
meeting, but also the trip to the region that allowed the
members of the Council to have a much more direct and
profound View of problems that affect the region.

Bolivia welcomes and commends the efforts of
Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and the Niger
in the deployment and operationalization of their
forces on the ground. The deteriorating political,
socioeconomic and security situation in the region,
in addition to jeopardizing the integrity and lives of
the people in the area, has curtailed and obstructed
the development of the region. We are sure that the
strategic concept of the operation and the deployment
of their forces with the purpose of countering the
impact of terrorism and transnational organized crime
through multidimensional operations in border areas
provide an appropriate complement to the work being
done by MINUSMA in Mali. The challenges facing the
G-5 Sahel are critical, and the response must, of course,
not be delayed.

We would also like to highlight the efforts of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
as it seeks to implement the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel, which goes hand in hand with
the Nouakchott Process on the enhancement of security
cooperation and the operationalization of the African
Union Peace and Security Architecture in the Sahelo-
Saharan region. The G-5 Sahel is the clearest example
of the contribution that African countries are making
to strengthen their security capacity in the region.

As an example ofthe situation in the countries ofthe
Sahel, let me refer to Mali, which, following a peaceful
transfer of power in 2002, enjoyed a period of political
stability and economic growth. Today, however, it
is suffering in a complex and volatile environment,
facing asymmetric threats that are not only putting the
political peace process at risk, but are also threatening
the civilian population and the members of the United
Nations peacekeeping mission. Not only must they
grapple with the impact of the violence from armed
groups, but they must also fight the threat of terrorist
groups and the transnational underworld and organized
crime, which are operating illicit networks trafficking
in persons, including migrants, drug and arms,
inter alia.

As a number of my colleagues have said, it is
therefore important to analyse the structural causes
of the conflict, which have brought about the volatile
security situation in the region. We have witnessed with
great concern the consequences of interventionism and
regime-change politics pursued in the aftermath of
the 2011 conflict in Libya. One of the side effects of
the foreign interference was the destabilization of the
Sahel, which brought chaos, terrorism and trafficking
in weapons and generated a vicious circle of violence.
Likewise, we cannot ignore, among the underlying
structural causes, the exploitation of natural resources,
which is intrinsically tied to international peace
and security. Countries of the subregion, such as
Mauritania, Mali and the Niger, are depositories of
substantial mineral wealth, while others like Chad are
rich in hydrocarbon resources.

It is clear that the security situation in the Sahel
presents great challenges both for national Governments
and for the international community. According to
statistics from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, of the almost 150 million of
inhabitants in the region, approximately 30 million
people face food insecurity; 12 million live at the crisis
and emergency levels; and six million children under
the age of 5 and pregnant and nursing women suffer
from malnutrition and are in need of urgent assistance.
That does not include the 4.9 million people who have
undergone the ordeal of internal displacement.

Moreover, the effects of drought and climate
change affect the Sahel every year. The lack of basic
services is having a negative impact on health, thereby
increasing the risk of the spread of diseases and the
need for their treatment. Bolivia believes that it is
necessary to mobilize a humanitarian response in order
to curb the population's vulnerability.

Within the framework of the United Nations four
support options for the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel,
it is necessary not only to take into account the
recommendations of the African Union, but also to
ensure sustainable and predictable economic support
for the Force. In that regard, as the five representatives
of those countries have pointed out, every effort and all
cooperation must be channelled through multilateral
institutions like the United Nations.

In conclusion, we call on and encourage the
international community to continue to contribute with
technical support to and economic and humanitarian
cooperation with all initiatives aimed at helping the
people of the Sahel in the interest of achieving stability
and permanent peace in the region. It is not only a
question of every country feeling duty-bound out of a
sense of solidarity and self-interest with regard to the
situation in the Sahel, but, above all, countries that are
partly responsible for the extremely volatile situation
in the region must also shoulder their responsibility.

