Mr. Mendoza-Garcia (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa Rica would like to thank you and your
delegation, Sir, for having convened this important open
debate and for your leadership of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural Matters.

Costa Rica aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
Group, which has contributed very responsibly to the
discussion on various aspects of the activities of the
Security Council.

We live in a time when transparency in
decision-making processes and the accountability
of representatives to those whom they represent are
based on increasingly solid principles of organization.
Presidential note S/2010/507, in its updated form,
marks an important landmark in the history of the
Security Council, above all with regard to transparency.
The note addresses many of the concerns of the
Organization's Members and resolves some of them, at
least conceptually.

We welcome the progress made in the past year
on very important issues such as documentation; the
election - six-months earlier than in earlier years - of
the non-permanent members of the Security Council;
the selection process for the next Secretary-General,
which has promoted the transparency and participation
of Member States and civil society; the call for more
monthly open debates on cross-cutting topics that are
important to all Members; wrap-up sessions aimed at
sharing details on the Council's monthly work with
all Member States; and the monthly publication of the
Council's programme of work.

Nevertheless, a review of the Council's practices
also leads us to conclude that the challenges involved in
implementing the agreements and rules that have been
adopted still persist. For example, Costa Rica is of the
view that the Council should pay more attention to the
inputs of those with legitimate interests in, or who are
affected by, the Council's decisions. Similarly, there
should be more direct and transparent communication
between the Council and its subsidiary bodies and with
the rest of the Organization.

The actions of the Security Council are increasingly
in the public domain, but we are still far from the spirit
of the guideline set forth in the rule that states that,
unless it decides otherwise, the Security Council shall
meet in public. In that connection, we believe that it is
imperative to finally and formally adopt the provisional
rules of procedure of the Security Council, with a view
to increasing transparency and accountability and
regulating and ending the excessively discretionary
nature of the Council's actions.

We reiterate the need to improve relations,
communication and cooperation among the General
Assembly, other relevant bodies and the Council,
without overstepping the mandates set forth for each
of those bodies in the Charter of the United Nations, in
order to work together to safeguard international peace
and security.

We also need greater transparency in the work
of subsidiary bodies. Additionally, it is important to
continue promoting improvements in the drafting of
the Security Council's annual report to the General
Assembly by involving Member States in an informal
and interactive debate during both the drafting and the
presentation to the Assembly. Moreover, the Council's
report should contain more analytical discussion of its
daily work and should not be a mere description of the
work being carried out.

Finally, we emphasize the need to continue our
efforts to delineate the limitations on the use ofthe veto,
such as its prohibited use in cases of genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes and massive violations
of human rights, as proposed by the Accountability,
Coherence, Transparency Group in its code of conduct.

My delegation underscores its conviction that
the working methods of the Security Council are a
fundamental aspect of its comprehensive reform. The
implementation of the agreed-upon measures to improve
the Council's working methods and the inclusion of
new measures will lend greater effectiveness to the
Council's actions and will contribute to its transparency
and accountability. We are therefore convinced that
a substantive reform of the working methods will
help us remove obstacles that sometimes prevent the
Security Council from entirely fulfilling its mandate
as enshrined in the Charter and strain the Council's
relationship with other organs.

