Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to welcome the presence in the
Council of Mr. Adil Abdal Mahdi, Vice-President of
the Republic of Iraq. I also wish to thank Mr. Qazi and
the delegation of the United States for their briefings.

Allow me to make the following comments.

First, as others who have spoken before me have
said, the situation in Iraq continues to be very
serious - as regards security, for instance. The report
issued last January by the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) listed a total of 35,000
civilian deaths in 2006 - or about 100 persons
daily- and more than 36,000 injured. In today's
report (S/2007/l26), the Secretary-General states that,
despite a brief improvement in the situation, an
atmosphere of serious violence continues to prevail in
Iraq. That violence is characterized by the continuation
of especially deadly and barbarous attacks, to which
the Security Council reacted publicly on 22 February.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, the
Secretary-General has already alerted the Council to
the issue of displaced persons. Today there is a record
2 million displaced persons in neighbouring countries,
with 1.9 million internally displaced in Iraq itself. The
Secretary-General goes even further, stating that this
crisis "has the potential of turning into a full-scale
humanitarian emergency" (S/2007/126, para. 30). As
far as I know, this is the first time that phrase has been
used. I would therefore be grateful to the Secretariat
for an explanation as to what it means, and its
significance for the United Nations if the assessment is
borne out.

Given the situation and the urgent need to halt the
deterioration, France notes the importance of re-
establishing a true political perspective through action
on several levels. First, at the internal level, we must
support genuine national reconciliation, the key to the
country's unity and stability, in the framework of an
inclusive process involving all elements of Iraqi
society. At the regional level, we should follow the
example of what was done at Sharm el-Sheikh in 2004
by strengthening dialogue among the neighbouring
countries, which have an important role to play in
contributing to stability and maintaining Iraq's
territorial integrity. At the international level, we
should set a clear timetable for the withdrawal of
foreign forces so as to allow the Iraqis to recover their
full sovereignty, assume all their responsibilities and
promote a national consensus.

France has also sought to play its part in the
humanitarian effort by contributing to the programme
of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and by actively supporting
the non-governmental organizations that continue to do
outstanding work in Iraq. In that context, the French
authorities have naturally followed with great interest
the ideas that have been mooted and initiatives
undertaken, especially since the beginning of the year,
at the levels cited earlier.

Within Iraq itself, the Government has affirmed
its intention of pursuing national reconciliation, in
particular in the political and legislative contexts. At

the regional level, on 10 March a preparatory meeting
was held for a forthcoming conference of Iraq's
neighbours, bringing to Baghdad the neighbouring
countries and representatives of the international
community, including of permanent members of this
Council. At the international level, in the framework of
the new American strategy, a transfer to the Iraqi
authorities of competencies for security throughout the
territory has been scheduled to take place by the end of
the year. Finally, the gravity of the humanitarian
situation in Iraq has been acknowledged and the
international community is increasingly responding to
it.

My country naturally hopes that those new
developments will guide Iraq towards a new dynamic
of peace and stability. It is in the interests of the Iraqi
authorities to spare no effort in that regard, just as it is
in our collective interest to assist them. In that regard,
and in conclusion, my delegation can only fully
endorse the recommendations of the Secretary-General
by recalling that there is no alternative to a political
solution and that Iraq's leaders now have no choice but
to seek a negotiated settlement amongst themselves if
they do not wish to find themselves engulfed in civil
war; by calling on the regional actors to play their role
to the full in promoting unity and stability in Iraq,
which will in turn strengthen their own security; and by
calling on the international community to stand with
Iraq, promote the full restoration of its sovereignty, and
support the United Nations efforts to reverse the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation.

