Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom):
Together with our European partners on the Council,
the United Kingdom put forward a number of ideas and
proposals over the past week in a serious attempt to
find a consensus in the Council on this most difficult of
issues. We did so because we believed that the Council,
putting its collective spirit first, could have a positive
influence on the peace process, on both the parties and,
therefore, on the promotion of peace and security in the
region, which desperately needs and deserves it. We are
very grateful to our Council and other colleagues who
worked with us so patiently and imaginatively in the
same spirit. We had not abandoned hope that the
textual proposals we sponsored could have produced
the right result with further work. We therefore regret
that the draft resolution that we have just considered
should have been put to the vote now, especially in the
knowledge that one permanent member could not
concur. The deadline imposed on us, while
understandable in the short term, carries less validity
when considered in a broader perspective.

We believe that the failure of the Council's efforts
in this way cannot contribute to the most important
objective: the lessening of tension in the Middle East
and assistance to the parties in ending the violence,
securing a normal life for the civilian population -
particularly in the occupied territories - and the
resumption of negotiations. We disagreed with the act
of seeking a vote this evening and, with our European
partners, therefore abstained. We remain ready to work
for the realization of the ideas expressed in the failed
draft resolution, not least progress towards the setting
up of a protection or observer mechanism, with the
agreement of the parties to cooperate with it. We
condemn the continuing violence and incitement, and
the excessive use of force in reacting to unrest. We
hope that the concept of observers will not now be lost,
and we have work in hand to pursue it when the
circumstances are right.

Our work on this subject will continue, and
United Kingdom policy remains unchanged. We
strongly support the part played already by the
Secretary-General, and expect that he will remain
engaged in an important role. The Council's experience
of working together on this issue - although
unsuccessful so far - should not be disregarded; we
were very close to something effective and valuable.

