Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in French): As
I said to you last time, Mr. President, as recently as 9
April, Morocco is pleased to see you in the chair, and
we wish you much patience and courage in an
extremely tense international situation, in which your
knowledge of the United Nations system will be highly
appreciated by all of us to advance peace and justice.

If you remember, Mr. President, when I took the
floor in the Council on 9 April, I expressed the hope
that the mission of the American Secretary of State,
Mr. Powell, and his well-known strength of conviction
would lead Israel to apply resolutions 1402 (2002) and
1403 (2002) and thus to conform to the requirements of
international law. In resolution 1403 (2002) the
Council did indeed express satisfaction at Mr. Powell's
mission and even encouraged it.

Unfortunately, despite all his efforts - I must
say, in very good faith - we are bound to recognize
that the American Secretary of State obtained no
precise commitment from the Israeli Prime Minister,
Mr. Sharon - no commitment to send the Israeli
intervention and repression forces back to their bases.

I do not intend here to enter into a debate on the
degree of success or failure that can be attributed to
Mr. Powell. It is enough to note that action taken by the
greatest Power in the world, with the support of the
European Union, the Russian Federation and the
United Nations, had no impact on Israel. Is such a snub
to the whole world acceptable? Is it acceptable to
continue to maintain the siege of the offices of
President Arafat, without the minimum facilities
necessary? Is it acceptable to humiliate President
Arafat to that point, and through him, all Palestinians?
Is it possible to ignore the hand of peace that the Arabs
held out to Israel at the recent Beirut summit? How
does Israel expect to live and prosper in the Middle
East while scorning the whole of its Arab environment?

A failure of the Powell mission means a failure of
peace and a failure ofjustice. It is a failure on the part
of the international community. It means a loss of
credibility for the Security Council, which bears the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of peace.

One of the foremost armies of the world has been
unleased since last 29 March and like a tidal wave has
carried away everything in its path - houses,
infrastructure, schools, hospitals. Hundreds of persons
have been buried under the ruins, to the extent that
United Nations officials - when only yesterday they
were able to get to the Jenin camp - stated that they
felt as if they were in a city hit by an earthquake. How
can the representatives of Israel deny what the whole
world can see on the television?

Bulldozers are only just starting to clear away
tons of debris and to collect bodies. Throughout all
these recent days humanitarian assistance has been
unable to get through to Palestinian cities, and this
includes ambulances and doctors. We have seen scenes
where doctors, including foreign doctors, were fighting
with soldiers to get through checkpoints and to bring
assistance to the wounded. It is a long time since we
have seen such scenes.
The Kingdom of Morocco welcomes the initiative
launched by the Secretary-General in Geneva, which he
explained this morning to the Security Council. It is a
matter of urgency that we provide all possible
resources to bring assistance to the people of Palestine,
people who lack everything - water, food, clothing. It
is urgent that we care for the wounded. Not to do that
today - immediately, now - would be to become
guilty of failure to bring assistance to persons in
danger, and this, for jurists, is considered a crime.

We must gather together all resources for
assistance and provide ourselves with the means to
bring those resources to the people for whom they are
intended. Of course, this action will have no meaning
unless we put a stop to the infernal cycle of violence,
killing and destruction. It is true that the situation on
the ground is such that only an interposition force -
whatever we decide to call it - will be in a position
today to calm the situation while tending the wounds of
the victims.

It is quite obvious that the situation in Palestine
today is a threat to international peace, because the
whole Middle East region is in danger of catching fire
from it. It was in this context that the Secretary-
General proposed that a multinational force be sent on
the basis of Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.
In Chapter VII, as everybody knows, there is Article
40, which deals with provisional measures intended to
prevent aggravation of a situation. I quote:

"Such provisional measures shall be without

prejudice to the rights, claims or position of the

parties concerned. The Security Council shall
duly take account of failure to comply with such
provisional measures."

Today there is urgency; there is a threat to the peace,
and there is a need to adopt provisional measures.

We are persuaded that the crisis of confidence
that today prevails in Israeli-Palestinian relations
necessitates more than ever the intervention of a third
party to put things back to their original state and to
open prospects for resumption of dialogue in the
framework of a comprehensive peace programme.

Israel is acting to destroy the Palestinian
Authority and perhaps to exclude Palestinians. The
Palestinian Authority is its interlocutor, and today one
cannot imagine any progress whatsoever that does not
start with massive aid to reconstruct the Authority. But
it is equally imperative to give back full freedom of
movement to the legitimate President of the Palestinian
Authority, President Yasser Arafat, so that he himself,
and he alone, can conduct and guide the reconstruction
process, organize the cooling-down and resume
dialogue, with the assistance of an interposition force,
if necessary.

This third party - it is, perhaps, preferable to
speak of a third party, and of course we will leave it to
the wisdom of the Council to decide what legal
framework this third party will fit into ultimately -
will perhaps impose nothing at all, but proceed - as
has been done in many other disaster-stricken regions
of the world - through mediation between the sides,
conducted in the field, in order to induce them to work
together to bring about the implementation of the
objectives set by the international community.

The Kingdom of Morocco solemnly requests that
the mass killings in Jenin be thoroughly investigated.
The world must know. An impartial and unprejudiced
inquiry must be carried out. At a time when the world
is welcoming the entry into force of the Treaty creating
the International Criminal Court, it would be beyond
comprehension if an investigation were not undertaken
to find out exactly what happened in Jenin and
elsewhere in Palestine. Such an inquiry should not be
conducted in haste, as the Secretary-General has said.
It must involve impartial and competent experts
working in an atmosphere of peace and calm. Israel,
which touts its democratic system, is in duty bound to
accept this. Such an inquiry must be carried out,
because what is at stake here is the entire ethical
foundation and legal corpus on which our Organization
is based.

His Majesty King Mohammed VI, who heads the
Al-Quds Committee, has indeed spared no effort over
the last few weeks - first of all in Beirut, by taking an
active part in the summit and in the adoption of the
plan proposed by Prince Abdallah of Saudi Arabia; by
receiving the American Secretary of State, Mr. Colin
Powell; and by having a large number of contacts,
during these past weeks, with all of those involved in
this tragic situation. The goal is to prevent irreparable
damage from being done, to lend tangible support to
the innocent Palestinian victims, and finally to
encourage peace initiatives. There are many peace
initiatives, and it is up to the Council to synthesize
them and to move forward, because the Council is not a
deliberative body; it is an action-oriented body. That is
what everyone expects of the Security Council.

The Kingdom of Morocco will continue to act in
a constructive and responsible manner to see that
justice is done for the people of Palestine and to enable
them as soon as possible to live in peace, within their
own state, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

Only in this way - and this has been said many
times, Mr. President, but it must be reiterated, and we
will reiterate it - will it be possible once and for all
finally to put an end to the despair of an entire
generation of Palestinians by giving them back land for
peace. Only in this way will we be able to put an end to
the violence resulting from such a situation. Violence
cannot be stopped by violence.

