Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2473
(2019), renewing for one year the Security Council's
authorization of the European Union military operation
in the Southern Central Mediterranean (EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA) in order to effectively enforce
the arms embargo on Libya at sea.

France remains extremely concerned by the
situation in Libya, in particular the ongoing fighting
and its potential consequences for the countries of the
region. We remain convinced that there is no military
solution to the Libyan crisis and that only a political
process can enable a return to stability in Libya. It is
in order to support this political process that France
also reiterates its call for the implementation of an
immediate and unconditional ceasefire. At the same
time, the parties to the conflict must commit to the
dialogue led by Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Ghassan Salame, for whom France reiterates
its full support.

In that context, which is undermining the political
dynamic and reinforcing instability in the country,
respect for the arms embargo is more necessary than
ever. Operation SOPHIA continues to play an important
role in stabilizing Libya. Its deterrent function limits
the violations of the arms embargo and reduces the
flow of weapons that continue to cross the seas and
have only aggravated the situation since the beginning
of the offensive.

While the operation's resources have been
temporarily suspended, operation SOPHIA has
refocused its efforts and remains active in order to
implement the mandate it has been given through its
training of the Libyan coast guard and its monitoring
of that entity's activities in order to ensure that they are
operationally effective and that human rights are being
respected. Its action also allows the Libyan authorities
to make their due contribution to the fight against
weapons trafficking. Furthermore, the operation
is using its aerial resources to collect intelligence
and the information that is needed to maintain the
arms embargo.

Within the European Union, we will continue
to contribute to the efforts of operation SOPHIA. To
that end, the operation must continue to benefit from
its authorization under resolution 2292 (2016), which
has been extended today in resolution 2473 (2019), in
order to enjoy the legitimacy and means necessary to
act appropriately.

