Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this open briefing, and I should like also to thank
Ms. Carolyn McAskie for the important information
that she has shared with us, both orally and in writing,
on the serious humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The humanitarian situation and the political and
military situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo cannot be considered separately, because the
former is, to a great extent, the consequence of the
latter. The current military situation, characterized by
the absence of peace and the absence of widespread
warfare but marked by local conflicts, implies a lack of
solutions to problems of, among others, refugees,
massive displacements of populations, chronic
malnutrition, health and educational opportunities for
young people. In sum, the humanitarian crisis resulting
from armed conflict is gradually eroding the living
conditions of the majority of the Congolese population,
relegating one of the African States richest in natural
resources to position 152 out of a total of 174 countries
on the human development index.

Armed conflict also affects the conditions in
which the humanitarian organizations carry out their
work. They are operating in a security context that is
different from the one the parties agreed to respect in
July 1999, when they signed the Lusaka Agreement.
The parties have repeatedly violated the ceasefire and
the humanitarian clauses of the Agreement. The
humanitarian organizations have faced limited access
to vulnerable populations, restrictions on their freedom
of movement and serious security risks in Government-
administered areas as well as in areas under the control
of the three main rebel movements. Of a total of
1,800,000 internally displaced persons, the
humanitarian agencies have access to only one-sixth of
that number because of widespread insecurity. The
parties must assume responsibility for the human costs
of limiting access to vulnerable groups. In this context,
Argentina wishes to reiterate once again the importance
of respecting the principles stemming from the 1994
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel.

I also wish to refer to the violations of
international law occurring in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, particularly in the eastern part of the
country. There have been crimes against humanity
there. Suffice it to recall the massacres of the civilian
population in Kalimbo, Katogata and Lusenda-
Lumimba. These massacres cannot go unpunished. The
necessary mechanisms to carry out an international
investigation must be created and those responsible
must be brought to justice.

Humanitarian assistance is an essential palliative
in a crisis situation, but it is no substitute for the
fundamental political decisions that the parties to the
conflict must take. In our judgement, these decisions
go beyond full compliance and good faith with the
Lusaka Agreement, involving respect for the territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the principle of non-intervention in its internal matters,
security guarantees for all the States of the region,
particularly Rwanda and Uganda, and the withdrawal
of all foreign forces from the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We also believe that the deployment of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), when
there are reasonable security conditions - and I say
"reasonable", not "ideal" - will be a factor of stability
that will contribute to the substantive resolution of the
matter, as well as facilitating the work of the
humanitarian organizations.

In conclusion, permit me to make two brief
observations.

The political and military situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot be analysed
in isolation; rather it should be seen in the context of
the situation in the Great Lakes region. We believe that
the humanitarian situation must be analysed with the
same regional approach.

We also believe that long-term stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot be seen
separately from the strengthening of democratic
institutions and the promotion of sustainable
development throughout the region; that is, a regional,
comprehensive approach is needed. For these reasons,
we wish to reiterate once again our support for
France's idea of convening an international conference
on the Great Lakes region when the appropriate
political conditions exist.

