Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We hail your wisdom
and stewardship. At the same time, I would like to
express the deepest appreciation to your predecessor,
the Permanent Representative of Peru. Finally, I would
like to thank Mr. Jan Egeland, not only for his briefing
today, but also for the work that he accomplished
during his tenure in general and during the
humanitarian crisis that my country, Lebanon,
witnessed last summer. I salute him and wish him all
the best in his future endeavours.

Between 12 July and 14 August 2006, Lebanon
was the target of a ferocious Israeli aggression,
considered disproportionate by international legal
standards as well as by the international community.
The scope and the scale of the destruction were
massive: 1,191 civilians were killed and more than
4,000 were injured. Approximately 900,000 people -
one quarter of the Lebanese population - were
displaced; many of them are still homeless. Buildings
and homes were flattened to the ground.

In 34 days, the Israeli forces carried out a
massive military campaign. The Israeli air force flew
more than 12,000 combat missions, the navy fired
2,500 shells and the army fired more than 100,000
shells. The Israeli army pursued an indiscriminate and
deliberate policy of targeting civilians, whether they
were hiding in shelters, fleeing in convoys from the
area of attack or lying wounded in ambulances and
medical facilities. No measures were taken to ensure
that the targets of the attacks had no military character.
No time was given to the victims to flee, and when
time was given, the fleeing civilians were themselves
the targets of violent and inhuman attacks.

As if all these massacres were not enough; as if
the state of panic and fear experienced by the entire
Lebanese population, from north to south and from east
to west, were insufficient; and as if the attacks against
the Lebanese infrastructure, which caused billions of
dollars in losses, were inadequate, the Israeli forces
prevented humanitarian assistance from reaching large
parts of south Lebanon. In a number of instances in
which they did allow such assistance, the forces
attacked the aid convoys either directly or indirectly.
The Israeli forces even attacked United Nations
positions and bases. At the Khiam base of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization, for example,
four United Nations observers lost their lives as a
result of a deliberately planned attack.

We all remember how a naval blockade and a
land blockade were imposed on Lebanon and how the
Israeli air force managed to impose a curfew on the
country, with countless raids that endangered the
humanitarian situation of all Lebanese. To this day, we
are still dealing with the lethal effects of the cluster
munitions, 90 per cent of which were fired by Israel in
the last 72 hours of the aggression. There were
1,159,200 individual bombs dispersed over south
Lebanon, concentrated in developed areas and
agricultural lands, all of which have since become
desolate.

Impunity cannot be tolerated. The twisting of
reality and blatant violations of international
humanitarian law cannot be accepted. The failure of
the Security Council to take responsible action to
ensure access to Lebanese civilians and to protect
humanitarian convoys over a three-week period should
not be repeated. The Security Council has the
responsibility to act swiftly to protect civilians.

In its presidential statement of 20 December
2002, the Security Council recognized that secure
humanitarian access and the clear separation of
civilians and combatants should be ensured in armed
conflicts. In resolution 1674 (2006), adopted on
28 April, the Security Council recalled that deliberately
targeting civilians and other protected persons in
situations of armed conflict is a flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law, and the Council asked
all parties immediately to put an end to such practices.

The high-level Commission of Inquiry, created
pursuant to Human Rights Council resolution S-2/ 1, of
11 August 2006, established Israel's responsibility for
the gross violations of international humanitarian law
committed during its military attacks on Lebanon. It
has proved beyond doubt that Israel's claims that it
took precautions to protect civilian lives in the conflict
were untrue.
In order to prevent similar events in the future,
whether in the region or in other parts of the world, the
forthcoming report concerning the protection of
civilians in armed conflict should include a clear and

extensive depiction of the suffering endured by the
Lebanese civilian population caused by the Israeli
attacks this past summer. Although Lebanon expresses
the utmost appreciation for all the humanitarian aid and
support that it has received from all nations of the
world and from the United Nations, it endured
extremely harsh circumstances when the ceasefire was
constantly delayed, which allowed Israel to continue its
violent attacks.

Lebanon calls on the Security Council to deploy
more efforts in the future to seek a durable and
sustainable peaceful solution to armed conflict in the
world.

