Mrs. Ozkan (Turkey): I have to speak in response
to one delegation's statement.

We do not deny the suffering that occurred during
the First World War over a wide geographic area beyond
the Caucasus and in the whole of Europe, including the
Balkans. The message of 24 April 2014 on the events of
1915 voiced by President Erdogan, then Prime Minister,
and our current Prime Minister Davutoglu's more
recent statement at the commemoration of the late Hrant
Dink speak for themselves. The period is the subject
of legitimate scholarly debate. Under international
law, genocide is a precisely defined concept, and its
proof requires high standards of evidence. It cannot
and should not be used randomly or arbitrarily, as
defined by the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.

It is important to face history in its entirety
and through impartial scientific examination of the
historical records so that the right lessons may be
drawn and a just memory retained. The narratives
of the parties as yet do not converge. We must forge
a shared memory instead of sharpening one-sided
narratives. In that context, our proposal to establish
a joint history commission remains on the table. As
underscored in the aforementioned statement of Prime
Minister Davutoglu,

"Our desire to share in the pain, to heal the wounds
and to re-establish friendship is sincere. Our course
is set towards a horizon of friendship and peace."

We also regret the fact that one delegation chose
to convey a selective and one-sided interpretation of
the history of the Cyprus question. Atrocities against
Turkish Cypriots are well documented in the United
Nations archives. The United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus was deployed on the island back in
1964. The Cyprus issue has entered its fifty-second
year. The Turkish Cypriot side, whose voice cannot,
unfortunately, be heard in this forum, can and will
certainly recall the facts that were conveniently left
untold, in order to help portray the full picture of
the Cyprus issue. Turkey fully supports the special
assistance of the Secretary-General's good offices
mission to find a comprehensive and just settlement to
the problem, without further delay.

Lastly, we categorically deny the baseless
allegations of the representative of the Syrian regime.

