Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The acceding country Croatia, the candidate
countries the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and Montenegro, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his introduction to the debate today, as well as
Under-Secretary-General Amos, Assistant Secretary-
General Simonovic and Mr. Spoerri.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/376) and his recommendations. As he states,
the reality on the ground continues to be characterized
by the frequent failure of parties to armed conflicts
to comply with their obligations under applicable
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and refugee law to respect and protect
civilians. We call on all parties to armed conflict to
respect their obligations.

Recent striking examples of failure are numerous
and have recently been reported, for instance, in the
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict. The EU shares the Secretary-General's grave
concern for other situations, including in Afghanistan,
South Sudan, the Sudan, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Somalia and elsewhere, where civilian
populations, and in particular women and children,
continue to be subject to various forms of extreme
violence, causing grave humanitarian crises with huge
displacements of population. In particular, we share
the Secretary-General's concern for the continuous
attacks against health care and the increase in threats to
journalists. We continue to be very concerned about the
humanitarian impact of the use of weapons in densely
populated areas. We take note of the view expressed by
the International Committee of the Red Cross that the
use of explosive weapons with a wide impact area be
avoided in densely populated areas.

With regard to Syria, we condemn the Syrian
Government's violent activities as a whole, starting
from suppressing peaceful protests by force and ending
up in several reported massacres of civilians, including
increased use of targeted assassinations and arbitrary
detentions, as a means of repressing the opposition.
The European Union calls on all parties, including the
armed opposition, to cease all violence and provocation
to violence with immediate effect. The European Union
also reiterates the importance of full and unhindered
access for independent humanitarian actors so that
assistance may be provided to those in need in line with
humanitarian principles.

During the reporting period, the Security Council
has taken decisive action in situations where civilians
have faced continuous escalating violence. In Cote
d'Ivoire, the Council authorized the United Nations
Operation in C6te d'Ivoire to use all necessary means
to carry out its mandate to protect civilians. In Libya,
the Security Council acted upon its responsibility to
protect civilians; the implementation of resolution 1973
(2011) was undertaken to prevent civilian deaths and
injury and was fully in line with resolution itself and
international humanitarian law.

As the Secretary-General rightly points out in his
report, there are fundamental differences between the
concepts of protection of civilians in armed conflict and
the responsibility to protect. Both are important and
relevant, and it is necessary to enhance our collective
understanding of both subjects and how they are related
in their implementation.

Strengthening accountability is an important
element in enhancing compliance by the parties to
armed conflict with their international obligations.
National authorities have the primary responsibility to
provide accountability for violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. Where national
authorities fail to take the necessary steps to ensure
accountability, the Security Council can, as appropriate,
play a more proactive role.

We see merit in the increased use of commissions
of inquiry and fact-finding missions and the referral of
relevant situations to the International Criminal Court.
Where applicable and when appropriate, we encourage
all parties to consider drawing on the services of the
International Fact-Finding Commission established
pursuant to Additional Protocol I to the Geneva
Conventions.

Regarding other encouraging developments, the
upcoming United Nations Conference on the Arms Trade
Treaty will provide us with an opportunity to address
the arms trade and availability and misuse of weapons.
Furthermore, we welcome the fact that the need for
improved recording of casualties is gaining increasing
attention. The African Union Mission in Somalia's
commitment should be followed, as appropriate, by a
more systematic approach to reinforcing capacities in
that regard.

The mandates of many peacekeeping missions
currently include protection of civilians activities.
Challenges to the implementation of those protection
mandates often relate to establishing effective
early-warning mechanisms, ensuring the provision of
adequate human and logistical resources to monitor,
prevent and respond to incidents, and building the
capacity of the host States to ensure that they are also
increasingly able to fulfil their primary responsibility
to protect civilians. We need to do more collectively to
ensure that missions are put in a position where they
can carry out their protection mandates. We welcome
the establishment of protection-of-civilians training
modules to better prepare peacekeepers for that task.
In order to make progress, it is up to Member States to
ensure that their peacekeepers receive proper training
before deployment.

We must ensure that shortfalls in equipment, such
as in helicopters, are dealt with and that missions are
properly resourced, with due priority given to civilian
protection activities. The success of a peacekeeping
mission is often judged by its ability to protect civilians.
The protection of civilians by the United Nations
peacekeeping missions mandated to do so is thus central
to the legitimacy and credibility of the United Nations
system. That also requires effective interaction between
protection-mandated missions and humanitarian
organizations undertaking complementary protection
activities.

At the same time, the host country continues to bear
the primary responsibility for protecting its civilian
population. We have therefore focused on contributing
to enhancing the capabilities of host nations to build
and maintain their own capacities. Activities in that
regard should seek to support the establishment of
an environment in which all persons, institutions and
entities are held to account, according to laws and
procedures that are consistent with international human
rights law and standards and applicable international
humanitarian law. We advocate the active participation
of all States in the ongoing endeavours by the
International Committee of the Red Cross, as mandated
by the thirty-first Red Cross Conference, to strengthen
compliance with international humanitarian law.

