Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): Let me first
congratulate Jordan on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the second time during
its mandate, and to thank it for having organized this
debate on the maintenance of international peace and
security, with a focus on the role of youth in countering
violent extremism and promoting peace. In particular I
would like to thank his Royal Highness Crown Prince
Al Hussein bin Abdullah II, for his Visit to New York so
as to preside over this meeting. I would also like to hail
his most instructive statement.

My delegation is pleased that the Security Council
is focusing on the consideration of matters relating
to peace and security and youth. As also stressed by
other delegations, young people are prey to conflicts
and extremism. The recruitment of child soldiers and
the kidnapping of young girls, youths, essentially as
sexual slaves are clear demonstrations of this. We have
seen how recruiters from terrorist groups exploit gaps
in societies so as to spread their theories and radicalize
youth. Economic and social inequalities, poverty and
particularly frustration arising from situations of youth
unemployment, underemployment and social exclusion
in double standard societies, which are increasingly
elitist, where the social elevator seems to have definitely
broken down, all of these things my delegation feels are
circumstances and root causes leading to radicalization
and the endoctrinement of young people.

My delegation therefore believes that there would be
a need to invest in young people such that they can enjoy
their fundamental rights and participate in decisions
having to do with their own flourishing. My delegation
also feels that there must be further investment in
human security so as to strengthen the resiliency of
populations in general and youth in particular, in order
to promote private-public partnership for economies
that generate employment for youth.

All of these things require good governance to
accelerate economic growth, harness demographics
and effectively combat poverty and inequality when
distributing wealth. The judicious use of public
administration is quite important to re-establishing
equality and combating inequality, as peace requires
inclusive development. It is Benin's hope that,
through shared prosperity, taking into account the
limited resources of our planet, the implementation
of the development programme from the post-2015
period, which is currently being finalized, will be a
transformative one that creates conditions for States to
have necessary resources that give rise to opportunities
for youth and provide them with means to flourish and
have faith in the political systems of their countries.

We also need to mobilize civil society so as to
counter extremism wherever it may emerge. Skill
and knowledge are necessary to create employment
and to access universal values such as secularism,
respect for human dignity and others, and acceptance
of coexistence and diversity. Such education must
be based on universal values, which can give youth
resiliency in countering propaganda on the Internet.
In this process, States will have to increasingly avoid
exclusion practices such as favortism and corruption
and instead choose programmes that draw upon the
merits of individuals where youth can demonstrate
their own skills, create and innovate for the common
good of their countries.

The international community must provide means
to change the situation of millions of disenfranchised
youth if it does not want the rug to be pulled out from
under them by religious extremists, leading to a total
delegitimatization of societies by terrorist movements
such as Boko Haram, the Islamic State, Al-Qaida
and others. We reiterate the importance of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, one pillar
of which is the elimination of conditions that lead to the
spread of terrorism. The strategy must continue to be
implemented by taking into account the new dimension
of the issue of religious extremism.

In making its humble contribution to achieving
this goal, Benin has launched the African Initiative for
Education in peace, development and interreligious and
intercultural dialogue. The official launching will be in
Cotonou from 26 to 28 May, during the international
symposium that Benin will be hosting. This is but one
example of my country's efforts along those lines. The
initiative is essentially to stop religious extremism in
Africa by attacking its root causes, as recommended
in the preambular paragraph of the UNESCO Charter.
The initiative seeks to find a happy medium among
religions by providing shared spaces where people
can live together and exhange views. It also seeks to
promote projects and innovations for harmony and to
strengthen the idea of living together, social progress
and balanced development which benefits all.

The African initiative will bring together various
religious and secular leaders for honest dialogue has
been supported by numerous partners, including
the Alliance of Civilizations, UNESCO, the United
Nations Development Programme and the Economic
Community of West African States. Moreover, the
initiative is one element of an important decision taken
the twenty-fourth regular session of the Conference
of Heads of State and Government of the African
Union on 30 and 31 January in Addis Ababa. The
General Assembly also endorsed the initiative during
its adoption on 15 December 2014 of resolution 69/140
on the promotion of interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace.

One of the high points of the Cotonou symposium
will be the adoption ofa manifesto on tolerance, dialogue
and understanding. This is a new commitment that
could lead to lasting peace through the strengthening
of love and reason in spite of the difficulties we are
encountering today. Youth will be a key stakeholder
in this new approach to combating terrorism and
extremism of all stripes. Benin needs the support of all
to ensure that the promises of this initiative become a
reality.

