Major General Uba: I am Major General Salihu
Zaway Uba, Force Commander of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). It is a privilege for me to
address the Security Council and to share some of my
thoughts on our experiences and the challenges brought
on by UNMIL's drawdown, based on my experience
in the United Nations Mission in Liberia, established
pursuant to resolution 1509 (2003). After 14 years ofback-
to-back civil wars in Liberia, UNMIL was established
with a robust force of about 15,250 personnel, including
formed police units, United Nations Police (UNPOL)
officers and a significant civilian component, whose
job, among other things, was to assist with the peace
processes and support security-sector reform. UNMIL
has worked assiduously ever since in accordance with
the various relevant Security Council resolutions as
they were adopted. The first post-conflict democratic
elections in Liberia were held in 2005, following the
establishment of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
and a programme of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. In 2006, in the wake of those successful
elections, UNMIL began a phased drawdown of the
Mission and by 2010 had adjusted troop strengths down
to 7,952, while the police totals, including the formed
police units, were reduced to about 1,375.

As a mission in transition, the Mission handed over
all security responsibilities to the Government of Liberia
in June 2016 and completed its drawdown in February
of this year, leaving only a residual force capacity of
434 made up ofa Nigerian company of 230 troops and a
Ukrainian aviation unit and a Pakistani Level II hospital
manned by 105 and 69 troops, respectively. The force
headquarters is compact, consisting of 15 staff officers
and 15 military observers, who are double-hatted and
generally carry out several headquarters functions. The
residual UNPOL contingent is made up of two formed
police units at an authorized strength of 260, and 50
individual police officers, for a total of 310, while
the civilian component consists of 783 international,
national and United Nations volunteer staff. The
Government of Liberia has fully taken over all security
responsibilities and has developed a concrete plan and
timelines for the third post-conflict general election,
scheduled for 10 October.

It is a well-known fact that, as countries emerge
from conflict, they undergo critical socioeconomic,
development and political changes in which United
Nations missions are expected to adapt to encourage
depth of reconciliation and peace consolidation within
the national polity. While United Nations transitions
can be as diverse as the contexts in which they take
place and are heavily influenced by decisions made by
host Governments, transitions must be a response to
significant changes in a country's political, security and
socioeconomic development. The UNMIL transition
was planned to ensure continuity in the development
and security agendas of Liberia with the goal of
consolidating a peace dividend and ensuring the nation
focuses more on building a holistic security system for
the society.

My briefing will focus on drawdown considerations
and associated issues, the current UNMIL configuration
and mandate and proffer some recommendations in
considering the drawdown and related issues.

Guidance for considerations when planning and
managing the transition of United Nations missions
scheduled for a significant drawdown, withdrawal
or closure are many and varied. The drawdown of
UNMIL considered several planning preparations and
guidance from United Nations Headquarters and the
Mission. These included early and integrated transition
planning, which was firmly rooted in the minds of the
leadership, other staff members and the host nation.
The planning guidance mapped clear objectives of
the drawdown and indicated some benchmarks and
timelines just as the Mission integrated transition
issues into an all-encompassing planning tool. A
planning officer was appointed and dedicated for such
tasks while intermission cooperation with the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire was intensified to
cover gaps in the transition planning process and to
assist in a potential security setback in Liberia by using
the quick reaction force where possible.

During the transition phases, UNMIL inculcated
and engaged the views of the Government of Liberia,
the Economic Community of West African States, the
African Union and other international partners in the
entire process of the drawdown. The UNMIL good
offices interfaced and informed on the timing, scope
and expected benchmarks of the transition. The iniative
of UNMIL to engage in regular dialogues and series
of engagements with all stakeholders assisted the
Government of Liberia in buying into the transition
agenda seamlessly. Consultations continued with all,
including civil society groups, opposition parties,
women and minority representatives in Liberia. While
UNMIL was interested in keeping the transition on
track to achieve its objective timelines, the Government
of Liberia was similarly made to see the transition as
its own product in which failure could have a serious
backlash on the Government and the people of Liberia.

Managing the logistics support in the transition was
Herculean to UNMIL, as Pakistani, Bangladeshi and
Chinese engineers were earmarked for repatriation in
the process of the drawdown. Engineering support for
the maintenance of UNMIL main supply routes became
unfeasible due to heavy rain and poor road conditions
in Liberia. UNMIL resorted to the planned use of air to
replenish most critical supplies in some key locations
in the field. Patrols for early-warning and mapping
exercises to assess and report the situation as it truly
was, particularly in the hinterland, became conditional
on friendly weather in the areas. Expired ammunition
certification and disposal and camp maintenance
became an issue owing to a lack of qualified workforce.
UNMIL had to resort to borrowing experienced
ammunition technical officers from sister missions for
the certification of ammunition before troops' rotations.

Consistent with drawdown requirements, UNMIL
engaged national staff capacity to function in some
critically vacated areas, while the need to keep qualified
international staff in support of the Mission to the
end was similarly appraised and balanced. UNMIL
continued to undertake staffing needs assessments to
determine the skills required throughout the drawdown
to liquidation phase with a view to meeting up critical
staffing gaps. Capacity-building and the capability of
the Liberian National Police and the Armed Forces
of Liberia, including other security apparatuses, have
been mixed. There are about 2,000 trained Armed
Forces of Liberia members, including engineering,
band and military police platoons respectively, while
the Liberian National Police is about 5,000 in strength
and mainly domiciled in Monrovia. Equipment and
logistical sustenance have been daunting for the
security services, particularly when deployed outside
Monrovia. UNMIL and other international community
members have been doing the best they could to provide
mentorship, training and logistics to the security
agencies and the Armed Forces of Liberia as the case
may be.

UNMIL transition leading to phased drawdown
of military forces started early following the first
successful post-conflict elections in Liberia. Thereafter,
UNMIL continued to right-size its personnel, coordinate
its activities and collaborate with other international
partners for coherence between peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development necessary for post-
conflict peace and stability. The Mission drew up a
drawdown plan and continued to implement the plan
by closing its field offices systematically and reducing
its footprints in several endeavours. The consequent
handover of security responsibilities to the Government
of Liberia in June 2016, the establishment of the
transition plan and benchmarks and the visit of the
Strategic Assessment Team in September 2016 were all
part of the drawdown process of UNMIL.

The transition leading to liquidation in June 2018
was supported by resolution 2333 (2016) and a budget
procedure is ongoing in support of such endeavours.
Processes were carefully planned in line with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations/ Department of
Field Support Liquidation Manual, aptly communicated
to stakeholders and politically supported by the
Government of Liberia. The review of the strategic
asessment team report and the subsequent release of
resolution 2333 (2016) all underscored the retention of
UNMIL's residual capacity through Liberia's general
elections in 2017. That resolution came up with a
mandate that includes the protection of civilians;
support for reform of justice and security institutions by
assisting the Government of Liberia in developing the
leadership, internal management, professionalization
and accountability mechanisms of the Liberian National
Police, with a particular focus on elections security;
the promotion, protection and monitoring of human
rights activities in Liberia; the protection of United
Nations personnel, installations and equipment and
the ensuring of security and freedom of movement of
United Nations and associated personnel; and support
for the capabilities of the Government of Liberia to
meet urgent gaps in the 2017 general elections.

UNMIL has consistently undertaken a proactive
approach to ensure all camps that are closing down
comply with environmental sustainability standards.
All measures necessary are taken regularly to inform
and sensitize Liberians and members of the international
community on the transition timelines. Resolution 2333
(2016) is the final resolution on UNMIL, as it sets out a
final closure timetable for the Mission.

In the broadest sense, a multidimensional mission's
transition and drawdown indicate significant changes
in its mandated presence in a country. While transition
may include start-up, reconfiguration and drawdown
or withdrawal of a United Nations mission, the need
for early and integrated transition planning needs to be
firmly in the minds of the mission leadership. Planning
considerations addressing the transition phase must be
transparent and flexible and be regularly reviewed and
adjusted to ensure their practical relevance.

A successful United Nations transition will require
broad national buy-in and ownership, strong support of
the Security Council, as well as the major donors and
regional partners. Planning guidance should therefore
involve all relevant partners and engage in high-level
consultations at the United Nations Headquarters and
in broader consultation with national actors, including
key political players, minority group representatives,
civil-society groups, women leaders and the media. The
strategic assessment of field missions must take into
account the need to balance the security forces required
to secure United Nations assets and personnel in the
midst of drawdown and closure of missions.

I would like to make a few recommendations.
Planning considerations addressing the transition phase
should be made clear and flexible. The drawdown
of missions should be planned using a graduated
approach, keeping in mind the need to retain a force
of reasonable strength and adequate manpower until
a mission is liquidated. Headquarters should adopt
strategies that will reduce the negative impact of the
drawdown and the withdrawal of mission assets in the
field. A mission-liquidation strategy should be carefully
planned, communicated and politically supported by
both the mission leadership and the host nation. Missions
should undertake early staffing-needs assessment to
determine the skills required throughout the liquidation
phase. Missions should set processes for the building of
national capacities early in the life cycle of a mission.
Information and records management should be given
priority at the outset of a mission - not only during
the liquidation phase. Documentation should include
lessons-learned exercises and after-action reviews of
transition processes and mandate implementation - and
the challenges thereto - undertaken by the outgoing
mission and the lead department.

