Mr. Wittig (Germany): I wish to thank Under-
Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his comprehensive
briefing and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for
his statement.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the delegation of the European
Union (EU) on behalf of the Union.

For too long, the peoples in the Middle East have
suffered from conflict and confrontation. They aspire
to peace, freedom and a decent life. It is our long-
standing conviction that good governance, the rule of
law and religious tolerance, including protection of
religious minorities, form the basic pillars upon which
durable stability and prosperity are based.

It is time to finally make decisive progress
towards a peaceful solution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. A just, lasting and comprehensive solution is
needed if we want to prevent the conflict from
continuing to overshadow the lives of millions of
people and from being a catalyst of extremism and
violence. A continuation of the current impasse is not
an option.

The goal is clear: we want to see the State of
Israel and a sovereign, independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable State of Palestine living side by
side in peace and security. That objective is shared by
practically the entire international community. It has
repeatedly been endorsed by the parties themselves. We
remain convinced that there is no viable alternative to
the two-State solution.

There is also broad international consensus about
the key parameters of the solution: borders based on
the 1967 lines, with agreed territorial swaps; Jerusalem
as the future capital of two States; an agreed, just, fair
and realistic solution to the refugee question; and
arrangements that ensure the security, both collective
and individual, of the Israeli and Palestinian people.

Progress toward that goal is urgently needed. I
wish to make four points that we believe are
fundamental to making progress.

First, sustainable peace can be achieved only
through negotiations. We urge both parties to return to
direct negotiations and to engage substantively on final
status issues. Such negotiations must be conducted
with the goal of achieving a framework agreement
within the l2-month period defined by the Middle East
Quartet.

Secondly, both sides must work hard on creating
an atmosphere conducive to progress. That includes
abiding by international law and previous
commitments, particularly the provisions of the Road
Map. As the EU has consistently and repeatedly made
clear, the continuation of settlement activity in the
occupied Palestinian territories is illegal under
international law and an obstacle to peace. It must stop.
At the same time, the Palestinian side must refrain
from incitement and violence.

Thirdly, Palestinian State-building needs to be
continued. Sustainable peace will need to rest on two
pillars: a negotiated settlement and viable institutions
of the future State of Palestine. We congratulate the
Palestinian National Authority on the progress
achieved so far in institution-building, including
implementation of the Fayyad Plan.

Fourth is Gaza. If we are to prevent the further
isolation and radicalization of the population in Gaza,
the policy of closure must end. Recent decisions by the
Government of Israel to ease access to and exports
from Gaza are steps in the right direction. Those
decisions need to be fully implemented. Import and
export flows should return to pre-2007 levels.
Complementary measures are necessary to allow for
the economic recovery of Gaza, while addressing
Israel's legitimate security concerns. In that respect, we
call for the full implementation of resolution 1860
(2009).

We remain seriously concerned about the fate of
the Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit, who has been in
captivity for much too long. He must be released
without further delay.

Germany commends the tireless efforts of and
valuable services delivered by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), and this year will continue to
support UNRWA by contributing an additional amount
of $8 million.

Finally, the strong support of the international
community is crucial to progress in the peace process.
We need an even more active role of the Middle East
Quartet. We welcome the Quartet meeting of principals
in Munich scheduled for 5 February, and expect a
strong political signal in that regard. The active
backing of Arab States is necessary to creating an
atmosphere conducive to progress. We need to send a
clear and unambiguous message that we stick to our
shared vision of two States living side by side in peace
and security. We need to be clear about the parameters
of such a solution and our willingness to support its
implementation, as required.

The international community stands ready to
invest considerably in a peaceful settlement and to help
shape the way forward, but only the parties themselves
can make the crucial compromises and lay the
foundations for a better future. It is up to them to take
the decisive steps and commit themselves
unambiguously.

With regard to Lebanon, we call on all parties to
abide by their obligations under resolution 1701
(2006). I would like to recall that the decision to
establish the Special Tribunal was taken following a
request by Lebanon and on the basis of negotiations
between Lebanon and the United Nations. It was
created in order to bring stability to the country and to
end impunity by prosecuting persons responsible for
the attack of 14 February 2005. The reasons for

establishing the Special Tribunal remain valid.
Germany calls on all parties to support the important
work of the Tribunal, to respect its independence and
to refrain from political interference and coercion. The
successful conclusion of the work of the Special
Tribunal is essential to long-term stability in Lebanon.
Germany will continue to support the Tribunal.

Regional efforts aimed at stabilizing the situation
are very welcome. At the same time, we cannot
compromise when it comes to justice.

