Mr. Sychov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus, as a State whose history is connected
to destructive wars and environmental catastrophes, highly
values and welcomes the fact that the Security Council is
giving priority attention to this question. Indeed, a solution
to the humanitarian crisis in Kosovo and the neighbouring
regions is the key to the establishment of stability not only
in the area of the conflict, but in the Balkan region as a
whole.

In evaluating the situation in Kosovo, we continue to
believe that the major reason for the worsening
humanitarian situation and the massive influx of refugees
was the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
military action undertaken, outside the Security Council and
in violation of generally accepted norms of international
law, against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. There is
a great deal of evidence for this today, and I think that
members of the Security Council and the representatives of
other United Nations Member States present in this
Chamber know this full well. There is aggression today
against a sovereign State which is having serious
consequences. The latest graphic example of this was the
attack on the Embassy of the People's Republic of China in
Belgrade, which resulted in the loss of diplomatic lives and
significant material damage.

Every day we see new evidence of the destruction of
the national economy and infrastructure of Yugoslavia and
the suffering of victims among the civilian population.
Today the victims amount to more than 1,000 killed and
approximately 4,500 injured. There are victims among the
civilian population as a result of the use of cluster bombs,
in violation of international norms. Once again we hear
from NATO that supposedly this was a mistake.

The world community cannot remain indifferent,
simply accepting the mounting catastrophe. The Republic
of Belarus believes that the humanitarian crisis cannot be
stopped in the context of continuing military escalation.
This contradicts the very logic of peacekeeping. We
sternly condemn the aggression against a sovereign State.
The complexity of the Balkan situation lies in the fact
that some political and military leaders of NATO are
playing the Kosovo card, not acting at all in the interests
of the Albanian or the Serbian people, but only in their
own self-interest through the assertion of their superior
force in the practice of inter-State relations.

In this connection, we once again call upon the
Council to take the necessary steps as soon as possible to
halt the military aggression and bloodshed so that political
means can be used to find a way out of the situation
acceptable to all sides, a situation fraught with irreversible
consequences for the fate of all mankind.

