Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank the Chairman of the Liberian sanctions
Committee, Ambassador Mahbubani, for his
introduction of the two reports of the Committee as
well as the discussion in the Committee. I would also
like to thank Mr. Tsui, representative of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), for
his briefing. In addition, I wish to extend a welcome to
the Foreign Minister of Liberia for his presence at our
meeting.
The importance of the Liberian question is self-
evident. It is highly necessary for the Council to revisit
this issue. China appreciates the Panel's efforts in
preparing the report submitted to the Council. It is
based on fairly detailed investigations on certain issues
and contains valuable recommendations, in particular
those concerning the improvement of existing sanctions
measures - for example, to allow Liberia to reopen an
aircraft registry and to design a standard end-user
certificate regime for the import and export of arms -
as well as the establishment of a special Web site for
the travel ban. Those recommendations warrant further
serious study by the sanctions Committee.

At present, the Liberian question clearly has two
sides. On the one hand, since the Council's imposition
of sanctions against Liberia last March, the Sierra
Leone peace process in general has made major
progress. The Revolutionary United Front (RUF) in
Sierra Leone has basically adopted a cooperative
attitude in the disarmament process. The relations
among Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia have also
improved somewhat. On the other hand, according to
the Panel's report, there are still serious violations as
far as the arms embargo, the export of diamonds and
the travel ban are concerned. This shows that the
existing Council sanctions measures still have
loopholes, and this concerns us.

The report also shows that the economic and
humanitarian situations in Liberia, in particular the
humanitarian situation among the most vulnerable
groups, present great danger. The Council's sanctions
have, in fact, resulted in serious economic
repercussions in the country. The international
community, including the United Nations, should show
its concern by offering more humanitarian assistance.
Meanwhile, in making any further decisions, the
Council should take full account of any possible
negative effect on Liberia's economic and humanitarian
conditions.

The peace process in Sierra Leone is of vital
importance to peace and stability in West Africa. In
considering the question of Liberia, the Council should
continue to adopt a regional and integrated approach -
namely, it should focus its deliberations on the overall
objectives of the Sierra Leone peace process, while
also taking account of reports from other sources. We
should continue to give full play to the role of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the countries concerned, and closely
listen to the views of all sides.

In sum, China is ready to join the other parties in
studying closely the recommendations of the reports
with a fair, pragmatic attitude, to promote substantive
progress in the Sierra Leone peace process so as to
create the necessary conditions for the ultimate
attainment of peace and stability in West Africa.

