Mr. Ahmed (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. President, I would like to congratulate you
on your brotherly country's successful presidency of the
Council this month. I also want to take this opportunity
to express our appreciation to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing.

We are meeting today as the security and stability
of the Middle East continue to deteriorate, thanks to
the various crises afflicting the region, particularly in
the occupied Palestinian territories, with the situation
in the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem
worsening owing to the practices and policies of the
Israeli occupation, as has been described in reports
of the United Nations and the relevant international
organizations. Egypt has always stressed that we
cannot achieve stability and security in the Middle East
without a just and durable solution to the Palestinian
question that will fulfil the aspirations ofthe Palestinian
people to establish an independent State within the
borders of 4 June 1967 and with East Jerusalem as its
capital, in line with the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions, as well as other terms of
reference, particularly the Arab Peace Initiative, which
Egypt still considers a viable basis for a solution to the
Palestinian question.

Egypt is concerned about Israel's announcement
that it intends to annex territories in the West Bank,
including the Jordan Valley and the northern Dead
Sea area, in addition to its announcement that it will
construct new housing units as part of its expansionist
settlement activities, all of which undermines the
possibility of a two-State solution and contravenes
Security Council resolutions, especially resolution
2334 (2016).

Israel's continued blockade of the Gaza Strip and
closure of all the crossings between Israel and Gaza
has led to deteriorating living standards for Palestinian
citizens and a decline in or even prevention of the
provision ofbasic services to them. Egypt is committed
to assisting its Palestinian brothers and alleviating
their suffering. We are working to maintain calm and
stability in the Gaza Strip and to create conditions
conducive to intra-Palestinian reconciliation. Here we
should not fail to mention the Israeli practices that
are aimed at altering the historical and legal status of
East Jerusalem, which is of profound significance to
the Islamic and Arab worlds. There have been repeated
incursions into the Al-Aqsa Mosque. The continuing
Israeli practices violate the rights of the Palestinian
people as well as all the relevant United Nations and
Security Council resolutions. Such practices contribute
greatly to destabilizing the region and encouraging the
dissemination of terrorism and extremist ideology in
the absence of a just solution to the Palestinian question.

Egypt is still hopeful that ajust and comprehensive
solution can be found to the Palestinian question,
ending the suffering of our brother Palestinian people
and fulfilling their long-awaited desire to establish an
independent State based on the 4 June 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. Until then, we call
on the international community, especially donor
countries, to continue lending their support by backing
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). The
Agency plays a vital role in providing basic services
to Palestinian refugees, which is why we should all
support it. Egypt would like to take this opportunity
to call on all Member States to ensure that during the
current session of the General Assembly we can extend
UNRWA's mandate for three years, thereby enabling it
to continue to play its important humanitarian role.

Egypt once again stresses that the international
community, as embodied by the Security Council, must
shoulder its responsibility, end the suffering of the
Palestinian people and resolve the Palestinian question
by implementing the relevant Council and General
Assembly resolutions. We cannot achieve security and
stability in the Middle East without finding a solution
to the Palestinian question and ending the suffering of
the Palestinian people.

