Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would first like to
take this opportunity, on behalf of my Permanent
Representative and the whole Indonesian delegation,
to bid farewell to Ambassador Francois Delattre and
extend all best wishes to him. He has always contributed
very constructively to the work of the Council, and that
has been instrumental in promoting its unity. We very
much admire his exemplary diplomatic skill. We wish
him the very best, bon voyage and au revoir.

Indonesia welcomes the adoption of resolution 2480
(2019), which renews the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) for one year. We thank France for
its efforts as penholder and all delegations for their
constructive spirit in crafting a balanced, consensus-
based resolution.

Indonesia concurs with the view expressed in the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/454) that
MINUSMA's presence in Mali remains crucial. In this
regard, the renewal of MINUSMA's mandate, which
includes a prioritization of its tasks, coordination with
other security presences in Mali and the Sahel region,
and division of labour with the United Nations country
team, will enable further progress and prevent any
deterioration of the situation in Mali. Granted, there
are many areas in which further progress is necessary.
Today we adopted a resolution that contains a set of
priority measures, on which we hope to see progress
in the coming months. As we said during the briefing
on MINUSMA earlier this month (see S/PV.8547),
all parties in Mali have to muster the political will to
accelerate the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.

Allow me to reiterate our support and appreciation
to MINUSMA and all its personnel in delivering its
mandate as well as possible under increasingly difficult
circumstances. We hope that the resolution that we
have just adopted will contribute to the achievement of
lasting peace, stability and prosperity in Mali.

Before I conclude, let me reiterate our sincere
thanks and appreciation to the Kuwaiti delegation for a
very effective and productive presidency.

