Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I,
too, would like to thank Mr. Ibrahima Fall for his
briefing. As his tenure will soon be coming to an end, I
would also like to thank him for the excellent job that
he has done as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes Region. We know how
closely he has been working with the African Union
with a view to facilitating the Conference process.

The signing in Nairobi of the Pact on Security,
Stability and Development in the Great Lakes Region
provided new impetus to cooperation efforts among the
countries of the Great Lakes region. Such regional
cooperation is an essential component of the internal
stabilization process that a number of countries in the
region have had to undertake - a process that, for
some, is still under way.

As my delegation has already emphasized, we
believe that in this context two aspects are particularly
important. The first is security. As this is a cross-border
problem, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region opens a special framework within which
to seek solutions. The problem of security continues to
be relevant, although it is less pressing today than in
the past, which is a welcome development.

The second aspect is economic relationships.
Each country in the region will be able to develop in a
sustainable manner only if it can do so in the context of
a regional economic framework that is stable and
balanced. That requires strengthened economic
cooperation and the transparent and mutually
beneficial management of the natural resources of the
region.

I would like to welcome the determination of the
States of the region to work together to overcome their
common challenges. Such regional efforts must
continue. To that end, the States parties to the
International Conference for the Great Lakes Region
must take ownership of that new instrument.
Ownership is a prerequisite for the success of the
process undertaken at Dar es-Salaam and Nairobi. I
therefore welcome the decision of the States parties to
the Conference to seek to continue and enhance the
process under way through the implementation of
regional monitoring mechanisms.

The international community, and the United
Nations in particular, will remain committed, together
with the Great Lakes region, to contributing to the
success of the process. The Security Council will soon
have an opportunity to reconsider the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo with a View to

adapting it to the post-transition context. The
Peacebuilding Commission will provide support for
reconstruction and development efforts in Burundi.
More broadly, the United Nations system will, we
hope, remain deeply committed to the region, for
which is has spared no efforts.

