Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation warmly thanks Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; Mr. Joao Vale de Almeida,
Ambassador of the European Union to the United
Nations; and Mr. Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve,
Ambassador ofthe Kingdom ofBelgium, in his capacity
as Security Council Facilitator for the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015), for their comprehensive and
detailed briefings.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea welcomes
the contribution of the balanced and comprehensive
seventh report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/492)
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015),
which characterized an intense diplomatic effort
on the part of the five permanent members of the
Security Council, Germany and the Islamic Republic
of Iran, and culminated in the agreement called the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). The
resolution, adopted unanimously by the Council on
14 July 2015, was the result of the persistent efforts
of the international community. It is an important
achievement in the sphere of non-proliferation and
remains a vital element in the global architecture of
multilateral diplomacy.

We continue to commend the rigour, professionalism
and impartiality of the work of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), an autonomous organization
mandated to verify, monitor and lend unwavering
support for the full implementation of the JCPOA and
provide confirmation to the international community of
its effective supervision of the Islamic Republic of Iran,
in the light of resolution 2231 (2015). In fact, in several
reports submitted to the Council from January 2016 to
date, the Agency confirms that the Islamic Republic of
Iran has been fulfilling its nuclear energy commitments
under the JCPOA. We welcome the Agency's
confirmation that Iran also continues to comply with
the Additional Protocol to its Safeguards Agreement.

On the other hand, we continue to note with concern
the impact of the withdrawal of the United States from
the JCPOA on 8 May 2018, its subsequent decisions
and their consequences. We nevertheless appeal to
the Islamic Republic of Iran to continue fulfilling its
obligations under the JCPOA.

It should be noted, however, that the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action represents only a
fraction of resolution 2231 (2015). Several of the
provisions set forth in its annex B - which sets out
restrictions applicable to nuclear-related transfers,
ballistic missile-related transfers and arms-related
transfers to or from the Islamic Republic ofIran, as well
as assets freeze and travel ban provisions - continue to
raise concerns for some Member States, especially with
regard to alleged violations of the travel ban by listed
individuals, in accordance with resolution 2231 (2015).
In that connection, we call on the relevant institutions
with the appropriate mandate to update that list in
the proper forums, thoroughly and comprehensively
analyse any information that may or may not corroborate
those concerns and inform the Security Council of
their findings in due course, and we urge the Islamic
Republic of Iran to duly reflect upon the concerns of
annex B.

The current climate, characterized by a spirit of
greater tension, clashes in the Middle East and the
recent announcement by the Iranian side that it will
soon surpass the established allowable limit of enriched
uranium under the nuclear agreement signed in 2015, is
quite alarming and of concern to my Government. We
therefore encourage regional and international actors
to mobilize to safeguard the JCPOA, a fundamental
tool for regional and international peace and security.
Therefore, through dialogue and diplomacy, we appeal
to the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to
reconsider this new position.

Finally, pursuant to my country's foreign policy
goals and ideals of peace and stability, we reaffirm our
commitment to preventive diplomacy, non-interference
and respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of States. We therefore encourage
all parties involved to continue to work effectively
with the participants in the JCPOA, to promote unity
and create the necessary conditions for safeguarding
the agreement.

