Mr. Ali (Kazakhstan): We thank Mr. Jean-Yves
Le Drian, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs
of France, for this opportunity to discuss the ways in
which the international community can support the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). We thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres;
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission; Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of
Mali; and Mr. Angel Losada Fernandez, European
Union Special Representative for the Sahel, for their
insightful briefings.

I would first like to express our deepest
condolences to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the Governments of Mali, the Niger, Chad and the
United States on the tragic deaths of their troops in the
recent terrorist attacks in Mali and the Niger. We salute
the bravery of the personnel of MINUSMA for their
selfless service in the cause ofpeace in one of the most
dangerous places in the world.

The security situation in the Sahel continues to
deteriorate as a result of the threats posed by Ansar
Eddine, the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara, and
other terrorist and violent extremist groups. The
insecurity is aggravated by their alliances with groups
involved in transnational organized crime, drug
and human trafficking and arms proliferation from
neighbouring Libya. We firmly believe that deploying
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force will help to reinforce the
efforts of MINUSMA, the Malian national security
forces and other operations in the region, such as
France's Operation Barkhane, to bring peace and
stability to the Sahel.

During the Council's recent field mission there, we
were pleased to see how determined the leadership of
the G-5 Sahel is to overcome these challenges to their
security. We therefore welcome the official opening on
9 September of the Joint Force's headquarters in Sevare
and look forward to its full operationalization by March
2018. Its effectiveness will depend on predictable
and steady funding, as well as the political support
of other regional actors. We therefore commend the
financial support that the European Union and France
have provided and hope that others will also make
major pledges at the donor conference in Brussels
in December so as to bridge the funding gap, which
currently stands at more than €300 million.

We welcome the Secretary-General's
recommendations in his report (S/2017/869) regarding
four possible options for supporting the Force, and
echo his appeal to the Security Council that any action
taken should be ambitious. We should also ensure the
complementarity and improve the coordination of the
Joint Force's operations with all security forces in the
region, including MINUSMA, Operation Barkhane,
the Multinational Joint Task Force for the Lake Chad
basin and regional frameworks, particularly the
African Union-led Nouakchott proces, designed to
enhance security cooperation and operationalize the
African Peace and Security Architecture in the Sahelo-
Saharan region.

However, we realize that a military approach alone
will not address the instability in the region, which
is the result of an accumulation of problems of which
violent extremism is only the most recent layer. It will
be vital to focus on the root causes of the conflict
and instability by strengthening local governance,
reducing poverty and tribal rivalries, providing basic
services, creating more jobs and mitigating the effects
of climate change. We therefore need a comprehensive
subregional approach aimed at building resilience
in the region's human and environmental systems
and increasing peace and prosperity. In that regard,
the effective implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, with increased
investments in sustainable development, climate
mitigation and development, can help us to achieve the
goals I have discussed. Concerted efforts to promote a
strong disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
policy, address impunity and corruption, advance
structural reforms in security, justice and the rule of
law and foster human rights are also vital. Peace will
also be more durable when women and young people
are fully integrated into all activities at every stage of
the peace process and are at the negotiating table at the
highest levels.

In addition, initiatives such as the G-5 Sahel
countries' regional development strategy, the Alliance
for the Sahel - a joint initiative of France, Germany
and the European Union - and others will help to
enhance the Strategy's mandate. Successful results at
the international investment forum in Mali scheduled
for 7 December will help to boost the region's social
and economic emergence and development. However,
none of that will happen without concrete progress
in the Malian peace process. We hope that the
operationalization of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force will
improve the implementation of the 2015 Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, including the
operationalization of the interim authorities in northern
Mali. However, that can succeed only if all stakeholders
work together and stick to a clearly formulated vision
and process, as well as realistic timelines.

My delegation therefore supported the Council's
adoption of resolution 2374 (2017), which establishes
a sanctions regime on Mali, since we believe it will
send a strong message to the parties to change their
approach and implement the Agreement. In conclusion,
Kazakhstan remains committed to helping the countries
of the Sahel fulfil their vision for peace, progress
and prosperity.

