Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank all
of the Force Commanders for their briefings and for
their service. I also thank Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous for assembling the Force Commanders here.
This is a critical annual gathering and an important rite
of passage.

As we mark the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations, the founders of the Organization would
never have conceived of the assortment of 16 Force
Commanders gathered here today, nor the operating
environments into which they deploy. The risk that
they and the men and women under their command take
are a powerful testament to the spirit that animates the
United Nations. Their work, their leadership and their
sacrifice could not be more important.

I wish also to take this occasion to extend my
country's deep appreciation to all countries on the
Council and beyond in the United Nations that deploy
troops and police to United Nations missions in very
difficult environments. Peacekeepers deserve the
support and attention of the Security Council, and we in
turn rely on the candour and expertise of Commanders
to help us to better address the challenges facing
peacekeeping.

Before asking several questions, I will focus on
three essential aspects of what the Force Commanders
have just touched upon, specifically the imperative
of appropriate training, the importance of expanding
the pool of troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and
the kinds of contributions they make, and the critical
question of how the system handles exceptions to the
rules of engagement.

First, as has been said, we must prepare
peacekeepers for the missions in which they serve, as
they are increasingly dangerous missions. As many
here know, the United States recently conducted a study
in Mali through the United States Army's Asymmetric
Warfare Group. I am sure that it will come as no surprise
to experienced Force Commanders, but the findings
made it abundantly clear that tailored pre-deployment
training for peacekeepers headed to Mali is the most
important and the largest gap in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), and that, ofcourse, was underscored
here today by the MINUSMA Force Commander.

We must do everything possible to avoid sending
men and women unprepared into environments
where violent extremists operate. We owe it to our
peacekeepers and the people they protect to do better,
and we extend special condolences to Chad, which has
lost more soldiers in MINUSMA, I believe, than any
other contingent.

While the Asymmetric Warfare Group's findings
were specific to Mali, this need for contextualized
training, including scenario-based protection-of-
civilians training, goes far beyond any one mission.
No one size fits all, needless to say. The context of
protecting internally displaced persons during the rainy
season in South Sudan while cohabitating with them
in United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
sites is very different from protecting civilians against
rebels who wear army uniforms and melt into the jungle
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, or, for that
matter, against banditry and militias in the Central
African Republic. These are very, very different and
specific contexts and specific threat environments.

This leads me to my second point, on expanding
the scope of troop-contributing countries and the
kinds of contributions they make. We all agree that
we need to continue to broaden and deepen the pool of
troop-contributing countries and increase contingents
with niche capabilities to operate in challenging
environments. Some of those niche capabilities have
been discussed today.

To assist in this endeavour, the Secretariat has
published a paper detailing the capabilities required
for current United Nations peacekeeping operations.
President Obama will host a peacekeeping summit
during the General Assembly high-level week with the
goal of working with the Secretary-General and other
troop-contributing countries and financial supporters
of peacekeeping to ensure that the United Nations can
draw on the resources ofcontributing nations to fulfil the
essential role played by United Nations peacekeeping,
to make it more responsive, more effective and safer for
civilians as well as for the peacekeepers who compose
such missions.

But increased and smarter contributions will not
be enough to help modern peacekeeping operations
meet the challenges they face. Responsive planning
and support to missions must also improve. The legacy
structure of sustainment planning and logistics support
is currently not adequate to back peacekeepers who face
these modern threats. When a peacekeeper in a mission
is wounded, be it in Mali, Darfur or elsewhere, it is
unconscionable that he or she cannot receive immediate
medical care, including evacuation.

Thirdly, I should like to turn quickly to caveats.
Force Commanders need to have confidence that
contingents will follow their leadership. A recent study
from the global peace operations initiative on operational
partnerships in United Nations peacekeeping found
that restrictive national caveats placed undue burdens
on those TCCs that have not put such restrictions in
place and that have to pick up the slack. We heard about
that here with the specifics of the Golan in mind.

Secret caveats, which are declared only when a
crisis breaks out, pose a particular risk to all mission
personnel, including the peacekeepers themselves who
have the caveats. In emergencies, commanders need to
know that orders will be carried out fully and without
pushback. But even open caveats, which are made
known to mission leadership from the start, are deeply
concerning when they restrict the ability of contingents
to undertake mission-critical tasks.

Decisions on how peacekeepers respond to a threat
or how to engage to protect civilians should be left to the
Force Commander and mission leadership and carried

out through the mission's chain of command, with full
respect for the mission's mandate. Those unwilling to
abide by the Force Commander's directives or to fulfil
the mandate should not deploy.

Finally, I would be remiss ifI did not address the
recent terrible allegations of sexual exploitation and
abuse being committed at the hands of international
forces, including some United Nations peacekeepers.
While the vast majority of peacekeepers serve
honourably, and make, again, tremendous sacrifices,
I must say unequivocally that this alleged conduct is
unacceptable and that any personnel who commit
such acts must be brought to justice by their national
authorities. There is no room in United Nations
peacekeeping or in any regional or national mission for
those who would prey on the most vulnerable, whom
they are there to protect. This should be a principle that
all of us can rally around at the United Nations.

Before I give up the floor, Ijust have a few questions
for our briefers.

First, itwouldbe helpful to hear from General Yohannes,
as we have about MINUSMA, what the biggest training
gaps are among troops who arrive as part of UNMISS
and within the Mission headquarters staff. What are the
gaps that he would like to see filled? We would welcome
any insight he has as to how we, as the Council, might
help address these gaps.

I should like also to know what General Finn's
standard operating procedure is when a contingent
comes to him and informs him that it has certain caveats
on his operation. We heard his concerns about caveats,
but when he receives that information, does he discuss
this, then, with the contingent Commander? Does
he inform Department of Peacekeeping Operations
headquarters? Is this reported to the Security Council
in any manner? It is not, to my knowledge, but it may be
that information is circulated that we are not aware of.
Could we think constructively and productively about
procedural changes that might help us mobilize the
will to overcome this challenge, which he eloquently
described?

I would also ask Under-Secretary-General Ladsous
what is needed from Member States, what is needed
within the Secretariat, what is needed in the missions to
improve support to peacekeepers with regard to medical
evacuations? This is an issue that, of course, every
troop-contributing country and police-contributing
country probably would like to have more assurance on
before they deploy into harm's way.

I would ask the same question of the Force
Commanders, as they are dealing with the mechanics
of medical evacuation in the field. Concretely, are there
things that they are missing or steps that they think we
could be taking to ensure this most basic care for the
troops and police under their command?

