The Deputy Secretary-General: I welcome this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on piracy
and armed robbery at sea, and to introduce the annual
report of the Secretary-General on piracy off the coast
of Somalia (S/2012/783).

Piracy and armed robbery against ships are of
global concern. They affect the freedom of shipping and
the safety of shipping lanes that carry about 90 per cent
of the world's trade. Pirate attacks also endanger the
safety of seafarers, fishermen and passengers, and the
delivery of humanitarian aid. They damage maritime
industries such as ports, fisheries and tourism, thereby
hindering sustainable development.

According to the latest reports of the International
Maritime Organization (IMO), there were 291 attacks
against ships in the first 10 months of 2012. Pirates are
still holding 293 seafarers hostage. As in 2011 and 2010,
the areas most affected are East Africa, West Africa and
the Far East. The latest report of the Secretary-General
notes a sharp decline in pirate attacks in waters off the
coast of Somalia in 2012 compared to 2011. However,
these gains can be easily reversed if we do not address
the causes of piracy, including instability, lawlessness
and problems of effective governance, notwithstanding
recent important political progress in Somalia.

Although piracy is a global problem, it takes
different forms. Off the coast of Somalia, pirates are
well organized, hijacking ships and crews to hold them
for ransom. In the Gulf of Guinea, piracy is related to
the theft of oil and linked with the regional black market
and organized crime. While hostages have been taken,
ransoms do not appear to be the driving goal. There are
also differences in the political and governance context
that contributed to the rise of piracy in these areas.

Still, our response in the Gulf of Guinea and
elsewhere can rely on the lessons learned from Somalia,
including by focusing on modernizing counter-
piracy laws, strengthening capacities for maritime
law enforcement and crime investigation, supporting
regional networks, and knowledge-sharing.

Combating piracy requires a multidimensional
approach. In Somalia, this has meant stabilizing the
country through a Somali-owned process. The new
President of Somalia has made an impressive start,
but challenges remain significant. We need to move
swiftly to support the Government so that it can finally
provide the security and peace dividends that Somalis
deserve. We welcome the Government's commitment to
combating piracy, as stated in the programme endorsed
by Parliament last Tuesday.

Secondly, Somalia needs a comprehensive maritime
security and economic strategy with a proper legal
framework, including the proclamation of an exclusive
economic zone, in accordance with the provisions of
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
We should translate the success at sea into progress on
land.

Thirdly, we need to strengthen the capacity of
States to prosecute individuals suspected of piracy and
to imprison convicted pirates. That effort must include
deterring and suppressing the financing of piracy and
the laundering of ransom money. The United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime's counter-piracy programme
is helping in this regard, including to ensure that prison
conditions meet international standards.

Fourthly, the constructive engagement of Member
States and international and regional organizations to
build consensus on a joint response should continue.
The Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia
now comprises over 70 participants with impressive
expertise. Other initiatives complete these efforts,
including the Djibouti Code of Conduct, under the
auspices of the IMO, and the Regional Anti-Piracy
Prosecutions and Intelligence Coordination Centre
recently established in Seychelles.

The United Nations Political Office for Somalia
also plays a key role under resolution 1976 (2011)
in coordinating the efforts of Somalia with those
of United Nations agencies, regional organizations
and the international community. Consistent with
resolution 2039 (2012), the United Nations Offices
for Central Africa and West Africa are assisting the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Gulf of Guinea Commission in the preparations for a
regional summit on piracy in Cameroon in April 2013.

Fifthly, the shipping industry should be encouraged
to take steps to protect itself. Twenty per cent of
vessels transiting high-risk waters do not implement
security measures, and those vessels account for
the overwhelming number of successfully pirated
ships. The IMO is working closely with the industry
on a variety of measures and best practices that have
prevented pirates from boarding vessels and enabled
rescues.

Finally, the United Nations is grateful for the
robust counter-piracy support provided by the naval
presence established by NATO, the European Union,
the Combined Maritime Task Force and individual
Member States. Several Member States - including
China, India, Japan, Malaysia, the Republic of Korea
and the Russian Federation - have deployed naval and
military assets in the region as part of international
counter-piracy efforts.

Let us also remember the seafarers themselves.
Hostages endure the most horrendous conditions and
are often threatened and tortured in an effort to extract
a ransom. I welcome the recent approval by the Board
of the Trust Fund to Support the Initiatives of States
to Counter Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, chaired
by the Department of Political Affairs, of a project to
provide medical care, accommodation, food and clothes
to hostages during the release phase, and to help them
return home swiftly. Let us not forget that human
dimension.

Looking ahead, three challenges require our
immediate attention. First, we must have better
coordination, information-sharing and trust-building
among countries and agencies involved in counter-piracy
operations. Secondly, capacity must be strengthened to
prosecute piracy cases and imprison those convicted in
accordance with international human rights standards.
Thirdly, a framework must be established to govern the
use of privately contracted armed security personnel
on board vessels. The work being undertaken by the
IMO should continue in order to ensure regulation and
accountability.

In closing, piracy is a problem that the international
community can address successfully if we continue to
work together. The United Nations remains committed
to working with its partners to consolidate international
assistance, coordinate our activities, and deliver a
comprehensive response to this threat.

