Mr. Arnault (spoke in French): As the first
speaker at today's meeting, I should like to express to
you, Mr. President, our condolences for the tragic air
accident that occurred yesterday and to request that you
convey our expressions of support and solidarity to the
families of the victims.

(spoke in English)

Thank you, Mr. President, for this new
opportunity to appear before the Council and also for
having agreed to postpone this presentation from last
week until today in order to accommodate the work of
the Mission.

Members of the Council have already seen the
quarterly report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/634),
which covers the period from mid-March until the end
of July. With your permission, Mr. President, I will
therefore refrain from reiterating what is already
contained in it and focus on providing the Council with
an update on the main issues on the Bonn agenda.

Throughout most of the country, voter registration
closed on 15 August. In some districts of the south and
the south-east, where registration started late owing to
insecurity, registration was extended for another five
days and came to an end on 20 August. Although final
figures will take some time to compile, the broad
picture is already available: 10.5 million people
registered, more than 41 per cent of them women.
Some 230,000 nomads were registered by dedicated
registration teams. Overall, that is a good result: this
comprehensive nationwide exercise now enables the
electoral authorities and the security forces to make
appropriate preparations for the 9 October election. It
will make it possible for the elected leadership to claim
representation of the Afghan nation as a whole. It has
also served as a tool for an unprecedented level of
popular mobilization around the political process,
much higher than the two prior exercises held earlier:
namely, the Emergency Loya Jirga and the
Constitutional Loya J irga. Elections held in the wake of
a prolonged conflict are meant to create political
legitimacy for the post-war order. The presidential
election in Afghanistan now has the potential to do just
that.

The picture is not entirely satisfactory, however.
Although many of the cases of imbalance that existed a
month ago between provinces have been corrected, it
has proved very difficult to redress the situation in the
areas of the south most affected by insecurity. In those
areas, general insecurity, threats and attacks by
extremist elements against electoral personnel and
against the people themselves have caused registration
sites to open late or for shorter periods of time. Most
affected has been the province of Zabul, where
registration barely exceeds 50 per cent of the target. In
addition, although even in very conservative areas of
the country the registration of women has reached the
national average of some 40 per cent, we believe that
insecurity has contributed to the very low registration
of women in the south - approximately 19 per cent.

Some concerns have been expressed - most
recently by several presidential candidates - about the
fairness of registration. Among the allegations were
charges that political considerations had shaped the
choice of registration sites or the date of closing.
Although there were obviously shortcomings to this
process, we are fully satisfied that political bias was
not one of them. Multiple registration, on the other
hand, has probably been a factor, but it is very difficult
to measure its scale, and, in any case, it will have no
impact on polling.

At the conclusion of this nine-month registration
campaign, it is fitting to pay tribute to the 12 electoral
workers who were killed and the more than 30 who
were wounded in attacks by extremists and to the
14,000 Afghan staff who made this success possible.
Credit also goes to the Afghan security forces, to the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and to
the coalition, which - along with United Nations
personnel - have played an essential role in this
unprecedented endeavour.

Preparations for the election are now under way.
The Joint Electoral Management Body is finalizing
regulations applicable to the electoral campaign, which
will start on 7 September. These cover campaign
financing, electoral activities and public order, access
to the media and the misuse of government resources
for political purposes. Logistical preparations for the
election are also under way: approximately 5,000
polling centres have been identified, in which 25,000
polling sites will be located. The recruitment of the
120,000 Afghan staff involved in the election has
begun. Ballot boxes and other non-sensitive materials
are arriving in the country and are in the process of
distribution to the 34 provincial centres. Ballot papers
will arrive in Kabul on 15 September and will similarly
be shipped to provincial centres during the second half
of September.

Of course, security is a major consideration. The
overall security plan for the pre-polling phase, for
election day and for post-election processes has been
finalized. The concept is essentially identical to that
developed during registration: polling-site security will
be the responsibility primarily of the Ministry of
Interior, who by polling day will have 20,000 police
trained in the training centres supported by the United
States and Germany.

The average number of police will be
approximately six per site, and therefore additional
security personnel will have to be recruited locally, in
addition to trained police. The security of areas around
the polling sites will be provided by the military:
personnel from the Afghan National Army, from ISAF
and from the coalition. The coalition now has
approximately 18,000 troops in Afghanistan; ISAF has
7,300, which will rise to approximately 8,300 when the
Spanish and Italian battalions are in theatre. They
should be operational by the end of September.
Cooperation between security actors and the electoral
authority has been increasingly smooth as voter
registration has progressed, and that legacy will be a
very significant asset in dealing with the much more
difficult challenge of providing security for the
election.

That leads me to the nature of the challenges that
we anticipate over the next six weeks. Difficult
situations can be expected throughout the country. In
recent weeks, factional rivalries have led to the
temporary closure of registration sites in several
provinces, including most recently in Badghis and
Ghor, in connection with factional Violence there.
However, although factional violence has occasionally
affected registration, it has never targeted it as such.
That has been the work of groups such as the Taliban
and Hezbi-i-Islami/Hekmatyar, which have vowed
publicly to derail the process and have been
responsible for the brunt of the attacks directed against
voter registration. The latest attack - involving six
bombs going off in quick succession inside and outside
a registration compound in the province of Farah -
took place on 19 August, killing two policemen and
injuring seven.

Those forces have not been able to derail the
process and have, in particular, failed spectacularly to
undermine popular participation in registration in the
country's east and south-east. However, as described
earlier, their impact on the south has been more
tangible and has deprived part of the population there
of the possibility of participating in the election. What
is more worrying, domestic and international security
agencies concur that there are clear indications that the
Taliban and similar groups are now preparing to
escalate their attacks against the last stage of the
election.

We are reasonably confident that these groups
will not be able to undermine the electoral process at
the national level. But we are concerned that violence
could cause part of the population to stay away from
polling sites in the south and elsewhere. That threat is
compounded by the fact that security forces - both
domestic and international - will be stretched thin to
protect all 5,000 sites across the country.

Action is therefore necessary against those who
plan and organize these attacks. In this respect, we
welcome the timely meeting held on Monday and
Tuesday between President Musharraf and President
Karzai, and we hope that enhanced cooperation
between the two countries and the international forces
will prevent further violence against the elections. This
is an urgent matter, as the electoral campaign will start
in less than two weeks and thousands of electoral staff
will be involved in the preparation of polling day
between now and 9 October. The presidential election
can make a major contribution to the stability of
Afghanistan and the consolidation of its fragile state.
Its protection deserves, in our View, the highest
priority, as does the protection of the lives of the
electoral workers who are making it possible.

Let me take this opportunity to refer briefly to the
security of United Nations staff. A recent joint mission
by the Office of the Security Coordinator
(UNSECOORD) and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations has identified a few measures that will
improve the security of United Nations staff in
Afghanistan in the upcoming period. They include
additional trained Afghan personnel for the protection
of United Nations premises and a better capacity for
security information and analysis. The cost of these
measures is modest and I hope they can be
implemented as quickly as possible.

Preparation for registration and voting in
neighbouring Iran and Pakistan has, fortunately, made
substantial progress since the Secretary-General's
quarterly report to the Security Council (S/2004/634).
Following the signing of memoranda of understanding
between both Governments, as well as between the
Government of Afghanistan and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), the
implementing partner, the International Organization
for Migration (IOM), has begun to operate in both
countries.
Because of the very compressed time frame,
registration in Pakistan will be less than comprehensive
but will still be carried out on a scale that, we believe,
is acceptable. The process will start on 1 October. It
will include three days of registration, two days of
exhibition and challenges of the voters' list and three
days for the retraining of staff. Polling day will take
place, as in the rest of Afghanistan, on 9 October.
Depending on the situation on the ground, registration
or exhibition could be extended by one additional day.
Over 1,000 registration and polling stations will be
deployed in 300 locations in the refugee camps, in the
north-west frontier province and Baluchistan and
among urban concentrations of refugees in Peshawar
and Quetta. The campaign of civic education aimed at
the refugee population in Pakistan will start on
1 September. I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the Government of Pakistan for its cooperation in
implementing this complex exercise.

In Iran, where the registration of refugees was
completed two years ago under the auspices of the
Government and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, polling will take place in
approximately 1,000 polling stations in 250 locations,
and the civic education campaign will start during the
first week of September.

Out of the initial list of 23 applicants, 18
presidential candidates have passed the test of
eligibility. The process of vetting was thorough and
involved public exhibition of the list of presidential
hopefuls and vetting of the applications by the
Ministries of Interior, Defence and Finance, as well as
the Supreme Court. Several embassies cooperated in
checking whether candidates held double nationality,
grounds for ineligibility under the Afghan constitution.
Three candidates were alleged to maintain relationships
with militias. They agreed to the Joint Electoral
Management Body's proposal to have professional
officers of the Afghan National Army assigned to take
command of their units.

The political affiliation of the candidates is quite
diverse, with two being related to the royalist
movement, two having achieved some prominence
during the communist period, five belonging to jihadi
parties and nine being broadly described as democrats.
The only female presidential candidate, Masuda Jalal,
already competed with President Karzai at the
Emergency Loya Jirga two years ago, where she
arrived in second place. Three more women are
competing in the election as candidates for Vice-
president. The diversity of political backgrounds of the
various candidates is, in itself, quite encouraging, as it
shows that, at the national level at least, a meaningful
political competition is seen as possible.

Political diversity is supplemented by ethnic
diversity. As an unintended consequence of the
constitutional provision that each presidential
candidate must run on a ticket with his or her two vice-
presidents, candidates have been able to nominate vice-
presidential candidates outside their own ethnic group.
This is certainly a welcome pattern. As reported to the
Security Council earlier this year, the Constitutional
Loya Jirga saw a rise in ethnic distrust and hostility
and generated at the time fear that the electoral
competition would further strengthen the politics of
ethnicity. So far, the politics of multi-ethnicity has
prevailed. In recent days, however, the tone of the
political debate has become increasingly acrimonious,
and we will have to watch closely how the electoral
campaign unfolds.

During the period of electoral campaigning
between 7 September and 8 October, the nationwide
verification of political rights, undertaken jointly by
the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission
and UNAMA, will continue. It will ascertain whether
the rights and obligations of candidates are observed
and will recommend corrective action if need be.

Let me now say a few words about developments
in other areas that are important to the State-building
process in Afghanistan and should, hopefully, provide
the next Government with better means to expand its
authority.

Council members know how critical the issue of
counter-narcotics has become as a result of the
dramatic expansion of poppy cultivation this year. In
his quarterly report (S/2004/634), the Secretary-
General reported on the weak outcome of the
eradication effort. The eradication campaign is now
over, but interdiction continues. A successful raid by
the Afghan Special Narcotics Force in early August in
Helmand destroyed processing equipment and over two
tons of drugs. This is an indication of the increasing
capability of this force, which has destroyed, in the
past eight months, over 30 tons of illegal drugs. The
counter-narcotics police, for their part, continue to
seize drugs and arrest suspects. They lack, however,
the support of a fully functioning criminal justice
system to prosecute drug cases fairly and efficiently.
However, a project implemented by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime provides for the
establishment of a specialized channel of the judicial
system to handle such cases more effectively with
specially trained prosecutors, judges and appropriate
prison facilities. By the end of this year, we expect that
the tools for a more effective law enforcement in the
area of counter-narcotics should be in place.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) and the cantonment of heavy weapons remain
slow, but we continue to believe that the targets of
Berlin with regard to DDR can be achieved by the time
of the election. Thirteen thousand soldiers have been
demobilized and the demobilization of another 10,000
would get us very close to the 60 per cent target.
Indeed, it appears more and more probable that the
actual number of militias is not the official 100,000 but
closer to 40,000 or 50,000.

In addition, in the past month, four corps
commanders, in Mazar-e-Sharif, Kandahar, Jalalabad
and Kunduz, have been reassigned to civilian
functions. Two of them are now chiefs of police, one is
a provincial governor and the fourth one is a deputy
interior minister. This gives the Ministry of Defence
the opportunity to transfer command and control of
these corps to professional officers, preferably trained
officers of the Afghan National Army. Final
discussions on these appointments are currently under
way. Good decisions in this regard will go a long way
towards reassuring the population that militias will not
be a factor in the upcoming elections. They will also
facilitate the conclusion of the DDR process and the
further expansion of the Afghan National Army.

Massive popular participation in voter
registration has shown how much is riding on the
upcoming election. We think that an election that meets
these expectations is now within reach. We need an
additional effort with regard to the security of voters
and electoral staff, and we need to continue to work
hard on the political environment in order to ensure
that it is as conducive as possible to a free and fair
exercise. The Government, the contending candidates
and the forces they represent, and the international
community have a share of responsibility in it. We trust
that we will all live up to it.

