Ms. Colakovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to commend you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting to discuss the topic of post-conflict
peacebuilding. I am confident that our deliberations
today will contribute greatly to the discussion of one
of the most important items on the Security Council's
agenda. I would also like to thank the briefers for their
valuable comments.

In January 2011, during its presidency of the
Security Council, Bosnia and Herzegovina held a
debate on post-conflict institution-building (see S/PV.6472). The focus of the debate was the importance
of national ownership and building national capacity,
including resilient institutions, issues that were seen
as core issues for a successful peacebuilding process.
In line with the Secretary-General's 2009 agenda and
the 2010 review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture (S/2010/393), the presidential statement
contained in document S/PRST/2011/2 requested an
impact assessment regarding the issue of contributing to
building viable institutions in post-conflict countries, as
well as recommendations to improve the effectiveness
of the United Nations contribution to more effective,
stable and sustainable institutions that can help prevent
relapses into conflict.

Almost two years after the debate, we are pleased
to see that institution-building, along with inclusivity
and sustained international support, are among the
central topics of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2012/746). Many concrete recommendations and
various developments resulted from the debate on
institution-building and a few other debates in the
Security Council on the issue of peacebuilding.

Inclusivity and institution-building are critical in
preventing relapses into violent conflict. Furthermore,
they are vital for domestic accountability systems and
are a more reliable base for the engagement of a State
with the international community. Only a viable State
with strong structures will contribute to peace and
stability and be able to avoid a return to conflict.

Dialogue with national actors in the earliest stages
of peacebuilding is a conditio sine qua non for the
success of early peacebuilding efforts. That process
needs to be open, creative and transformative. It must
include all relevant decision-makers who can contribute
to post-conflict peacebuilding and recovery efforts.

Rebuilding and transforming the functionality
of country systems is essential primarily for a good
transition from conflict, but also for the drawdown or
closing of peacekeeping missions and peacebuilding
offices. It is clear that the international community
should invest more in strengthening its tools in that
area. Finally, in order to improve that process, suitable,
well-designed and practical accountability mechanisms
must be in place. Early and substantial results need to
be achieved through the restoration of core Government
functions and delivery of services. In that way, balanced
long-term support for the process of institution-building
can be attained.

Maintaining and developing partnerships for
rebuilding institutions and sustainable peace requires
constant and stable international political and financial
support. In that context, we emphasize the importance
of mutual accountability. Balanced partnerships
between donors and recipient Governments are
a prerequisite for ensuring long-term and lasting
results and securing investments in peacekeeping
or peacebuilding processes. The development of
relevant national peacebuilding capacities is critical
to ensuring an effective and sustainable handover of
mission responsibility to host countries. In that regard,
the donors need to develop flexible, risk-tolerant
approaches, because the risk of inaction may outweigh
the risks associated with action.

The interaction between the Security Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission should be continued in
a more practical and sustained manner, which assumes
the continuation of dialogue and a better articulation
of the advice and analysis that the Council may receive
from the Commission, especially during mandate
discussions.

Institution-building as a central pillar of sustainable
peace was reinforced by the World Bank's World
Development Report 2011 and the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development's guidance
to donors on supporting State-building in situations
of conflict and fragility. The Group of Seven Plus
conflict-affected countries are working on their efforts
to implement the New Deal for engagement in fragile
States, which emphasizes the importance of, and respect
for, national priorities in funding peacebuilding efforts.

The United Nations civilian capacities initiative
aims at strengthening support for nationally owned
institution-building. Bosnia and Herzegovina actively
participates in the initiative, including through the
online platform CAPMATCH, and stands ready to
provide our first-hand experience in areas where
we have a comparative advantage, knowledge and
experience.
As noted in the Secretary-General's report,
institutional support and capacity development are not
quick fixes. Reforms can be detrimental ifimplemented
too quickly, without national ownership or prematurely
by authorities that lack legitimacy. Therefore, we can
and need to do more in order to transform the mixed
record in this area into success stories.

