Ms. Mushikiwabo (Rwanda): I thank the United
States for organizing this important debate on the
situation in Iraq at this very challenging time for
that country, the region, and indeed the world. Your
leadership today, Mr. President, and the presence of
a number of ministers in this debate are an indication
of the will of the international community to honour
its obligation to support and protect the Iraqi people
against the threat of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL). It is unfortunate that every time the
Security Council defaults on its inherent responsibility,
that of the maintenance of international peace and
security, the human cost is just unbearable.

We all know that the conflict in Syria has been
a breeding ground for ISIL. That terrorist group has
committed mass and gross atrocities that may amount
to crimes against humanity. Its ongoing persecution of
Christians, Yazidis and other religious minorities for
simply who they are may even amount to genocide.
The unprecedented brutality of this group should and
must reinforce our resolve to protect the many innocent
civilians caught up in the cruelty they have had nothing
to do with.

We take this opportunity to express our condolences
to all of the bereaved families.

Baghdad is far from Kigali in more aspects than
only geography. But the plight of many Iraqi people
today is no different from that of many Rwandans
20 years ago. Faced with unprecedented cruelty, they
looked to the world for help. I am the Foreign Minister
of Rwanda and, as such, I carry Rwanda's experience of
abandonment in 1994.

We believe that the international community
must act fact and act collectively to deny this terrorist
group any hold to territory, any access to financing
and any channel to recruitment, which has allowed
it to kill children and adults, behead journalists and
humanitarian workers, enslave women and girls and
persecute religious minorities.

There are opportunities upon which we can build
our support for the people of Iraq and to eradicate the
ISIL threat. First, there is the ability, demonstrated
by the Iraqis, to come together and form an inclusive
Government led by Prime Minister Haider Al-Abadi.
Indeed, unity among Iraq's communities is critical
to ensuring any sustainable success against ISIL: the
effort against that organization should be nationally led
and owned, with the support of all.

Secondly, we should take advantage of the existing
building blocks. We acknowledge the active role played
by the United States in building a coalition to fight the

terrorist group. The upcoming Security Council meeting
on foreign terrorist fighters that President Obama will
preside over next week will be another opportunity
to garner global support for the effort. We are also
encouraged by the outcome of the Jeddah ministerial
conference held on 11 September, which brought
together States members of the Gulf Cooperation
Council, as well as Egypt, Iraq, Turkey, Jordan and
Lebanon. We commend their resolve for a coordinated
military campaign against ISIL. In the same spirit, we
welcome the outcome of the international conference
on peace and security in Iraq held on 15 September in
Paris.

Thirdly, there is a critical need to ensure
implementation of resolution 2170 (2014), of 15 August,
and other relevant resolutions concerning the fight
against terrorism. There is a lot that the international
community can do, particularly this body, to stop the
influx of funding, starting by the implementation of
targeted sanctions. In that respect, countries of the
region and beyond should also play an important role in
preventing hatred and extremism and take the necessary
measures to prevent religious radicalization.

Before concluding, I should note that the rapid
advance ofISIL in Iraq and Syria has led to the massive
displacement of more than 2 million people, requiring
increased humanitarian assistance. We therefore call
on the international community to provide enhanced
support to the affected populations and countries.

Finally, Sir, we commend your delegation for
introducing the presidential statement that was just
adopted (S/PRST/2014/20). We also thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and the entire team in the country for
their dedication to the people of Iraq in such a difficult
time and environment.

