Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
Bolivia thanks the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS),
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, for his briefing.

Bolivia is gratified by the leadership of countries
of West Africa and the Sahel for their progress in
implementing political, institutional and constitutional
reforms. cote d'Ivoire's path to peace is a case in
point. The United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
successfully completed its mandate on 30 June. We
hail the commitment of the United Nations presence in
C6te d'Ivoire to support the Government and ensure the
maintenance of peace and the prosperity of the country
and its people.

Bolivia highlights the work of the UNOWAS
in the areas of good governance, security, human
rights, gender issues, preventive diplomacy and good
offices. We also know that we need the support of all
members of the international community to carry out
that work. In that regard, we value the support of the
United Nations, the Security Council and regional and
subregional bodies - such as the African Union and its
Peace and Security Council, the Economic Community
of West African States, the Economic Commission for
Africa, the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) and
other associated groups.
Where good governance is concerned, we would
like to highlight the progress that has been made in
areas such as the peaceful resolution of a post-election
crisis in the Gambia, the preparations for elections in
Liberia and Sierra Leone and the initiative to promote
development in the region. With regard to initiatives
on gender issues undertaken by the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, we support and
encourage its work in promoting women's participation
in political processes for peace and security.

We also commend the work that UNOWAS has been
doing in the areas of conflict prevention, mediation and
exercise of its good offices, as well as the constitutional
reforms that have been implemented in Benin, Burkina
Faso, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The links that UNOWAS
has established between best practices, interactive
dialogues, preventive diplomacy and strengthened
coordination between the parties concerned have made
it possible to launch initiatives for peace and security
as well as national ownership and inclusivity, paving
the way for consolidating peaceful solutions within a
democratic framework.

Bolivia supports the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, as outlined
in presidential statement S/PRST/2017/2, and we
encourage the members of the G-5 Sahel to continue
their work in coordination with the Secretary-General
and the African Union, as laid down in resolution 2359
(2017). With regard to implementation of the strategy,
we firmly believe that the current coalition of partners
in the region, including the countries of the Sahel,
regional organizations such as the African Union, the
Economic Community of Central African States and
ECOWAS, can contribute in ways that will make it
possible to comprehensively tackle the region's political,
economic, development and security challenges while
also identifying the causes ofinstability there.

We are concerned about the complex of problems
facing various countries in the region that are dealing
with enormous challenges to their efforts to achieve
peace and stability. Insecurity, transborder crime,
human trafficking and the smuggling of migrants,
and arms and drug trafficking are resulting in
conflicts that have a negative effect on the region's
population and development, on top of instability,
terrible humanitarian situations and terrorism. Bolivia
condemns such actions, particularly terrorism, which
can have no justification and represents a serious threat
to international peace and security in all its forms
and manifestations, wherever and by whomever it
is committed. We call for the full implementation of
resolution 2349 (2017), of3l March, in the fight against
terrorist groups, including Boko Haram and Da'esh.

Bolivia would also like to emphasize that part of
the reason for the serious crisis that the Sahel is dealing
with is the consequence of interventionist policies in
North Africa. It is impossible to discuss a crisis of
this magnitude in that part of the world without taking
into account the interventionist efforts in Libya, which
have resulted in arms and mercenaries pouring into the
region. Bolivia firmly rejects such interventionist and
interfering policies, which destabilize and undermine
international peace and security.

Lastly, we urge the States of West Africa and the
Sahel to continue with their stabilization process with
strict regard for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of all of their members.

