Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today's debate. I also
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
for the month of January.

As we usher in 2015, inclusive development is a
very timely theme for a Security Council open debate.
Conflicts around the world show that peace and security
are fragile without an inclusive process in the political,
economic and social realms. Indeed, discrimination
and marginalization often provide space for violent
extremism, which is increasingly transboundary in
nature.

While serving on the Security Council over the
past two years, the Republic of Korea supported the
prioritization of inclusivity for peace and prosperity.
The outcome was not always rewarding, however.
Sometimes, reiterated calls sounded like hollow
words in the face of harsh realities. Sovereignty and
territorial integrity were not always properly invoked
for their genuine raison d'etre. Political considerations
sometimes stood in the way of finding reasonable
solutions.

In countries in conflict, more often than not,
national stakeholders' priorities do not necessarily
overlap with those of the international community.
Therefore, an important prerequisite is to foster
national unity. If national stakeholders are fragmented
and even hostile to each other, international support
will also be fragmented and remain counterproductive.
That is where the role of national leadership becomes
indispensable.

Exercising leadership with a view to reconciliation
and social cohesion is often a task that requires self-
sacrifice. Sharing limited resources with former
enemies requires courage and vision. That is a sine
qua non, however, for making progress and leaving
conflicts behind. The international community cannot
replace those who must play that role, but it can provide
assistance so that political, economic and social
inclusiveness are integrated into the entire process
of peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
In that regard, the horizon-scanning mechanism
can be utilized to help the Security Council and the
international community remain alert to early warning
signs requiring rapid responses.

At the same time, the importance of regional entities'
proactive engagement cannot be overemphasized. Their
voices can be better heard, mitigating concerns over
domestic affairs. The United Nations system and the
donor community may review a strategy to provide
more sustained and predictable support for more
inclusive societies. In that context, we believe that the
concept of inclusive societies should be included in the
post-2015 development agenda.

The Republic of Korea attaches importance to
socioeconomic inclusivity in assisting other countries'
capacity-building. We have been providing integrated
assistance to post-conflict countries in the areas of
security, development, women's empowerment and
maternal and child health.

In conclusion, we would like to stress the importance
of close cooperation between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Security Council. Inclusive
development for conflict prevention is the area where
both organs' stakes overlap. We will continue to play a
constructive role in that process moving forward.

