Mr. Tanin: The holding of early general elections
in Kosovo on 6 October, which gave the people an
opportunity to select their representatives from among
1,067 parliamentary candidates, including 343 women,
has brought about the most significant change in
Kosovo's political landscape in 12 years. Allow me to
make some observations about those election, in which
the turnout was the highest since 2010. The decision to
call a snap election came at a time that was characterized
by internal political division, a broken unity with the
governing coalition and, most importantly, public
perception of the inability to deliver on promises to
the people of Kosovo. The preliminary results point
to a victory by the opposition Vetevendosje, or Self-
Determination, party and the Democratic League
of Kosovo. The two parties are currently exploring
coalition options.

The change in the political environment was
manifested by the decision ofmost voters to rally behind
unconventional political candidates who do not share
the background or vision of past leaders. The Kosovo
Serb majority areas have recorded the highest voter
turnout in recent times, confirming a trend of active
participation by that community in Kosovo elections.
The Serbian List may become the only Kosovo-Serb
parliamentary group represented in the legislature.
Overall, the elections were assessed positively
by international observers but challenges such as
campaign financing, intimidation and voter pressure in
the Kosovo Serb-majority areas were also highlighted.

In terms of women's political participation, the
election marked the first time that a major political
party in Kosovo had nominated a woman as the
candidate for Prime Minister. Other encouraging signs
were campaign pledges made towards greater gender
parity in Government and the high turnout among
young voters.

I remain hopeful that the new leadership can use
the momentum of the election to deliver on its promises
to the people by advancing the rule of law, fighting
against corruption and organized crime and tackling
unemployment. The international community also
expects the new leaders to affirm their commitment
to the negotiations with Belgrade and to ensure that
obstacles to dialogue are removed. A particular effort
should be made to ensure that political rhetoric and
actions are conducive to the resumption of and progress
in the dialogue after a year of stalled negotiations.

I welcome the continuous efforts by many
international players to give new momentum to the
political dialogue. While I am convinced that an
agreement between Belgrade and Pristina can be
sustainable only if it is based on responsible action and
local ownership of the process, it is also imperative
that during the transition in Kosovo the international
community stand united and firm in its support towards
a viable agreement. Let me turn to an issue that was
raised during the previous debate on Kosovo on 10 June
(see S/PV.8541).

As the Council is aware, on 28 May two staff
members of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) were arrested by the
Kosovo police. The arrest took place in the course of
a police operation targeting smuggling and organized
crime. As I told the Council on 10 June, UNMIK stands
fully behind the efforts of the Kosovo institutions to
combat organized crime and corruption.

I wish to recall that during their arrest, both staff
members were badly beaten and injured. They were
subsequently detained and later released. In addition,
criminal proceedings were instituted against both
staff members, including a detention hearing against
one of them. To ascertain the facts, I established an
investigation team, comprised of United Nations
Secretariat staff members from outside UNMIK with
extensive investigative and legal expertise.

The team carried out a thorough investigation,
interviewing more than 50 witnesses and examining
photographic, video and documentary evidence.
International partners and Kosovo institutions,
including the Kosovo police, cooperated with the
investigation. The investigation team has now submitted
its report to me. These are the facts.

The investigation team found no evidence to support
the accusation of wrongdoing by the two UNMIK
staff members. The team confirmed that both were
on official duty when they were arrested. Their arrest
and detention occurred despite their having clearly
identified themselves as United Nations staff. The team
found substantial evidence of the use of excessive force
by the Kosovo police: Mr. Krasnoshchekov had suffered
fractures in the back and side of his skull, cheekbone
and upperjawbone and was assessed to have acute stress
and anxiety-related depressive reactions. Mr. Dimovic
suffered multiple contusions and skin excoriations on
his head and thorax, in addition to hearing loss in both
ears and a deviated septum. He has also been diagnosed
with post-traumatic stress disorder.

Without the prior authorization of the United
Nations, the Kosovo police drove and retained an
UNMIK vehicle, and forensic examinations were
conducted on an UNMIK-owned telephone and two
SIM. cards. The arrest and detention of Kosovo staff
members while on official duty and the institution
of criminal proceedings against them were in clear
violation of their immunity from arrest, detention and
legal process. The use of excessive force, interference
with Mission property and the continuation of criminal
proceedings against staff members are in clear breach
of the applicable legal framework, including resolution
1244 (1999), UNMIK regulations and international
human rights law standards.
The international staff members were also declared
persona non grata - a concept that is not applicable, to
or in respect of, a United Nations person. These actions
are unacceptable and should be deplored. All ongoing
criminal proceedings against the two staff members
must therefore be terminated immediately. The status,
privileges and immunities of United Nations personnel
must be fully respected at all times. The Kosovo
authorities should investigate the Kosovo police
officers involved in the incident to ensure appropriate
accountability, and steps should be taken by the
institutions of Kosovo to ensure that such incidents will
not be repeated.

In recent days, UNMIK has engaged with the
Kosovo authorities on the outcome of the investigation.
I am pleased to report that the discussions have been
taking place in a positive spirit. As long as the Council
maintains the mandate for international presence in
Kosovo, I look forward to the institutions of Kosovo
and UNMIK operating with full respect for one another.
We are proud that UNMIK played a central role in the
formation of the Kosovo police and judiciary, and we are
hopeful that they intend to address any failure in their
operations and to act in accordance with international
norms and standards.

In advancing our mandate, we continue to foster
the rule of law and human rights, an essential element
of which is access to justice for every individual. An
UNMIK-funded legal aid centre provides free legal
assistance to people from vulnerable groups. In support
of court infrastructure across Kosovo, we continue
to assist the investigation into the integration of the
judiciary in northern Kosovo. In addition, we are
assisting the local authorities in northern Kosovo to
establish the first-ever shelter in the region for survivors
of gender-based violence. We have also launched a
platform that brings together civil society organizations
across Kosovo to empower people in advocacy and
grass-roots monitoring of their fundamental rights.

Within our trust-building framework, which
remains central to our vision, the Mission has
advanced support for language rights and cooperation
with the Language Commissioner of Kosovo and the
International Organization for Migration. We have
engaged language experts from Belgrade and Pristina
to prepare the first Albanian-Serbian dictionary since
1984, which is available online.

Today marks 19 years since the Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. On this occasion, I would like to underline
the importance of a gender-inclusive and responsive
political process. Our Mission continues to support
such efforts with women leaders and international
partners, including UN-Women and the European
Union, through concrete projects.

I would like to reiterate the Secretary-General's
call for assistance for the most vulnerable communities
in Kosovo through contributions to the United Nations
trust fund established to support the Ashkali, Egyptian
and Roma communities in Kosovo. I welcome the initial
contribution to the trust fund received earlier this
year. However, I would urge the making of additional
contributions to enable a meaningful response to the
pressing needs of the affected communities.

As we approach the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations, we are reminded of the central
importance of "we the peoples". These first three
words of the Charter of the United Nations remind us
that the vital work of Governments in the maintenance
of international peace and security can endure only if
anchored in strong societal foundations. This vision of
our founders inspires UNMIK's work.

I wish to express my deep appreciation to the
Security Council for its sustained engagement and
continuous support for our Mission.

