Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Armed conflicts are one of the
basest acts of the human condition. Their extreme
brutality and degradation affect first and foremost the
innocent who do not carry weapons, that is to say, the
civilian population, who are victims of the cruelty of
war. It is therefore inevitably the elderly, women and
children, innocent social groups in conflicts, who suffer
the most from violence. Armed conflicts are among the
worst tragedies that can befall a nation and any act used
as a justification for the narrative of violence must be
denounced and condemned.

Today we have come to demand that the Security
Council act immediately to prevent the disaster of
imminent military action against Venezuela, already
announced by one of its permanent members, the
Government of the United States, in complete violation
of its responsibilities within the Council and of its
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and
international law.

On other occasions, we have denounced before the
Council, members of the most important organ in the
world, who are responsible for maintaining international
peace and security, the plan systematically implemented
by President Trump's Government to suffocate our
nation's economy with its coercive measures, which
are in violation of the United Nations Charter and the
human rights of our people by serving as a collective
punishment against the civilian population, particularly
the most vulnerable sectors, such as the elderly, women
and children.

We also denounce how extortion measures have the
effect of stealing and plundering our national wealth
by illegally appropriating refineries, gold currency and
other financial instruments, amounting to more than
$30 billion, which are essential for meeting the basic
needs of our people.

The economic blockade and colossal robbery
bear the hallmarks of monstrous cruelty, unique to
war crimes, by criminalizing the purchase of basic
foodstuffs for the sustenance of more than 6 million
families receiving vital assistance through special
programmes run by our Government. We are here
today to denounce the United States Government for
trying to fabricate a famine in Venezuela to appropriate
our natural resources and recolonize our nation. That is
a crime against humanity.

Economic terrorism was compounded by political
aggression and the violation of Venezuelan sovereignty
on the border with Colombia on 23 February. A coup
d'etat was also funded and organized on 30 April, but
it was thwarted by the swift action of Venezuelan State
institutions. The clandestine operations of political
aggression - subsequently shamelessly acknowledged
by officials of the Trump Government 4 have failed,
but their arrogance does not allow them to admit
their mistakes.

Desperation makes for a poor adviser. President
Trump, beleaguered by all the internal accusations
against his Government, is awakening the demons of
racism, internal conflict and international war. It is a
flight forward, and we are now entering an even more
dangerous phase that involves the militarization of
politics towards Venezuela, with a plan that seeks an
excuse for invasion in the very short term. The United
States Southern Command, Mr. Trump's branch of the
armed forces in South America and the Caribbean, has
this year conducted more than 55 spy plane incursions
into Venezuela's flight information region, without
prior warning or without providing a reason, thereby
endangering air safety in the region. Overflights
have occurred daily over the past two weeks,
thereby increasing in frequency and accompanied
by provocative and threatening statements about the
ability of the United States to immediately attack
Venezuela, if ordered to do so by President Trump. A
reciprocal military assistance treaty among countries
of the region, which has never been applied in the past
70 years and which Venezuela denounced six years ago,
is now being invoked as a legal excuse for invasion.

We are also here to denounce the fact that President
Trump yesterday announced to the media that he is
considering imposing a naval blockade and quarantine
against Venezuela. According to Article 41 of the
Charter of the United Nations, such measures involve
the use of armed force, which, due to their gravity and
devastating effects on civilians, can be applied only
with the authorization of the Security Council, in cases
of threat to the peace, breach of the peace or acts of
aggression. We therefore ask, when did the Council
approve such force? When did the Council determine
that Venezuela is a threat to the peace, or that it breached
the peace, or that it committed acts of aggression? It
is clear that none of the assumptions for such serious
action exists and that none of the legal requirements has
been met. Every threat and action by the United States
against Venezuela is illegal and criminal and could lead
to disaster for the civilian population.

President Trump's threats and aggression are in
line with the comments made here in the Chamber by
the representative of the United States a few days ago.
According to the official, international law and Security
Council resolutions, which are binding on all States and
are part of international law, are not references for the
decisions of the United States.

The world that President Trump offers is a world
without the rule of law; where children, women and
the elderly are the primary victims of the calamities
of war; and where humankind lives in constant fear
of the abuses of an unpredictable Government, guided
by a supremacist ideology that offers only hatred and
violence. It is a world without the United Nations.
Therefore, we can conclude only that Government
of President Trump is a threat to international peace
and security.

We in Venezuela reject the nightmare of perpetual
war proposed by Mr. Trump. We urgently demand
that the Security Council enforce the United Nations
Charter, uphold international law, maintain peace, halt
the imminent disaster of a world Power that behaves like
an outlaw State and, using its authority, stop Trump's
war. In sum, we ask that Trump's war be stopped.

