Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me
at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you for guiding our
work in your dual capacity as President of the Council
and as Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC).

My country appreciates the useful introduction
you gave us in your latter capacity as well as your
presentation of the Committee's comprehensive 90-day
programme of action.

The Permanent Representative of Peru will be
speaking on behalf of the Rio Group, and I shall
therefore confine myself to a few brief comments on
behalf of my delegation.

I should like to highlight in particular the
reference you made, Sir, to the principles of
cooperation, transparency and equality that inspire and
guide the work of the CTC. It is clear that the
Committee is making concrete and effective efforts to
apply these principles in every case - efforts that
involve not only the Chairman but also delegations,
experts and the Secretariat.

As has so often been said here in the Council, the
international community as a whole is vulnerable to
terrorism. Yesterday Spain was struck by terrorist acts,
which we deeply condemn and deplore - not only out
of solidarity as a brotherly country, but also because it
is our political and ethical duty. Protection therefore
cannot be merely unilateral. We must continue our
efforts to build a common structure effectively to
confront the scourge of terrorism and help all Member
States to increase their capacity to prevent terrorism
and respond to it.

Resolution 1373 (2001) set in motion an
unprecedented type of cooperation effectively to
confront this global threat. I believe that the Committee
is at the core of a process of collaboration to which no
country can fail to contribute. The new programme of
work highlights the fact that what is important is to
make progress in terms of concrete measures in order
to increase the means available to, and capacities of, all
States to combat terrorism.

We welcome also the growing degree of
cooperation and the deepening of contacts between the
CTC and international, regional and subregional
organizations following the special meeting on 6
March last. We welcome in particular the meeting that
the CTC will hold in October with international,
regional and subregional organizations at the
headquarters of the Organization of American States
(OAS) under the auspices of the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism. Chile, as a member State
of the OAS, is very encouraged and gratified by this
level of cooperation.

As regards the reports provided by States to the
Committee, the rate of response is highly satisfactory.
But going beyond mere figures, what is most satisfying
is the ongoing relationship between the CTC and
States, which enables them jointly to comply with
resolution 1373 (2001) in resolving problems that arise.

The effectiveness of the Committee depends, in
the final analysis, on the degree of compliance and on
the support of all the States Members of the
Organization and of the international organizations.

Finally, I should like, Sir, as Chairman of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), publicly to say to you that I intend to continue
to promote, through concrete measures, a greater
interconnection between the two committees, as
provided for in Security Council resolution 1455
(2003). I believe that I will soon be able to report on
the fruitful inception of cooperation between these two
committees, which, in the ultimate analysis, endeavour
to prevent and, hopefully, to eradicate the scourge of
terrorism.

