Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): Allow me in turn to thank Under-Secretaries-
General Mr. Le Roy and Ms. Amos, as well as the
representative of Haiti, for their briefings.

My delegation remains concerned by the fact that,
two and a half months after the announcement of the
results of the first round of the presidential election,
the second round has not yet taken place. The
Government of Haiti, despite its efforts, is not yet in a
position to conclude the review of disputed issues by
the relevant Haitian entities. We pay tribute to the
Organization of American States (OAS) for its
assessment report on the electoral process, and hope
that the Provisional Electoral Council, in line with the
agreement reached between the Government and the
OAS, will professionally, transparently and impartially
consider the recommendations contained in the report
and bring the electoral process to its conclusion.

We urge the political class in Haiti, for its part, to
accept in good faith the results of that review. We hope
for a successful conclusion to the electoral process in
order to ensure that Haiti has a Government that will
be in a position to tackle - with the support of the
international community, of course - the various
hardships afflicting the country, including the lack of
security.

With respect to the lack of security in particular,
we are alarmed by the reports of recent acts of sexual
violence. We are, however, encouraged by the efforts
of the Haitian Government to rebuild the judiciary and
train security forces, with the assistance of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

The recovery and reconstruction of Haiti require
national mobilization, which has largely taken place. It
also requires coordinated efforts and a rational use of
the assistance provided. We are convinced that this will
all take place and that the assistance promised by the
various donors will indeed be disbursed. We also
welcome the progress achieved in the delivery of
humanitarian assistance since the terrible earthquake of
January 2010 and the outbreak of the cholera epidemic.

In conclusion, Gabon will continue to support the
efforts of MINUSTAH in Haiti to rebuild and
reconstruct the country.

