Mr. Al-Douri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation wishes at the outset to thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this public meeting of the
Security Council on the prevention of armed conflict.
We wish also to convey our appreciation to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his tireless
efforts in this field, particularly as he works to move
the United Nations from a culture of reacting to
conflicts to a culture of preventing them before they
erupt. We hope that the Council's deliberations will
lead to the implementation of the ideas and conclusions
set out in the report of the Secretary-General that is
before the Council in document S/2001/574.

There is no doubt that the prevention of armed
conflict lies at the core of the United Nations mandate.
The clearest evidence of that is the fact that the first
words of the United Nations Charter express a
determination

"to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought
untold sorrow to mankind".

The primary purpose of the United Nations is the
maintenance of international peace and security. If
international and regional conflicts were once a result
of the cold-war climate that then prevailed, the past
decade, which saw the end of the cold war, was marked
by regional and civil strife that was more brutal, more
tragic and more devastating than the conflicts of the
cold-war era. It has claimed millions of victims, as well
as giving rise to millions of displaced persons, refugees
and disabled persons and massively draining economic
and human resources.

The result has been the emergence of a single
super-Power, which continues to give priority to its
own interests only and to impose its hegemony on
international relations, while attaching no importance
to the principles and purposes of the Charter or to the
norms of international law as these conflicts erupt and
continue.

The Charter entrusts the General Assembly with a
role in the maintenance of international peace and
security and in the prevention and settlement of
conflicts, particularly in Articles 10, 11 and 14 of the
Charter. Yet the fact that the Security Council has
expanded its mandate, thus exceeding the terms of
reference of the General Assembly, has led to a
diminished role and reduced competence of the
Assembly. We would like, therefore, to reaffirm the
importance we attach to the restoration of the role of
the General Assembly and to the continued discharge
of its responsibilities in accordance with the Charter.
We hope that the discussions that are currently under
way to reform and revitalize the role of the General
Assembly, which are being conducted by the President
of the Assembly, will lead to a reactivation of the role
of the General Assembly in the area of the prevention
of armed conflicts.

My delegation supports the expansion of the role
of the Secretary-General in the prevention and
settlement of conflicts, particularly since Article 99 of
the Charter refers to this question. The Security
Council, in this case, should encourage the initiatives
proposed by the Secretary-General and refrain from
any action that might cause him to fail in his task.

We would like to note here that, although the
Security Council has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, it does
not deal with areas of conflict in a balanced and
objective manner. Indeed, it acts selectively, in the
hegemonistic interests of some of its member States.
Sometimes it acts quickly in a specific area; at other
times, it prefers to procrastinate and prevaricate,
despite the fact that the risks posed by the conflict in
question might be far greater than those posed by the
one in which it took speedy action.

The international community is still unable to
understand why the Security Council took no action in
the Great Lakes region in Africa despite the many signs
of imminent genocide. The genocide that occurred in
April 1994 could have been prevented. The Council
had many opportunities to deal with the question.

In this context, I would recall that one member of
the Security Council 4 the United States of America -
supported by the United Kingdom, endeavoured to stop
the adoption by the Security Council of a resolution
calling for the provision of protection to the unarmed
and defenceless Palestinian people, who daily are
facing, under Israeli occupation, the most brutal forms
of torture and killing. Those two countries tend to
tailor Security Council resolutions to suit their
imperialistic interests. They continue to perpetrate acts
of aggression on a daily basis against my country, Iraq,
under the pretext of the so-called no-fly zones in
northern and southern Iraq, which have no basis in
relevant Security Council resolutions. Hundreds of
innocent civilians have fallen victim to this continued
aggression, and property and infrastructure continue to
be destroyed.

The most recent of these acts of aggression was
perpetrated by United States and British aircraft on 19
June 2001 in northern Iraq. Twenty-three children and
young people were killed on a soccer field, and the
Security Council did nothing, despite the fact that the
Iraqi Government sends a letter every week to the
Secretary-General and to the Security Council
concerning these continued acts of aggression.

Conflict prevention must not depend on political
and diplomatic necessities. Such measures will not
succeed for long, because the real causes of the conflict
will persist. Armed conflict is but a manifestation of
hunger; poverty; underdevelopment, due to the plunder
of the wealth of the countries of the South during the
colonialist era and the resulting inequitable distribution
of wealth between the countries of the South and those
of the North; the continuing intervention of
hegemonistic States in the internal affairs of other
countries; restrictions on the political independence
and the sovereignty and territorial integrity of certain
countries; the pitting of certain countries against one
another through religious, ethnic and racial disputes;
and the starving of peoples through the application of
sanctions, whether unilateral or under the auspices of
the United Nations.

All of these are the real causes of armed conflict.
If we do not deal with them, we have no hope of
preventing such conflicts from erupting.

Finally, my delegation believes that it is
imperative to expand and revitalize the role of the
International Court of Justice and of regional and
subregional organizations in order to resolve current
problems and address their root causes, because we
believe that those organizations have a very important
and vital role to play in resolving the problems of their
respective countries.

