Mr. Daeic' (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): I would like to thank
Secretary-General Guterres and his Special
Representative, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for their submission
of the report before us (S/2018/76) and their overall
dedication and engagement in the realization of the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) under resolution 1244
(1999). I would also like to recognize and express
my gratitude to the President and the members of
the Security Council for the extensive attention they
accord to the continued consideration, review and
understanding of the issue, which is of paramount
importance to the Republic of Serbia.

Some members of the Security Council suggested
before this meeting that, in the delivery of our
statements, we stick to the topic of the meeting,
demonstrate constructiveness, maintain calm and avoid
all provocations and confrontation. Just as I did in my
previous statement (see S/PV.8100), I shall focus on
the current situation in Kosovo and Metohija and the
developments that took place in the preceding quarter,
as well as on the report ofthe Secretary-General. I hope
that the representative of Pristina will also honour those
recommendations and that she will not, as she did in the
past, hold a history lesson full of falsehoods, unfounded
accusations and unwarranted embellishments of the
situation in Kosovo and Metohija, disregarding, all
along, the report of the Secretary-General and the
realities on the ground.

The reality on the ground is that the First Agreement
of Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations
was signed as early as August 2013, and that Agreement
provides for the establishment of a community of
Serb-majority municipalities. I would like to remind
those present that I signed that Brussels Agreement
together with Hashim Thaci and Catherine Ashton, the
latter on behalf of the European Union. As members
of the Council know very well, the establishment of
the community is a question of crucial and enormous
importance for Serbia as it aims to ensure and protect
the vital interests of the Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija
and improve their everyday lives.

For four and a half years now, Serbia has
been waiting patiently for Pristina to fulfil its
fundamentally important obligation. In the meantime,
30 non-permanent Member States have been in and out
of this esteemed organ, and each and every one of them
called on Pristina to fulfil its obligations. Unfortunately,
rather than forward, the movement thus far has only
been backward. In his report, the Secretary-General
notes that

"There was no progress towards the establishment
of the community/association of Serb majority
municipalities in Kosovo No indications were
provided about when and how steps towards the
establishment of the community/association might
be taken." (S/2018/76, para. 21)
That is the reality on the ground.

I would also like to remind members on this
occasion that Serbia's participation in the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina was both dedicated and
responsible, and that, irrespective of the hurdles and
challenges, my country approached it with the strong
conviction that there is no alternative to such an approach
and that only within a status-neutral framework is it
possible to contribute to regional peace, security and
stability, as well as the realization of conditions for
the Western Balkans unimpeded progress towards
European Union membership.

Convinced that this approach has no alternative
and that all issues must be resolved peacefully through
dialogue, for its part Serbia has fulfilled its obligations
consistently and in good faith. I emphasize, once again,
that Serbia is ready to continue engaging in dialogue;
however, it is questionable if a new agreement would
have any meaning at all, given that four and a half years
after the signing of the Brussels Agreement we continue
to be saddled with a lack of indications as to when and
how it will be implemented for the establishment of
the community.

The reality on the ground is that Oliver Ivanovic',
the leader of the Civic Initiative "Freedom, Democracy,
Justice", was shot dead in Kosovska Mitrovica on
16 January and his murder has dramatically jeopardized
security in Kosovo and Metohija. We welcome
the reaction of Special Representative Tanin, who
condemned that gruesome act and called for a speedy
and resolute investigation, providing assurances that all
international agencies will support the authorities and
help them arrest those responsible for the crime.

The murder of Oliver Ivanovie is a senseless
terrorist act that threatens the stability not only
of northern Kosovo and Metohija, but also the
entire region. Serbia's political leaders and State
authorities called for a calm and stable situation in the
province. My country's responsible approach to the
situation was confirmed on 21 and 22 January when
the President of Serbia, Aleksandar Vueie, visited the
Serbs in northern and central Kosovo and Metohija, and
called on them to maintain stability, peace, calm and
dignity, while emphasizing that all problems must be
solved peacefully through dialogue.

Aware of the seriousness of the situation, Serbia sent
correspondence to UNMMIK and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), requesting
that its State organs take part in the investigation of the
murder, convinced that their participation would help to
quickly and efficiently establish the truth. The request
was reiterated by President Vucie in his telephone
conversation with Hashim Thaci. It was rejected by the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo
and Metohija, which insisted that the investigation be
conducted exclusively by the investigation authorities
of Kosovo. However, three weeks after the murder, we
have no information whatsoever except for statements
by Pristina representatives that the settling of scores
with local mafias was involved and that the murder
was not ethnically motivated. Such statements have
served only to obfuscate Pristina's inability or its
lack of readiness to conduct an investigation into the
gruesome crime.

I emphasize once again that bringing those who
ordered the crime to be committed and its perpetrators
to justice, as well as establishing the motives of the
crime, are of vital importance to maintaining peace and
trust among the people of Kosovo and Metohija. The
tragic event proves that the overall security situation
in the entire province is very serious, volatile and
sensitive, and that the presence of the international
community is required.

The reality on the ground is also that, at the end
of last year and at the start of this year, the power
structure and the political parties and leaders of
Kosovo and Metohija tried to revoke the Specialist
Chambers law intended to conduct trials for crimes
allegedly committed by the Kosovo Liberation Army
(KLA). There is no need to assure the Council of
Serbia's concern about the situation because Council
members were themselves surprised and concerned
about the developments. In his report the Secretary-
General expresses deep disappointment. He states that
it is a step backwards in one of the most important
areas, and strongly calls on Pristina to demonstrate its
commitment to justice and the rule of law.

United States Ambassador Greg Delawie stated
that any initiative to change the law governing the
Specialist Chambers will have a profound negative
impact on Kosovo' future in Europe and its relations
with the United States. The head of the European Union
Office in Pristina, Nataliya Apostolova, stated that she
was shocked by the Kosovo Assembly initiative to
revoke or abrogate in any way the law governing the
Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor's
Office. German Ambassador Christian Heldt warned
that the decision on the decision to establish Specialist
Chambers could affect relations between Kosovo and
its friends abroad. Those statements are clear evidence
that the international community does not share the
views of those who are behind the initiative, and that it
believes that the heinous crimes committed against the
Serbs and other non-Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija
reported by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council
of Europe Special Rapporteur Dick Marty must not go
unpunished and cannot be relativized or justified.

Mindful of the moral responsibility towards
the victims and their families, we believe that the
establishment of criminal responsibility in an impartial
and credible way and the punishment of criminals will
have a measurable impact on the fight against impunity
and demonstrate that justice is achievable for all victims.
I would like to assure the Council that Serbia is ready to
provide the evidence it possesses on the commission of
brutal crimes, which have no statute of limitations and
must not be forgotten. In accordance with its laws and
with international law, Serbia will continue to prosecute
those for whom there is convincing evidence that they
have committed criminal offences ofwar crimes against
the civilian population in Kosovo and Metohija.

The positions held by some individuals in the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government cannot and
must not deter us from achieving justice. They do not
release those individuals from criminal responsibility
for perpetrating the offences. In that regard, we were
concerned about and disappointed in INTERPOL's
recent decisions to remove international arrest warrants
for a certain number of persons from Kosovo and
Metohija from its list, including Hashim Thaci and
Ramush Haradinaj. Let me state unequivocally that
such decisions set a precedent that is at variance with
the rules of the organization.

Regrettably, the so-called President of Kosovo,
Hashim Thaci, pardoned three KLA members sentenced
to 30 years in prison for killing all five members of the

Albanian Hajra family near Glogovac in August 2001.
The victims included 3-year-old Adelina and 9-year-
old Mimoza. According to the EULEX report, their
father, Hamsa Hajra, was a member of the Ministry
of the Interior of the Republic of Serbia and the entire
family was killed as an act of KLA retaliation. In ajoint
communique, the Embassies of France, Germany, Italy,
the United Kingdom and the United States in Pristina
expressed deep concern about the decision taken by
Hashim Thaci to pardon the criminals. There is no need
for me to assure the Council that the decision sparked
concern among the Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija.

I recall that, in addition to approximately 16,500
internally displaced persons in the province, more
than 200,000 continue to reside outside Kosovo and
Metohija in central Serbia more than 18 years after
the arrival of the international presence. Only 1.9 per
cent of them have achieved sustainable returns, to
which UNMIK should pay additional and maximum
attention. It is noted in the report that the lowest
number of returns since 2000 was recorded in 2017.
Regrettably, only 498 people returned to the province.
On one hand, that statistic is shocking; on the other
hand, it is understandable and raises the question of
who wants to return to a place to suffer discrimination
every day; where nationalistic and religious hatred is
not punished; property is not protected; jobs are few;
people are exposed to intimidation, arbitrary arrests
and ethnically motivated violence; the grave sites of
their forefathers cannot be visited; and where the rule
of law is implemented by institutions that have not
brought a single legally valid decision for the killing of
a large number of Serbs since the end of the conflict?

I pose the question again: Who would want to return
to that situation? Before those problems are resolved
structurally and institutionally, regrettably, the number
of returnees will regrettably only be lower. In his
report the Secretary-General mentions the continued
lack of progress in implementing the ruling of the
Constitutional Court of Kosovo in favour of the Visoki
Decani Monastery in a case of disputed land ownership,
I would also like to underscore that the protection of
the historical, cultural and religious heritage of the
Serbian people in Kosovo and Metohija, which is
at the same time an important part of European and
world heritage, is a priority for the Republic of Serbia.
There are harmful institutional attempts to conceal
the true identity of Serbian heritage in the province,
which is frequently designated as medieval Balkan or
Byzantine. However, such designations continue to be
omitted from crucial Serbian heritage.

A responsible, realistic and rational approach is
needed in the relations with Pristina. Serbia continues
its internal dialogue to which President Vueie called
its citizens. A working group has been established to
support the dialogue. It is conducted at a number of
levels and with the participation of all the relevant social
groups. I assure the Council that Serbia wants to make
a serious and responsible contribution to the stability
of the region, political cooperation, understanding and
economic progress. We want to offer a solution that
would provide an opportunity for a historic agreement
with the Albanian community in Kosovo and Metohija
and will not cause new divisions, misunderstandings,
instability and conflict. The solution must honour
the interests of Serbia and the needs of the Serbian
community in Kosovo and Metohija. To achieve that
goal, genuine commitment and determination on both
sides are needed in order to build very necessary trust
and respect.

To that end, I would like to point out that the
inappropriate and disconcerting statements made
by some leaders of Albanian political parties do not
contribute to the creation of a constructive atmosphere
for the achievement of a historic agreement. Let me
emphasize in particular that Pristina's one-sided acts,
as well as each and every attempt to solve problems
unilaterally, are entirely unacceptable to Serbia. I
underscore that Serbia is firmly opposed to Pristina's
intention to form a Kosovo army. Those and other
similar attempts are very dangerous and could threaten
not only the security of the province and the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, but also the stability of
the entire region.

In addition, we have witnessed for some time
attempts by Pristina to become a full-fledged member
ofinternational organizations despite the opposition ofa
considerable number of countries, including even some
of those that have recognized the unilateral declaration
of independence of Kosovo. The most recent instances
of such efforts were Kosovo's attempts to become
a member of UNESCO, INTERPOL and the World
Customs Organization. All those attempts, let me point
out, run contrary to the basic principles of international
law and are detrimental to - while needlessly
politicizing - the work of international organizations.
I take this opportunity to express special gratitude to
all the countries that, with regard to that issue, support
Serbia and, at the same time, insist, together with
Serbia, on principled respect for universally accepted
norms of the contemporary international order as it
relates to upholding consistently the principles of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States.

I would also like to remind Council members
that for a decade - that is, since Kosovo declared
independence by a unilateral act - Serbia has patiently,
dedicatedly and responsibly apprised the international
community of the apparent danger resulting from
unilateral acts and admonished that the unilateral
declaration of independence of Kosovo is a very
dangerous and unacceptable precedent that, as we have
witnessed, has already emboldened other separatist
and secessionist movements all over the world. As in
the past, Serbia continues to take measures to protect
its national and State interests, with full respect for
the basic principles of international law - primarily
the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity
as universal values reasserting freedom and equality
among States and peoples. In that regard, I would like to
thank once again those States that have not recognized
the unilateral declaration of independence of Kosovo
for their consistent support and principled respect of
the Charter of the United Nations and resolution 1244
(1999). At the same time, I call on those States that have
done so to reconsider their decision and accordingly
encourage both sides to find a mutually acceptable
solution through dialogue.

Lastly, I would like to call on all members of
the Security Council to focus together on finding a
compromise and sustainable solution to this decades-
long question and fully support UNMIK in the
meantime, as its unimpeded presence in Kosovo and
Metohija is key to building lasting peace, stability and
security, as well as confidence among communities,
and solving the problems facing the members of the
Serbian and other non-Albanian communities in
the province. In that context, I would point out the
importance of maintaining UNMIK's financial and
personnel capacities, which will allow the Mission to
meet the complex demands of the implementation of
its mandate.

What I have spoken about today is a testament
to the reality that there are many problems, that the
security situation is volatile and that commitment,
patience and hard work will be required for us to be able
to communicate a different reality to the international
community from this same Chamber in three months
from now. For its part, Serbia is looking forward to the
future and ready to invest all its resources to make a
contribution towards achieving those goals.

