Mr. Feltman: In a statement by its official news
agency on 3 September, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea announced that it had successfully
conducted a sixth nuclear explosive test. The Democratic
People's Republic of Korea characterized the event as
a "perfect success in the test of a hydrogen bomb for
intercontinental ballistic missile". The Democratic
People's Republic of Korea further said that it also
"marked a very significant occasion in attaining the
final goal of completing the state nuclear force".

The Executive Secretary of the Preparatory
Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization (CTBTO), in Vienna, said in a
statement that the organization's monitoring stations
had picked up an unusual seismic event in the area
of the site used in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea for its previous nuclear tests. The CTBTO's
data indicated that the event measured approximately
6.0 in magnitude. Governmental sources from United
Nations Member States measured a yield as high as 6.3.
In any case, it is evident the yield of the device was
larger than any of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea's previous nuclear tests. Experts have estimated
a yield of between 50 and 100 kilotons, or on average
more than five times more powerful than the weapon
detonated over Hiroshima and at the low end of the
yield of a modern thermonuclear weapon.

The CTBTO detected a second smaller seismic event
at the location of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea test site eight and half minutes after the main
event. The CTBTO has not yet completed its analysis
of this second event, but experts have speculated that
it could have been caused by the collapse of the tunnel
used in the nuclear test.

In an earlier statement the same day, the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea official media reported that
their leader had inspected what they claimed to be a
hydrogen bomb, which was conspicuously displayed
in front of a payload fairing for a Hwasong-l4
intercontinental ballistic missile. The Democratic
People's Republic of Korea article stated that the
hydrogen bomb was

"a multi-functional thermonuclear nuke with great
destructive power which can be detonated even at
high altitudes for super-powerful EMP attack".

This was a rare reference by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to the use of an electromagnetic
pulse, which, triggered by a nuclear weapon, would aim
for widespread damage and disruption to electricity
grids and sensitive electronics, including on satellites.

This is the second emergency Security Council
meeting on non-proliferation and the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea in less than a week, and
the tenth time the Security Council has met to discuss
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea this year.
On 31 August, the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea Foreign Ministry issued a statement rejecting
the Security Council's recent presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/l6, and said that the ballistic missile
launch of 29 August was the "first step taken by the
Korean People's Army in its Pacific operation and a
meaningful prelude to restraining Guam". There are
reports today indicating that the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea may be preparing new ballistic
missile tests.

We are alarmed by this dangerous provocation.
The Secretary-General condemns the underground
nuclear test announced by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. This act is yet another serious
breach of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
international obligations and undermines international
non-proliferation and disarmament efforts. This act
is also profoundly destabilizing for regional and
international security. The Democratic People's
Republic of Korea is the only country that continues
to break the norm against nuclear test explosions. The
Secretary-General reiterates his call on the Democratic
People's Republic ofKorea leadership to cease such acts
and to comply fully with its international obligations
under relevant Security Council resolutions.

The Secretary-General counts on the Security
Council to remain united and take appropriate action.
As was said in the Security Council meeting last week
(see S/PV.8034), as tensions rise so does the risk of
misunderstanding, miscalculation and escalation. The
latest serious developments require a comprehensive
response in order to break the cycle of provocations
from the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Such
a response must include wise and bold diplomacy if it
is to be effective.

As the Council considers its reaction, the Secretary-
General reiterates the importance of responding to
humanitarian imperatives regardless of the political
situation. The people of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea rely on the international community
to provide humanitarian assistance to those in need. We
will continue to follow the developments and remain
in close coordination with the concerned international
organizations, members of the Council and other
Governments concerned.

