Mr. Oshima: I would like to thank you, Madam
President, and the members of the Council for inviting
me to brief the Council on the implementation plan for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Despite the growing attention paid, including in
the media recently, to the fate of civilians caught in
armed conflict, the reality faced by millions of civilians
around the world is a grim one. The situation in
Afghanistan, for example, highlights many of the
issues and challenges addressed in the Secretary-
General's report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, such as the issue of humanitarian access to
vulnerable populations; the special protection needs of
women and children; safety, protection and security in
camps for internally displaced persons; engagement
with armed groups for access negotiations; civil and
military relations in the delivery of humanitarian aid;
separation of civilians and combatants in camps for
internally displaced persons and refugees; and the
security and safety of humanitarian personnel. These
and other issues dealt with in the Secretary-General's
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
are, in fact, the daily problems faced in the situation of
Afghanistan today.

The Secretary-General's two reports on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, submitted to
the Council in September 1999 and March 2001,
contain 54 recommendations with respect to these and
other, related problems. In a letter of June 2001, the
President of the Council suggested to the Secretary-
General several initiatives to move these
recommendations into action.

The initiatives suggested cover three main areas.
The first involves a reorganization of those 54
recommendations by the Secretariat, in collaboration
with the Security Council, into different groups, with
the aim of clarifying responsibilities, enhancing
cooperation and facilitating implementation; I would
like to refer to this reorganization of work, for
convenience's sake, as a road map. Secondly, the
Secretariat was asked to draft an aide-memoire to
facilitate consideration by the Council of issues
pertaining to the protection of civilians in the design
and planning of peacekeeping mandates. Thirdly, the
Council encouraged the Secretary-General to further
ensure closer cooperation between my Office - the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) - and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations on the protection of civilians.

The Secretary-General welcomes the opportunity
to develop this implementation plan. I am pleased to
report this morning that all the suggestions mentioned
are in various stages of development.

Let me elaborate on the progress made so far on
the three proposed initiatives.

First, the aim in developing the road map is to
reorganize the Secretary-General's recommendations
into different themes, then identify responsible
institutions for implementation and define the
necessary steps, including the steps for cooperation and
coordination. For this purpose, my Office, in
consultation with interested Member States and various
agencies, is in the process of creating a matrix, or
implementation chart, to elaborate on needed action for
the implementation of the recommendations. We intend
to include the final outcome in a comprehensive report
to be submitted to the Council in November 2002. The
matrix will list thematically the recommendations and
relevant provisions contained in resolutions 1265
(1999) and 1296 (2000) while, of course, identifying
the responsible institutions, including the Security
Council, the General Assembly, Member States, the
Secretariat and others, such as regional organizations,
the private sector and civil society. We hope that this
exercise will eventually contribute to enhancing the
implementation of the recommendations at the
legislative, executive and operational levels.

To assist in the preparation of the road map, my
Office has organized thus far three workshops, in
which interested Member States, the Secretariat,
agencies, the International Committee of the Red
Cross, non-governmental organizations and various
experts have participated. In this connection, I would
like to express my gratitude to the Government of
Norway for providing the necessary financial support
to hold these workshops.

I would like to highlight some of the points raised
during the discussions in the workshops.

Concerning legal protection, for example, the
participants called for greater specificity with regard to
State obligations under international humanitarian,
refugee and human rights laws. It was suggested that
Member States could exchange information about their
best practices to provide guidance for other States and
to reinforce the success of initiatives. Participants
called upon the United Nations to provide capacity-
building assistance in States where implementation and
enforcement capacity is inadequate. High priority was
attached to establishing the International Criminal
Court and moving away from ad hoc tribunals while
bolstering national justice systems. Funding in this
regard was identified as a major problem in post-
conflict situations in which the national justice system
has collapsed. More secure funding from assessed
contributions was suggested as a solution.

On the issue of internally displaced persons, the
importance of operationalizing the guiding principles
concerning internally displaced persons through
training, mainstreaming and assistance programmes
was stressed in the course of the discussion. The
effective implementation of these programmes will,
again, require increased donor support. The frequent
lack of funds often results in lost opportunities and
dangerous setbacks.

As regards peacekeeping, the workshops noted
that so far, in most instances, peacekeeping mandates
do not include the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Many participants cited insufficient political
will as one of the reasons. It was widely agreed that
mission planning for peacekeeping operations would
benefit from the perspectives of humanitarian workers,
as they have often been on the ground for years and
could contribute essential information and analysis
regarding the protection of civilians. To change the
realities on the ground, sometimes peacekeeping
operations need robust mandates from the Security
Council.

These are some of the points highlighted in the
course of the workshops.

This leads me to my second point: the issue of the
aide-memoire process. This is meant to be a checklist
to ensure that the issues of protection of civilians are
systematically taken into consideration in establishing,
changing or closing peacekeeping mandates.

Working closely with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and humanitarian and human
rights agencies, my Office has prepared a list of key
issues to be considered by the Council. The list is
currently being shared informally with interested
Member States for comment. We would like to propose
that a half-day, expert-level discussion with members
of the Council be organized to review the aide-
memoire sometime next year, perhaps in January or
February.

I would like to move on to the third initiative,
which concerns steps to ensure closer coordination
between my Office, OCHA, and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. The Secretary-General
welcomes the opportunity to develop a cross-cutting
team composed of representatives from the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and OCHA in order to
facilitate due consideration of issues related to the
protection of civilians in the design, planning and
implementation of peacekeeping operations. To that
end, my Office is developing a strategic paper, which
will be brought to the attention of the members of the
Executive Committee on Humanitarian Affairs and the
Inter-Agency Standing Committee for further
development and action.

While the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians rests with Governments, it is
important that we reach beyond traditional lines and
create synergies between a wide range of actors. This
will require the commitment and cooperation of
Member States, regional organizations, international
and domestic non-governmental organizations, the
media, the private sector and academia.

My Office is committed to continuing in close
consultation with the Council to develop an
implementation road map and the aide-memoire. We
will also seize the opportunity to establish a cross-
cutting mechanism between OCHA and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations. I look forward to coming
back to the Council in a few months with additional
information on the status of these initiatives.

