Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would like to thank Mark Lowcock for his briefing. As Mr. Lowcock said, our immediate priority is to do everything in our power to end the offensive under way in Idlib. France strongly condemns the intense bombing by the regime's air force and its allies in Idlib governorate. The fight against terrorist groups cannot be used as a pretext for indiscriminate bombing, which primarily affects civilians. The hospital in Sarjeh and ambulances and infrastructure belonging to the White Helmets have all been the target of strikes. It is shocking and unacceptable that health facilities and schools remain the target of attacks, in breach of international humanitarian law. The report submitted on 16 January by the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, documenting violations of children's rights in Syria (A/HRC/43/CRP.6), is telling. Government forces deliberately attack schools and use them for military purposes, thereby not only committing war crimes but also ruining the future of a generation deprived of education. Those responsible for such violations will be held accountable. The worsening humanitarian crisis is extremely worrisome. Three million people, nearly 80 per cent of whom are women and children and nearly 400,000 people who have been displaced since early December,are exposed to daily attacks by the regime and its allies. In that context, we must focus our efforts on three priority areas. The first is immediate de-escalation. We call on the signatories to the Idlib ceasefire agreement - first and foremost Russia - to resume strict compliance with their commitments and ensure an effective ceasefire in the north-west, with a view to ending hostilities. The second is the protection of civilians, including humanitarian and medical personnel, as well as civilian infrastructure. Respect for international humanitarian law is non-negotiable. The board of inquiry established by the Secretary-General to investigate the attacks in the north-west, which we fully support, must shed light on the incidents. The third is ensuring safe and unhindered humanitarian access by ongoing' cross-border assistance. France will continue to help the Syrian population. In that regard, an additional €5.27 million in emergency aid was made available at the end of last year for civilians in north-west Syria, via the United Nations Cross Border Humanitarian Fund, based in Gaziantep. I would also like to return to the issue of the consequences of resolution 2504 (2020), on cross- border humanitarian aid. Make no mistake, as Mark Lowcock underscored earlier, the resolution, adopted by the Council on 10 January, which is essential for providing humanitarian assistance for 3 million people, has also seriously reduced the ability of the United Nations to provide medical aid and vital medicines to those in need in north-east Syria. The loading of eight to 10 World Health Organization trucks, whose convoy should have passed the Al-Yarubiyah crossing- point in mid-January, is on hold in Erbil. There is no reason that those medicines and trauma and surgical kits should not reach victims in urgent need across the border, from Iraq or from Damascus. It is a matter of life and death for them, and is a gross violation of the principle of the impartiality of humanitarian aid, which is unacceptable. The Security Council's mandate to the Secretary- General to present alternatives by the end of February to allow for the delivery of humanitarian assistance, including medicines, to north-east Syria is therefore essential. We call on everyone to shoulder their responsibility in taking a decision based on an objective analysis of the alternatives presented by the Secretary- General. The parties, in particular the Syrian regime, must now ensure full, safe and unhindered access for humanitarian actors to people in need, wherever they may be. In addition, I wish to reiterate that we are disappointed about the fact that the mechanism was renewed for only six months, when humanitarian operations need predictability and stability for effective planning and operations. We must reconsider the relevance of returning to a one-year mandate when we renew the mechanism in July. I will conclude by underscoring that the ongoing offensive in Idlib jeopardizes the quest for a negotiated political settlement to the crisis, although we all know that an inclusive and lasting political solution, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), is crucial for stabilizing Syria and ending civilian suffering. We will return to that key issue later today.
