Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I thank Under-
Secretary-General O'Brien for his briefing. I would
assure him that we remember Khaled Omar Harrah, and
we remember and commend all of the humanitarian and
search-and-rescue workers who have put themselves
at risk as they strive to save and support innocent
civilians, both in Syria and beyond. We would also ask
that Mr. O'Brien pass our expression of appreciation to
Yacoub El Hillo for his selfless and unwavering service
in the work he has done in Syria.

Distressed at the horrific humanitarian situation
in Syria and the looming humanitarian catastrophe
in Aleppo, New Zealand, Egypt and Spain, as Syria
humanitarian penholders, felt compelled to speak here
in this open meeting today. We thought it important to
call here publicly, in the open, on all the relevant parties
to take measures to improve the humanitarian situation,
including, first, by allowing immediate, unhindered
and complete humanitarian access to all areas of Syria;
secondly, by immediately lifting all sieges; thirdly, by
implementing substantial pauses in fighting to ensure
that sustained humanitarian deliveries to Aleppo can
commence safely and effectively, whether it be via cross-
line or cross-border efforts; and, finally, by ensuring
that all initiatives operate according to international
humanitarian law and humanitarian principles.

We acknowledge the Russian support for the 48-
hour humanitarian pauses and look forward to them
working with the United Nations and other stakeholders
to ensure their full implementation, in accordance
with international humanitarian law, as called for this
morning by Under-Secretary-General O'Brien.

Terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations, is
criminal and unjustifiable. Da'esh and the Al-Nusra
Front, which recently renamed itself to Jabhat Fateh
Al-Sham, are designated by the Security Council as
terrorist organizations. The international community
must do all it can to prevent any material or financial
support from reaching those groups and dissuade any
party to the cessation of hostilities from fighting in
collaboration with them.
We strongly condemn ongoing and repeated attacks
against medical personnel and facilities. All parties
must uphold the principle of medical neutrality. The
humanitarian situation will continue to deteriorate in
the absence ofa political solution.

We reaffirm support for the Syrian-led political
process, facilitated by the UnitedNations, which includes
formal negotiations on a political transition process.

We had hoped to agree on a draft press statement
that encompassed the points that I have just outlined,
and we are disappointed and frustrated that we have
not been able to do so. It is disappointing that we
are not able to agree on a response to the horrific
humanitarian situation throughout Syria and the
looming humanitarian catastrophe in Aleppo. We must
do better as a Council. The innocent civilians of Syria
deserve no less from us.

