Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome you, Sir, to the presidency of the
Security Council and thank the delegation of Chile for
organizing this meeting on the subject ofpeacebuilding
in the aftermath of conflict. We would also like to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General for his briefing
and Ambassador Patriota of Brazil for his effective
leadership of the Peacebuilding Commission in 2014.

The primary aims of States engulfed in the hot
phase of conflict is to strengthen national reconciliation
and to restore safe and favourable living conditions
for the entire population of the country. That is
absolutely necessary in order to avoid a relapse into
armed conflict. It is particularly important in that
such countries frequently have limited human and
institutional resources to address the entire range of
problems in the areas of security, law and order, social
and economic development and other pressing issues.
At the same time, we believe that it is counterproductive
to overemphasize, in the recovery context, gender and
human rights issues that have no direct bearing on the
root causes of the crisis situation.

Given the scope of the peacebuilding tasks,
of particular importance is the assistance of the
international community in building the national
capacities of post-conflict States. Moreover, while
it is critical and frequently fundamental to provide
outside peacebuilding assistance to national efforts,
it is imperative to uphold such fundamental principles
as the consent of the recipient States and respect for
national sovereignty and political independence.
Governments must determine their own priorities when
carrying out reform, coordinate them and bear primary
responsibility for the outcome.

As experience shows, in order to achieve and truly
sustain long-term results, we must take into account
the country-specific context and the root causes of
the emergence of a crisis situation. Otherwise, relapse
into conflict is practically unavoidable, as we saw, for
example, in the Central African Republic and the South
Sudan. It is no secret that in those instances priorities
were imposed from the outside for the activities of the
entities involved, with insufficient justification. There
was a diffuse and irrational use of limited funds and
resources, as well as an encroachment upon the remit
of other players.

The United Nations clearly has a particular role
to play in coordinating international efforts in post-
conflict recovery. To date, however, as the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/694) rightly points out, the
activities ofthe entire team ofpeacebuilders - including
the Secretariat, the programmes and funds, the Member
States, regional organizations and international
financial institutions - are fragmented. There is
inefficient division of labour, and there are gaps in the
mechanisms of financing. Many early peacekeeping
issues are also currently included in the mandates of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. In carrying
out their primary task of facilitating peace processes,
United Nations peacekeepers also play a critical role
in creating favourable conditions for providing broader
peacebuilding assistance. However, peacebuilding is
a long road that goes far beyond the framework of a
time-bound peacekeeping operation.

We see the Peacebuilding Fund as an important
mechanism of emergency funding that contributes to
the involvement of long-term mechanisms in assistance
to recovery and development. My country backs up its
position with a $2 million annual contribution to its
budget.
Our global Organization is entering a very important
anniversary year. A slew of review processes have
been initiated with a view to objectively examining
various areas of the activity of the United Nations,
and peacebuilding is no exception. We believe that the
upcoming review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, as approved by Member States, will
focus on affirming the Commission, with its unique
intergovernmental nature, as its central element, and
on proposing concrete, achievable recommendations
for improving that architecture, with strict regard for
the prerogatives of the principal organs of the United
Nations, as enshrined in its Charter.

