Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I would like to associate myself with the
statement made by the representative of Argentina on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China, as well as that
made by the Ambassador of Egypt on behalf of
Non-aligned Movement. I would further like to make
the following brief additional observations on the topic
of today's open debate of the Council.

The repeated encroachment of the Security
Council into the Charter-defined mandates of the other
principal organs of the United Nations is a matter of
serious concern. While the Council has not even been
able, capable or willing to genuinely address the well-
established causes of insecurity and conflict around the
world, its insistence on delving into issues outside its
competence or issues that are not generally believed or
proven to threaten world peace and security is
incomprehensible. Overstretching by the Security
Council, with its current exclusive structure and
non-transparent working methods, will have grave
consequences for the functioning of other United
Nations bodies and the fate of those issues in which the
Council shows interest.

Perhaps the best service that some permanent
members of the Council can deliver in combating
climate change would be to honour their commitments
on capacity-building, unconditional transfer of climate-
friendly technologies and provision of financial
resources to countries that are most in need,

 

particularly small island developing States, the least
developed countries and Africa, as well as to commit
themselves to meaningfully reducing greenhouse gas
emissions.

There is a spectacular gap between commitments
and actions on the part of many developed countries
with regard to requirements urgently needed to combat
climate change. Meanwhile, we note with concern that
the prospect of dramatic reduction of emissions in the
near future is too slim.

Climate change is an inevitable and urgent global
challenge with long-term implications for the
sustainable development of countries. Thus addressing
climate change within the context of sustainable
development, rather than of peace and security, is the
best advisable solution. The United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Commission on Sustainable Development, in
our understanding, are the competent and relevant
bodies to deal with climate change and its
consequences in a comprehensive, inclusive and
substantive manner.

