Sheikh Al Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express our satisfaction and
pleasure at seeing His Excellency President Trump
preside over this meeting of the Security Council.
We appreciate your initiative in convening this
open meeting, which confirms that you attach the
utmost priority to one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security, namely, weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs).

The discussion we are having in this Chamber
comes at a delicate stage amidst complex circumstances
facing our world today. That is especially so in the
Middle East region. In addition to the spread of conflicts
and terrorism, we are facing more threats embodied in
the use of WMDs. Those are not virtual threats any
longer, because we have recently witnessed the launch
of ballistic missiles, the testing of nuclear weapons and
the use of chemical weapons in many places around
the world.

In that regard, I would like to reiterate the constant
and principled position of the State of Kuwait on
non-proliferation. We condemn the use of all WMDs
anywhere, at any time and by any party. The use
of WMDs is a grave violation of international law.
Achieving peace, security and stability in the world
cannot be reached while such weapons exist.

We have recently witnessed the horrors of
chemical-weapon attacks undertaken by State and
non-State actors in Syria. Such attacks confirm that the
threat ofproliferation ofWMDs has not declined, despite
numerous treaties and resolutions criminalizing their
use. We are following with great concern the possibility
once again of such attacks in future, whether in Syria or
elsewhere in the world. We emphasize the importance
of addressing chemical attacks through the unity of the
Security Council in responding to the imminent danger
posed by WMDs, thereby ensuring the implementation
of the relevant international resolutions, particularly
resolution 1540 (2004).

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is facing
unprecedented attacks from ballistic missiles launched
by the Houthi militias towards its territories and
targeting civilian and religious sites. The State ofKuwait
reiterates its strong condemnation and denunciation
of the rocket attacks targeting the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia in particular, and the region in general. We also
emphasize the need for the Security Council to take
action and shoulder its responsibilities in confronting
the threat facing the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, in
order to preserve international peace and security. My
country's delegation is fully prepared to take further
measures in order to put an end to such attacks, which
are undoubtedly linked to the proliferation of WMDs.

In the midst of the events the Middle East region is
witnessing, the State of Kuwait remains committed to
supporting all United Nations resolutions, and we have
welcomed the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015). While
the Islamic Republic of Iran continues to implement
the provisions of that resolution and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) publishes reports
confirming Iran's compliance with its nuclear-related
obligations, we note with concern the independent
international reports that indicate that Iran continues
to support and finance militias and armed groups in
Arab countries.

We are particularly concerned about Iran's
interference in Yemen and, as the resolution adopted
by the League of Arab States on 11 September
confirms, Yemeni territories have been transformed
into a launching pad for Iranian-made ballistic missiles
targeting Yemen's neighbors and threatening maritime
navigation in the Bab Al-Mandab Strait and the Red
Sea, which not only negatively impacts the security and
stability of Yemen and the region but also constitutes a
violation of resolution 2216 (2015). The League of Arab
States resolution also calls on Iran to cease those acts
and all such acts that adversely affect the security and
best interests ofthe States in the region, and to undertake
confidence-building measures with its neighbors in
order to establish ties based on a good neighbour policy,
cooperation, mutual respect and non-interference in the
internal affairs of other countries.

As I give my speech from this forum, I consider it
a great honor to speak as a representative of the Arab
States in the Security Council, conveying the concerns
and preoccupations of our peace-loving peoples and
their aspirations to security and stability. In that
context, the State of Kuwait and all other Arab States
reaffirm their absolute faith in multilateral action under
the umbrella of the United Nations, according to the
objectives, principles and commitments agreed upon in
the Charter of the United Nations. We also emphasize
the Arab position on the importance of achieving the
universality of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, which was extended indefinitely
after the decision of the 1995 Review and Extension
Conference, and establishing a zone free of nuclear
weapons and other WMDs in the Middle East.

We reiterate the Arab position calling upon the
three sponsor States of the 1995 Middle East resolution
to shoulder their responsibilities by implementing the
resolution, as it was an integral part of the indefinite
extension of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. We
also emphasize the need for Israel to accede to the
Non-Proliferation Treaty and to place all its nuclear
facilities under the supervision and monitoring
of the IAEA, especially as it is the only country
in the Middle East that has not yet acceded to the
Non-Proliferation Treaty.

In conclusion, the commitment you have shown,
Mr. President, to confront the challenges posed by
WMDs is not limited to our meeting here today;
it is also to be seen in the current diplomatic efforts
to ease tension and achieve denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula. Those efforts came within the
context of cohesion and unity on the part of Security
Council members to counter the illegal programmes
and activities of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea. We know that the road ahead is still long
and hard to achieve denuclearization of the Korean
Peninsula, yet we believe that the absolute and sincere
commitment of all the parties concerned, as well as the
full implementation of all the relevant Security Council
resolutions, will lead to a lasting and comprehensive
peace agreement in a Korean peninsula free of
nuclear weapons.

