Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): It is with great pleasure
that my delegation expresses its congratulations to you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of December. We are convinced that your
leadership, vast experience and diplomatic skill will guide

 

the Council effectively through its work during this
month. My delegation pledges its full support and
cooperation in discharging your task and responsibility. I
myself would like to express deep gratitude for your kind
and generous words addressed to me as President of the
Security Council for last month at the Council meeting
yesterday.

Today we are going to decide on the future of the
United Nations Support Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH). In
this regard, the Indonesian delegation extends its
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on UNSMIH (S/1996/813). My
delegation is gratified to note that the security situation
has improved because of the presence of UNSMIH and
the enhanced capacity of the Haitian National Police
(HNP). UNSMIH has played a significant role in training,
supporting and enhancing the capacity of the HNP, as
well as in maintaining security. Hence, we would like to
commend UNSMIH on its efforts in effectively assisting
the Government of Haiti to professionalize the HNP,
which in turn creates a more stable environment in Haiti.

However, the report suggests that the situation in
Haiti is still fluid. The weight of Haiti's past continues to
create many obstacles, undermining further progress in
rebuilding Haiti economically, socially and institutionally.
The most dire threat to Haiti's future development lies in
the violence caused by the militant groups opposed to the
present Government. Furthermore, a high level of
criminality and disgruntled former soldiers continue to
contribute to potentially dangerous outcomes.

At this juncture, the HNP is not yet prepared to meet
fully the complex difficulties that Haiti is confronted with.
The HNP's institutional and operational capacities still
need to be developed further. Indeed, it is crucial that the
HNP become, with the shortest of delays, a professional,
self-sustaining and fully functioning national police force
of adequate size and structure, so that this organization is
able to conduct the full spectrum of police functions with
the appropriate leadership at all echelons of its hierarchy.
It is also in this context that Indonesia considers it
essential for Haiti not only to strengthen the HNP, but
also to establish an effective and strong judiciary system
in order to overcome the multi-faceted challenges the
Haitian Government has to face.

The promotion and consolidation of peace and
democracy is essential in order for Haiti to preserve and
maintain peace and stability in the long term. We
therefore welcome the regional contribution of the

 

Organization of American States (OAS) in cooperation with
the United Nations, in particular the contribution of the
International Civilian Mission in Haiti (MICIVIH). This
also demonstrates how meaningful cooperation between
regional organizations and the United Nations can be in
handling a conflict.

The Organization, of course, can also provide technical
assistance to ensure the continuity of its activities. It is in
this connection that we support the role of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in coordinating
different activities to achieve the long-term goals of
institution-building, national reconciliation and economic
rehabilitation.

The future of Haiti will depend in large measure on
the rehabilitation and reconstruction of its economy, without
which Haiti will return to a state of political turmoil and
conflict. There is indeed a link between peace or political
stability and development. In this regard, operative
paragraph 4 of today's draft resolution (S/1996/1002) is
essential because close cooperation between the
Government of Haiti and international financial institutions
is expected to permit the mobilization of additional
financial support to assist the economic, social and
institutional development which is so needed for Haiti to
weather the winds of instability.

The presence of UN SMIH, in our View, is a reflection
of the international community's commitment to restoring
democracy in this country. Therefore, my delegation has no
difficulty in supporting operative paragraph 2 of this draft
resolution, which recommends the extension of UNSMIH's
mandate until 31 May 1997, with a possible final extension
until 31 July 1997. The continuous presence of UNSMIH,
in our view, will ensure the development of a professional,
self-sustaining, fully functioning national police force able
to conduct the full spectrum of police functions for the
consolidation of democracy and the revitalization of Haiti's
system of justice.

Based upon these considerations, Indonesia will vote
in favour of this draft resolution.

In conclusion, we would like to extend our deep
appreciation to the men and women of UNSMIH, who have
carried out their work with diligence and professionalism.

