Dr. Piot: I come to you today directly from the
International Conference on AIDS, in Durban, South
Africa, where over 10,000 people from all over the
world gathered, as they called it, to break the silence
around AIDS. It was the first such conference in the
South and in Africa and it generated unprecedented
attention to the AIDS problem in the developing world,
particularly in Africa. The meeting was opened by
President Thabo Mbeki and closed by former President
Nelson Mandela, who stated that

"The challenge is to move from rhetoric to action,
and action at an unprecedented intensity and
scale. There is a need for us to focus on what we
know works."

I believe this can be the theme for our further
deliberations.

I believe that this Conference came, and is
coming, at a turning point in the epidemic -
particularly the epidemic in Africa, but also outside
Africa. It's underlying message was one of hope; that
prevention works and that there are many examples of
it; and that it is possible to improve the treatment and
care offered to people living with the Virus. I must say
that access to treatment was the main theme at the
Conference.

Yet the latest news is not so good. Our report to
the International Conference confirms that the AIDS
epidemic continues its expansion, particularly in
Africa, where there are now 16 countries in which
more than one tenth of the adult population aged 15-49
is infected. The social and economic gains of the last
several decades hang in the balance. No wonder AIDS
is the first health and development issue to be
considered a threat to global peace and security.

When I spoke to the Council last January, I
outlined the relationship between AIDS and war. I
brought up the issue of humanitarian aid workers and
uniformed services. I suggested that they could be
powerful agents of prevention if they are well trained
in HIV prevention and behaviour change. Equally
important, of course, they can protect themselves from
HIV infection. I said that it was a matter of getting our
priorities straight and of doing what we know would
make a difference. The last six months have
strengthened my resolve in this regard.

I will not repeat what I shared with the Council
last January. Instead, I will focus on the actions we
have taken to date on the basis of that discussion. But
first let me assure the Council that the question of
AIDS is now at the top of the agenda of the
organizations making up the United Nations system, as
illustrated by the debate and resolutions of the
Administrative Committee on Coordination, the
governing bodies of numerous agencies and
programmes, the World Bank/International Monetary
Fund (IMF) Development Committee in April, and as
highlighted by the Secretary-General's report to the
Millennium Assembly.

But what have we done in terms of more concrete
actions? First, we have intensified clearing house
efforts on information on AIDS in Africa within the
United Nations, as requested by several members of the
Council in January. One of the most comprehensive
initiatives in this regard is the Country Response
Monitoring Project, which will be launched this month.
This effort - in collaboration with relevant
Government departments and supported by the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS),
the United States Agency for International
Development (USAID), the Department for
International Development of the United Kingdom
(DFID), and the Swedish International Development
Agency (SIDA) - will enable easy access through the
World Wide Web to the latest summary information on
the epidemic in specific countries as well as regular
updates on the financial support and programmatic
actions of various partners in a particular country.

Secondly, the International Partnership against
AIDS in Africa, which I described in my statement to
the Council last January and which was convened by
the Secretary-General in December 1999, is making
substantial progress. This Partnership brings together,
under the leadership of African Governments, the
United Nations system, donor Governments and the
private and the community sectors. They all have
joined forces under a common framework for action,
which was endorsed last week at the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) Summit of heads of State or
Government in Lome.

More importantly, I would say, the most
significant progress is being made at the country level
through, among other achievements, a successful round
table in Malawi, which mobilized more than $100
million for AIDS in the country; the creation by the
Government of special funds in Burkina Faso and
Ghana; renewed community responses in Ethiopia;
strategic plans in Mozambique; and the establishment
of high-level national coordination councils in
Tanzania and other countries.

Finally, as a follow-up to the Security Council
discussions, an Inter-Agency Standing Committee
working group endorsed an action plan last May which
emphasizes the importance of incorporating AIDS also
into humanitarian action. It addresses, inter alia, the
role of the uniformed services and peacekeeping forces
in the prevention and spread of HIV; the epidemic's
potential to contribute to social instability and
emergency situations; and the need to ensure minimum
standards of prevention and care before, during and
immediately after conflicts or disasters occur.

To implement the proposed actions, which the
Standing Committee working group charged the
UNAIDS secretariat with spearheading, a humanitarian
coordination unit was established by that secretariat in
June. Already a number of countries have been
identified for the first phase of this effort. The majority
are in Africa but countries in crisis and conflict in
Asia, Latin America and Europe have also been
included.

We have developed a matrix of the strengths of
each participating agency in order to build on existing
activities and avoid duplication. Country-specific plans
of action for moving forward are being formulated.
Multi-year budgets are being developed to support
these plans, and two basic packages will be developed
for AIDS prevention and care in complex emergencies.
The first is for use during the acute stages of the crisis,
and the second is for pre- and post-crisis situations.

Of particular interest to the Council are the
intensified discussions now under way with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, focusing on
ways to promote responsible behaviour among staff
providing humanitarian aid and peacekeeping troops.
Specific follow-up actions include training before and
during deployment as well as the development of a
United Nations medical policy on HIV/AIDS for
personnel associated with United Nations missions,
including the ensuring of adequate supplies of
condoms. The UNAIDS Humanitarian Coordination
Unit will be working closely with the World Health
Organization (WHO), the United Nations Population
Fund (UNFPA), the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and a number of civil defence and military
organizations in these areas.

In conclusion, let me now turn to the draft
resolution on HIV/AIDS the Security Council is
considering. We very much welcome the recognition
that HIV/AIDS has adverse effects on all sectors of
society. It is, in fact, the breadth and scope of these
effects that make AIDS a threat to human security and
a potentially destabilizing force worldwide.

The emphasis of the draft resolution on the
uniformed services is also significant. During the last
several months, the UNAIDS secretariat has sharpened
its own focus on training and prevention measures
among uniformed services.

In the second operative paragraph, the draft
resolution urges all Member States to institute
voluntary and confidential counselling and testing for
HIV for members of national uniformed forces,
particularly troops to be deployed to international
peacekeeping missions. We agree with the authors of
this draft resolution that voluntary and confidential
HIV testing, accompanied by counselling, has a Vital
role to play in HIV prevention. The value of this
approach in terms of better preventive behaviour was
made clear in several studies presented at the Durban
Conference. Its benefits include improved health
through earlier access to care and treatment; better
ability to cope with HIV-related anxiety; and
motivation and support to initiate or maintain safer
sexual behaviours.

To maximize the effectiveness of voluntary
testing and counselling, it must be offered as one
element in a comprehensive range of HIV prevention
and support services. The results of voluntary testing
should be confidential, provided in a non-stigmatized
environment, and should include pre-test counselling,
informed consent and post-test counselling. Testing
without informed consent and confidentiality should be
avoided, as there is no evidence that such testing
achieves public-health goals. On the contrary, such
practices often drive the epidemic underground and
complicate other prevention measures.

There are, however, many successful counselling
and testing services in many parts of the world, so
Governments should make such programmes available
within the uniformed services - as they should in the
civilian community. UNAIDS co-sponsors and its
secretariat are willing to work with Governments to
ensure that the voluntary testing recommended in this
draft resolution not only respects the human rights of
individuals, but also achieves the goal towards which it
is directed: to protect both the peacekeeping troops and
the communities in which they operate.

Remarkably, AIDS is at the centre of the
Council's deliberations for the second time this year.
We really applaud its foresight. I thank the Council for
its commitment and, finally, ask for its support.
Implementing the conclusions of the Durban
Conference will cost money. Last week, I told the
world that beating back this epidemic in Africa alone
will cost $3 billion per year for basic prevention and
basic care, which is almost 10 times what is being
spent today. I repeat this appeal again this morning.
Commitment is vital, and resolutions will help. But the
world must do more than talk about this epidemic. We
must end it.

