Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, allow me to begin by thanking you for
convening this important and well-timed meeting to
discuss the situation in the Middle East which
continues to be a priority for the Security Council. I
would like to thank Mr. Alvaro de Soto, the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and the Secretary-General's Personal
Representative, for his presence and for his briefing to
the Council on behalf of the Secretary-General. I
would also like to associate myself with the statement
that will be delivered later on behalf of the Arab
Group.

The Palestinian territories have recently seen a
seriously different kind of escalation brought about by
the Israeli authorities. The events have taken a more
serious turn endangering peace and security in the
region. The Israeli authorities violated the sanctity of
the holy Al-Aqsa mosque compound in East Jerusalem
to permit for demolition and excavations on the
historic road leading to the Mughrabi gate of the
Haram al-Sharif compound in the Old City of
Jerusalem, which is one of the main gates adjacent to
the Western Wall of the holy sanctuary. These
excavations, irrespective of the flimsy pretext
promoted by the Israeli Government, are an example of
the same pattern of actions perpetrated by Israel, the
occupying Power, to change the legal status of
occupied Jerusalem, its demographic composition and
its historic and religious landmarks.

These actions and measures are illegal and
unjustified, a fact previously and frequently stressed by
the Security Council, for example, in resolution 465
(1980), and by the General Assembly. Furthermore,
compromising the Islamic holy sites constitutes a grave
escalation that brings about inauspicious repercussions
in the region and the Islamic world at large.

Let me ask here whether these provocative
policies are compatible with the pursuit of peace.
Would unilateral attempts to impose a fait accompli be
considered a positive contribution to negotiations, if
we assume that there is a sincere desire for peace?

We have previously stressed the importance of
establishing a government of national unity in Palestine
and of ending the current crisis. It is encouraging to see
that the dialogue between Hamas and Fatah in Mecca
has borne positive fruits as a result of the auspicious
efforts of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The result of
the dialogue was that Ismail Haniyeh, the current
Palestinian Prime Minister, was entrusted with
presiding over a government of national unity. That
step not only will avert the Palestinian bloodshed, but
is considered essential for a resumption of the peace
process.

We should like to take this opportunity to express
our hope that the establishment of a government of
national unity in Palestine will bring together our
Palestinian brethren and align their positions in a way
that fulfils the hopes of the Palestinian people and
preserves their national unity. We hope that the sincere
efforts to establish the government will continue. Such
a step, which would mark the beginning of a new
chapter, would benefit both the Palestinians and the
Israeli Government.

A situation in which the Palestinian Authority
was able to perform the vital administrative tasks of a
government, including ensuring security and providing
basic services for its citizens, would be in the interests
of all stakeholders. We therefore urge all the parties
concerned to support the Palestinian Authority, and we
call once again on the Israeli Government to lift the
siege it has imposed on the Palestinian people, who are
suffering a grave humanitarian situation unlike any
other in the world.

Ever since the adoption of resolution 1701
(2006), the situation along the Lebanese-Israeli border
has been calm, with the exception of airspace
incursions by Israeli jets and the recent event in which
fire was exchanged when an Israeli bulldozer violated
the border, allegedly in order to clear a number of
explosive devices along the barbed-wire line between
the two countries. In such a volatile situation as that
along the Israeli-Lebanese border, both parties must
abide strictly by the provisions of the cessation of
hostilities, which is still in effect, because a simple
violation could constitute a major setback and
endanger stability. We therefore call on the Security
Council to seriously address Israel's violations of the
Lebanese border and its airspace. The Security Council
failed to condemn these acts, a matter that is truly
regrettable.

The Quartet will meet in a few days' time in
Berlin. Once again, we wish to express our hope that
the Quartet will provide an incentive for breaking the
stalemate in the Middle East. We support the
significant role of the Quartet, which we believe is
unique.

The Security Council should focus more intensely
on the situation in the Middle East, with a view to
reviving the peace process. We expect the Council to
play an active and robust role in reaching a
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the
Palestinian question and the Arab-Israeli conflict. That
is precisely what the Council does when conflicts rage
in other parts of the world. The comprehensive and
lasting solution should be in accordance with
international legality and based on previous
agreements, the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the terms of reference of the peace process and the
Road Map.

