The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada, the Czech Republic,
Ireland, Malaysia, Norway, Turkey and Ukraine, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sacirbey
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the Council
table; Mr. Fowler (Canada), Mr. Rovensky (Czech Republic), Mr. Campbell (Ireland), Mr. Hasmy
(Malaysia), Mr. Biorn Lian (Norway), Mr. Celem
(Turkey) and Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/ 1996/ 1017, which contains the report of the Secretary-
General pursuant to Security Council resolution 1035
(1995); document 5/1996/968, which contains the letter
dated 21 November 1996 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council; and
document S/ 1996/ 1012, which contains the letter dated 5
December 1996 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1996/ 1032, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by France, Germany, Italy, the
Russian Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:
S/l996/1024, letter dated 9 December 1996 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council, conveying the communication from the
High Representative, Mr. Carl Bildt, on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina; and S/ 1996/ 1025, letter dated 9 December
1996 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council, conveying the exchange
of letters between the Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Parties to the Dayton
Peace Accords concerning the Stabilization Force in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, on whom I now call.


