Mr. Mayr-Harting (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
and its member States. The candidate countries of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.

I want to thank the speakers who have taken or
will take part in today's discussions, in particular
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Zerrougui, to whom we reiterate our firm and
continuing support. We also wish to thank the French
presidency of the Security Council for organizing this
debate.

The fact that 51 of the 59 parties listed in the
Secretary-General's report oflast year (see S/2014/339)
are non-State armed actors illustrates the extraordinary
importance of today's debate, namely, the way we
manage the issue of child victims of non-State armed
groups. The various conflicts we face today and that
involve non-State armed groups engender appalling
suffering for children. I shall give two examples. The
first is the scandalous atrocities perpetrated by Boko
Haram, in particular against children, as illustrated
by the abduction of approximately 276 young girls
from Chibok. Those girls were subjected to abuses,
including physical and psychological violence, forced
labour, coerced participation in military operations,
forced marriages with their captors, sexual violence
and rape. As to the second example, in Syria and Iraq,
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Daesh commits
barbaric acts against children, recruiting them into their
combat units, forcing them to participate in executions
and inflicting various forms of violence and physical
and psychological abuse, such as cruel and degrading
treatment, sexual violence and rape.

(spoke in English)

It is the responsibility of us all to ensure that all
children are able to attend school and to grow up free
from fear and violence, no matter where they live. In that
regard, we must not forget the responsibility of States
to protect their populations, including children, from
atrocity crimes. We need to intensify efforts to address
abuses and violations committed by non-State armed
groups against children through a series of measures.
For example, we need to facilitate the adoption of
action plans and, more important, work towards their
effective implementation. So far, only 12 action plans
have been concluded with non-State armed groups. In
order to implement them it is essential that Member
States allow the United Nations unconditional access
to non-State armed groups for the purpose of ending
and preventing violations and abuses against children.
In addition, child protection provisions, including those
relating to the release and reintegration of children,
need to be addressed in peace negotiations.

Furthermore, we need to ensure accountability.
Twenty-five non-State armed groups have been listed
for at least five years, and are therefore considered
persistent perpetrators. Fighting impunity needs to be
part and parcel of our actions and, whereas the primary
responsibility lies with States, the International
Criminal Court has an essential role to play in that
regard.

Moreover, we need to better protect schools against
attacks and deter their use for military purposes in
accordance with international law. We welcome the
decision in resolution 2143 (2014) to request enhanced
monitoring of and reporting on the military use of
schools. We also need to include child protection in
military training and standard operating procedures,
undertake targeted and operational training of United
Nations troop and police contingents and ensure the
inclusion of child protection provisions in the mandates
of peace operations.

We need to address the worrisome pattern of the
abduction of children. One measure in that regard
would be to add abductions as a new trigger for listing.
Recent abductions in Nigeria, Iraq and South Sudan are
just some examples for the need to act more decisively
in that area.

We need to give priority to combating sexual and
gender-based violence committed against children,
including violations committed by non-State armed
groups.

Finally, we need to ensure effective reintegration in
order to prevent re-recruitment by armed groups.

The EU and its member States have made
considerable strides to address the issue in a
comprehensive manner. Let me name just a few recent
measures.

We have strengthened our capacity on child
protection through regular training for our staff, and are
currently finalizing our predeployment child protection
training module for civilian and military personnel.
The European Union is working with the International
Labour Organization and UNICEF on a project to
reintegrate former child combatants in Somalia. We
also support the "Geneva Call" project's review and
promotion of the implementation of the so-called deeds
of commitment for non- State actors. Soon, the European
will launch a €9.3 million call for proposals for conflict
prevention and peacebuilding that prioritize actions on
child combatants and child victims.

In conclusion, I also want to underline our strong
support for the United Nations campaign "Children,
Not Soldiers", which celebrates its first anniversary this
month and which the European Union and its member
States have strongly supported from its inception.
Looking ahead, this summer will mark the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005),
which established the Council's Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. That will be an excellent
opportunity to take stock of what has been achieved
and what challenges still lie ahead.

