Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the representatives of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Mr. Filippo Grandi, and the International
Organization for Migration, Mr. William Swing, for
their detailed, significant and unambiguous briefings
on the situation of migrants in Libya. I also thank
the Italian presidency for its engagement on this
central topic.

Following the very constructive debate on
trafficking in persons in conflict situations was
organized by the Italian presidency on 21 November
(see S/PV.8111), President Emmanuel Macron took the
initiative of calling for this emergency meeting of the
Security Council against the exploitation of migrants
in Libya and trafficking in persons. The purpose of this
important meeting of our Council is twofold.

First, we of course must seek not only to condemn
but also to publicly denounce that barbaric practice,
which is profoundly shockking to our universal
conscience and constitutes a crime against humanity,
so that it can be put to an end. Secondly, such action
must follow specific concrete responses to the scourge,
in both the immediate and the long terms, by using
all resources within the framework of the law. That
of course hinges - and I will revisit this point in a
moment - on greater cooperation with the Libyan
authorities and on a relentless fight against impunity,
including through the International Criminal Court
and through the imposition of sanctions against all
individuals and entities that contribute to those barbaric
acts. In that context, France naturally calls for a strong
response from the Security Council.

The images that have been circulated by the media
in recent weeks are shocking. They highlight the
urgent need to improve our global policy in the light
of the migratory crisis and to put an end to this human
tragedy. We strongly condemn the inhumane treatment
and violence suffered by all individuals in Libya,
particularly migrants and refugees, as a result of their
vulnerability. We must all keep in mind that trafficking
in persons includes many forms of exploitation:
kidnapping, forced labour, torture, arbitrary detention,
sexual servitude and rape, to name but a few. Those
despicable practices are not only morally unacceptable,

but they also constitute crimes against humanity and
must not and cannot be allowed to go unpunished.

In the face of such crimes, we have a duty not only
to protect victims, but also to respect international and
humanitarian law. The Security Council bears a special
responsibility to combat this scourge, as trafficking in
persons thrives in and fuels conflict areas. It is also
used as a means to sow terror among peoples and has
become a major source of funding and an instrument of
retribution, for armed groups and even terrorist groups.
For those reasons, trafficking in persons clearly
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
Resolution 2388 (2017), which we adopted last Tuesday,
is a further step forward in our common fight against
trafficking and the exploitation of human beings, but
we are all aware that much remains to be done, and that
we must act with a sense of urgency.

We must act at several levels. We must first
strengthen our cooperation with the Libyan authorities
and help them in assuming their heavy responsibilities.
We must urgently respond to the situation by putting
an end to arbitrary detention and, in particular, the
atrocities suffered by migrants in certain detention
centres. We must also improve the sanitary conditions
in those centres. We welcome the opening of an
investigation by the Libyan authorities, and hope that
it will be completed as soon as possible.

The Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, met in Tripoli with the Libyan
Minister of the Interior on 4 September. The Libyan
authorities are aware of their duty to protect and assist
migrants in their territory and to fully cooperate with
the international organizations, to which France extends
its full support. At the same time, we must take into
account today's reality of the Libyan State as a State in
a precarious situation and a country that has endured
several years of conflict and which has limited ability
to act regarding the majority of migrants ensnared by
trafficking networks, which are beyond the reach of
Government centres. Our response will be ineffective
if we do not acknowledge this complexity.

We also call for the strengthening of dialogue
with the Libyan authorities on the status of refugees
and the right to asylum in Libya, as well as support
for the development of economic alternatives in a
country that has been a destination country for foreign
labour in the past and remains so in part today. The
development of Libyan capacities in this regard is
therefore indispensable. Action on the part of the
United Nations and by the European Union through
EUNAVFOR Sophia seeks to strengthen the Libyan
State, as well as its security and judicial institutions,
with the aim of enabling Libya to better manage the
migration crisis and to uphold international standards
in the field of human rights.

As I said, we must also leverage all the resources
available to international law and justice, to which
perpetrators of crimes against migrants in Libya must
be held accountable. Impunity is simply not an option
in the face of such horrors, and we will not accept it.
The Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
indicated, during her briefings here in November and
May (see S/PV.8091 and S/PV.7934), that she continues
to receive information and evidence relating to alleged
crimes against migrants transiting through Libya and
that some such crimes may fall within the jurisdiction
of the Court. She has our full support. It is important
that Libya and all States concerned fully cooperate
with the International Criminal Court, in line with
resolution 1970 (2011).

As per the recent call of the Minister for Europe
and Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, we must
not hesitate to use the framework of the sanctions
regime on Libya against traffickers and the individuals
implicated in such inhumane practices. The regime,
created by resolution 1970 (2011), enables us to impose
targeted sanctions against individuals involved in the
smuggling of migrants owing to their responsibility for
grave violations of human rights.

France will offer to assist the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
chaired by Sweden, in identifying the individuals and
entities responsible for trafficking through Libyan
territory. We count on the support of the members of
the Council to make resolute progress in this direction.
We must also work with countries of origin and transit
to develop enhanced cooperation with the authorities
of the countries concerned so as to encourage them to
develop their asylum policies, in cooperation with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. We
must also encourage countries of origin to strengthen
consular protection for their nationals and to support
International Organization for Migration (IOM)
initiatives for voluntary return whenever possible.

It is clear that a lasting settlement to this tragedy
is inextricably linked to an inclusive political solution
to the conflict in Libya that places the Libyan State
in a position to respond fully to it. This requires the
establishment ofa unified army under civilian authority
and, initially, by strengthening the Libyan coast
guard. In that regard, it is critical that Libyan political
actors recognize the importance of moving quickly
to implement the plan of action of the United Nations
Special Representative to put an end to a conflict in
which the primary victims are Libyans themselves.

The exploitation and violations of the fundamental
rights of migrants on Libyan territory are fuelled by
political and security instability, feeding back into
the dynamics of the conflict. To break this vicious
circle, we reaffirm our full support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan
Salame', and for his action plan, which remains the sole
valid framework for the negotiations under way. In
the immediate term, this requires the adoption of the
necessary amendments to the Skhirat Agreement.

Finally, in accordance with the commitments made
at the Paris summit on 28 August, we shall continue
to fight alongside our European and African partners
against the trafficking of migrants in all its forms
by targeting criminal organizations and smuggling
networks and acting decisively to dismantle and destroy
the economic model of the traffickers. Subsequent to
this agreement, it is possible to work concretely with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the IOM, in collaboration with
the Libyan authorities, in order to improve living
conditions for migrants in official camps, facilitate
the efforts of these organizations with the Government
of National Accord, and promote the transfer of the
most vulnerable to the Niger with a view to their
resettlement. We hope to identify, as we have begun
to do in connection with our African partners, the men
and women who can benefit from the protection of the
right to asylum and enable the most vulnerable to find
refuge in Europe. The President of the Republic, who is
currently in Ouagadougou, hasjust confirmed his desire
to see other Europeans join France in this initiative.

In conclusion, Mr. President, you can count on
France to pursue its mobilization in favour of a unified
and decisive approach on the part of the Security
Council. On this crucial and vital issue, the Council
must adopt a strong position with specific measures and
tangible measures commensurate with the challenges
we face.
