Mr. Chergui (spoke in French): At the outset,
on behalf of the presidency of the Commission of the
African Union, allow me to express the deep gratitude
of the African Union to Angola, which holds the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March 2016, for scheduling this debate on the Great
Lakes region. I would like to thank the Angolan
presidency for the opportunity to address the Council.

I would also like to take this opportunity to once
again express the gratitude of the African Union to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his personal
commitment to Africa, as well as for his unstinting
support, not only to the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, signed in Addis Ababa on 24 February
2013, but more generally for the initiatives he has taken
in favour ofpeace, stability and prosperity in the Greak
Lakes region. His loyalty to the principles and founding
goals of the United Nations naturally led him most
recently to the Western Sahara in order to provide the
necessary impetus to the peace process so that we can
finally achieve the objective for which the UnitedNations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara was
established, namely, the organization of a referendum
on self-determination for the Saharan people.

That was also the reason behind the Secretary-
General's recent visit to Burundi and to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the month of February in

the context of the extension of the mission of Security
Council members from 21 to 22 January in Bujumbura.
The Secretary-General's visit to Burundi on 25 and
26 February was followed by a high-level delegation
made up of five Heads of State and Government of the
African Union within the framework of supporting the
country to emerge from the spiral of violence that had
enveloped it since April 2015. That visit also underscores
the unanimous vision and the complementarity of action
between the African Union and the United Nations
when it comes to Burundi.

The Great Lakes region faces numerous security and
humanitarian challenges that are mainly linked to the
results of the activities of the negative forces operating
in the region. They have taken the development of the
region as hostage and encouraged the illegal trafficking
of natural resources, thus adding to the poverty of
the population and preventing development, which is
unsustainable. However, thanks to the efforts of the
countries of the region, supported by bilateral and
multilateral partners, significant progress has been
made, namely, since the signing of the Peace, Security
and Coooperation Agreement. The most outstanding
progress is the neutralization of the Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23), the signing ofthe Nairobi Declarations,
on 12 December 2014, as well as the organization of
the Private Sector Investment Conference for the Great
Lakes Region held in Kinshasha on 24 and 25 February.

In that regard, we also welcome the resumption of
cooperation between the Government of the Democratic
Republic of Congo and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on joint military operations against the Forces
democratiques pour la liberation du Rwanda (FDLR)
and the other negative forces that are present in the
eastern part of the country. Council members will
remember that the Heads of State of the region had
encouraged the resumption of that cooperation during
the sixth meeting of the follow-up mechanism of the
Framework Agreement, which was held here in New
York on 29 September 2015.

In that regard, we must also congratulate the

co-guarantor organizations of the Framework
Agreement - the Southern African Development
Community, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, the African Union and the United
Nations, as well as the two co-chairs of the Technical
Support Committee - for their efforts in implementing
the Framework Agreement. I would like to encourage
the planned visit by the co-guarantors to Uganda, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda from
11-25 April, as well as the evaluation mission of the
members of the Support Committee to Goma during the
same time period. Both those visits would be a part of
the decisions that emerged from the second ministerial
retreat of Member States and the guarantors of the
Framework Agreement, which was held on 28 January
in Addis Ababa.

I hope that those initiatives will help us to identify
possible solutions to questions linked to the repatriation
of ex-combatants of the M-23 cantoned in Rwanda and
Uganda, the repatriation of the FDLR cantoned in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as the
neutralization of the combatants of the F DLR.

The latest political developments in the Central
African Republic are a reason for hope for the African
Union and the United Nations, which have spared no
effort for the return of stability to that country. That
is why I would like to congratulate the transitional
authorities for the sound holding of the elections that
led to the election of a new democratically elected
President as head of the country.

On South Sudan, the signing of the agreement on
security arrangements on 3 November 2015 will make
it possible to implement the peace agreement signed in
August 2015 under the facilitation of Intergovernmental
Authority on Development between President Salva
Kiir Mayardit and Mr. Riek Machar. I would like to
renew our support for the security measures under way
to finalize the return of the First Vice-President to Juba,
as well as the setting up of a transitional Government.
I hope that the return of Mr. Machar to Juba is a matter
of days, not of weeks.

The African Union, through its High Representative,
President Alpha Oumar Konare', is continuing its
mission to support the peace process under way. I
would like to renew the unreserved support of the
African Union for the efforts of President Mogae as
head of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Mission
of the Peace Agreement on South Sudan in order to
establish peace and to promote both parties' full respect
for the ceasefire. That would prevent a worsening of a
humanitarian situation, one that is already disturbing,
at a time when a large part ofthe region is experiencing
a serious drought and is facing an acute food crisis.

The African Union remains concerned by the
security and humanitarian situation in Burundi, where
a durable solution would be the holding of an inclusive
dialogue, under the facilitation of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), without
preconditions, among all the actors in the crisis. In that
regard, I am pleased by the ECOWAS appointment
of Mr. Benjamin Mkpa as the new facilitator for
the Burundi crisis. Mr. Mkapa has just conducted
a consultation mission to Bujumbura, Rwanda and
Uganda with a view to holding this dialogue as soon
as possible.

The African Union, like the United Nations,
is committed to providing its entire support to the
mediation team in order to provide every opportunity
to that dialogue. At the same time, the African Union
continues its operation to deploy 200 human rights
observers, as well as military experts, approved by the
Government of Burundi and the Peace and Security
Council of our organization in order to support the
dialogue and also to restore a secure environment in the
country where human rights and freedom of expression
are respected. The very high number of refugees, as
well as displaced persons, must also command our
full attention.

Given the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as the constitutional time line is approaching
for the holding of presidential elections, the African
Union remains alongside the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and intends to support it in every effort to hold
inclusive, peaceful, credible, free, just and transparent
elections. I welcome the support of the United Nations,
as well as of the entire international community,
to the efforts of the facilitator of the African Union,
Mr. Mkojo, with a view to holding a political dialogue
with the Congolese stakeholders to find solutions with
regard to the electoral time line, as well as the actual
holding of elections in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in peace and unity.

I cannot conclude without recalling the need for
greater promotion of the rights of children and women
in the region. Any type of violence against women
must stop immediately. And the inclusion of women
in conflict prevention, in conflict resolution and in
reconstruction is not an act of charity, but rather an
investment in a society that would be fair, inclusive
and respectful of the rights of everyone and in harmony
with the eternal values of Africa.

Finally, I hope the Kinshasa Investment Conference
will send a decisive signal on support for cooperation,
development and solidarity in combating the ideology
of hatred, suspicion and recurring crises in the Great
Lakes region.

