Ms. King (Australia): I would also like to thank His
Excellency President Didier Burkhalter and welcome
him to the Council as Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE).

Cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations clearly strengthens the United Nations
efforts to maintain international peace and security,
prevent conflict and restore stability in post-conflict
situations. The OSCE provides welcome expertise in
those areas, and close cooperation with it will assist the
Council as it endeavours to fulfil its mandate.

As an Asian Partner for Cooperation with the
OSCE since 2009, Australia strongly supports the
OSCE's work. We welcome the 2014 OSCE priorities
for fostering security and stability, improving people's
lives and enhancing its own capacity to act.

With regard to territorial disputes, we welcome the
OSCE's efforts to reduce tensions and engage parties
in dialogue. Those efforts are crucial in helping to
resolve territorial disputes such as those concerning
Nagorno-Karabakh, Transnistria, Abkhazia and South
Ossetia.

We welcome recent developments in Ukraine,
which has seen moves towards peaceful dialogue -
developments that were backed by calls from the OSCE
for restraint from violence, resolution through dialogue
and political means and respect for international
humanitarian norms. Australia of course shares those
views. It will be important in coming months for the
OSCE to assist in ensuring that Ukraine remains able to
transition to a new Government and a new Constitution
and to fulfil the aspirations of the Ukrainian people. In
that regard, Australia welcomes the OSCE's willingness
to remain engaged and President Burkhalter's offer that
the OSCE support Ukraine as an impartial witness to
the implementation of agreed steps.

We commend the OSCE's recent appointment of a
special representative for the Western Balkans, a region
where the OSCE has worked constructively to facilitate
the recent peaceful and fair conduct of the mayoral and
municipal elections in northern Kosovo, which was a
key milestone in ensuring full implementation of the
19 AprilAagreement. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
special representative's efforts will be particularly
important in improving the security environment in the
country.

We also welcome the OSCE's continued constructive
contribution to supporting Afghanistan's security and
stability with an OSCE election and support team to
assist with the presidential and provincial elections in
April.

We are pleased the OSCE is placing priority on
addressing transnational threats. We strongly support
the OSCE's ongoing efforts to counter terrorism by
tackling a number of emerging aspects of the terrorism
threat. First, we welcome President Burkhalter's focus
on kidnapping for ransom. In adopting resolution 2133
(2014) a few weeks ago, the Council sent a united
message about the increase in terror- financing through
kidnapping for ransom and about the role that regional
organizations must play in addressing that threat. We
agree with President Burkhalter that we should find a
common response to that challenge, and we encourage
the OSCE to use the strong framework provided
by resolution 2133 (2014) to continue to strengthen
awareness, capacity and cooperation among members
so as to prevent the payment of ransoms to terrorists
and draw on the support of the Security Council
counter-terrorism entities and their expert bodies, as
well as of the Global Counterterrorism Forum and its
Algiers Memorandum on Good Practices.

Secondly, we support the OSCE's work on
countering violent extremism and radicalization.
The changing nature of the terrorism threat and the
fact that it is more diffuse, with groups intent on
taking advantage of social, economic and governance
vulnerabilities, have driven the Security Council,
and United Nations States Members more broadly, to
recognize that countering violent extremist strategies
is essential for preventing the spread of terrorism. The
OSCE is clearly doing valuable work on that issue, in
particular with its forthcoming resource on community
policing. The Security Council's Counter-Terrorism
Committee would benefit from the OSCE's sharing its
work and experience in that area to reinforce the way
in which the Council engages with the United Nations
membership on its counter-terrorism obligations.

Thirdly, we note the OSCE's intention to address
the issue of the growing trend of citizens travelling
offshore to engage in or support terrorist activities
or conflict. Like other members of the international
community, Australia is very concerned about that,
and it is important for the international community to
work together in order to address the issue, including
by enforcing Security Council travel bans and through
effective measures to counter violent extremism.

Australia also values the important work being done
by the OSCE in countering trafficking in persons, and
we are pleased to have supported an OSCE programme
promoting human rights protection for trafficked
persons and vulnerable groups in Central Asia.

We also welcome the OSCE's intention to refocus
its agenda to address the use of torture. Australia
deplores the use of torture by any country and in any
circumstances. We agree with President Burkhalter
that regional organizations need to work to implement
on-the-ground commitments undertaken in the
context of the United Nations, specifically in this
case by ratifying the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment. The international community needs to
work collaboratively to eliminate the use of torture.
Australia looks forward to working with the OSCE to
achieve that.

President Burkhalter has given the Council a clear
sense of where the OSCE and the United Nations may
serve to strengthen each other's efforts. The Council
should continue to work closely with the OSCE. We
wish President Burkhalter every success in leading the
OSCE in its important work this year.

