Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I wish to thank Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix and all the briefers for their
very comprehensive briefings. I would also like to pay
tribute to all police peacekeepers for their remarkable
work, service and dedication to advancing peace.

Police peacekeeping has become an important
element of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
As the challenges for such operations have become
more complex, their tasks have expanded to include
protecting civilians, fighting transnational crime and
building the capacity of local police. In that context, let
me underline three pertinent points.

First, to fulfil their mandate effectively, United
Nations police peacekeepers must actively engage the
local community. Community engagement is crucial
to gaining the trust of the local population. Close
engagement with local communities also helps to
develop early-warning systems, better monitoring and
police intelligence. Police peacekeepers therefore must
invest in building relationships with the communities
they serve. For that purpose, they must be equipped with
communication skills and an understanding of local
culture, in addition to basic policing skills. Those should
be part of our comprehensive measures to continue
improving the capacity of our peacekeeping operations
personnel. It is in that framework that Indonesia
initiated presidential statement S/PRST/2019/4, relating
to training and capacity-building for peacekeeping
operations, during our presidency of the Security
Council in May.

Secondly, the role of United Nations police in
peacebuilding and sustaining peace needs to increase.
Strengthening the rule of law through police reform is
one of the key tasks of United Nations police in post-
conflict situations. The highest consideration must be
given to the needs, capacities and priorities of host
States, as well as to ensuring national ownership. We
also need to recall the broad and comprehensive scope
of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, ranging from
advancing political solutions and enhancing the political
impact of peacekeeping to strengthening partnerships.
All elements should be mutually reinforcing. Indonesia
stands ready to share its experience and contribute to
that important undertaking.

Thirdly, we must redouble efforts to increase the
participation of women in police peacekeeping. The
presence of women police officers will improve the
performance of United Nations police units, including in
protecting civilians and responding to sexual violence.
Indonesia is a strong supporter of greater representation
of women in peacekeeping. More efforts certainly
need to be made to increase their representation at all
levels of United Nations police - for instance, what
we underlined a few days ago with Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed (see S/PV.8657) concerning
the need to pay special attention to the needs of women
police in the field, including with regard to deployment
kits, housing and home leave rules.
Indonesia has been a longstanding contributor
to United Nations police peacekeeping. Currently,
there are 326 Indonesian police officers serving in
six United Nations peacekeeping missions, including
two formed police units in the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic and individual
police officers in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan and the United Nations Mission
to Support the Hudaydah Agreement. We stand ready
to deploy police officers with special skills in areas
such as investigation, serious and organized crime,
sexual and gender-based violence and community-
oriented policing.

Allow me to ask the briefers some questions. To the
three Police Commissioners, what are the most pressing
challenges facing their respective missions in terms of
policing mandates? What can the Council do to address
those challenges? What has been done to improve
community outreach? What are the challenges in that
domain? To what extent do they hinder the achievement
of mission mandates?

Lastly, I would like to underline that every time
we put our men and women in harm's way as part of
any United Nations mission, we tell them to always
be proud to wear the Blue Beret or Blue Helmet with
honour and dignity, for they are all serving humankind
and saving lives. I salute all the Blue Berets and Helmets
in the Chamber, as well as those who are serving on
the ground.

