Mr. Pedersen (Norway): Let me start by joining
others in expressing my deepest condolences over the
terrorist attacks in recent weeks.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Nordic
countries, namely, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden
and my own country, Norway. I will circulate my full
statement. Let me make six points.

First, social, economic and political exclusion are
often the root causes of conflict. From Libya to Yemen
and from Burkina Faso to Mali, the international
community is trying to assist in building peace.
State-building must be an integral part ofpeacebuilding.
We must do more to create responsive institutions
based on the rule of law and to foster inclusive politics
in order to ensure that the social contract is established
or, indeed, re-established.

Secondly, inclusion is important for peace
agreements to be sustainable. The inclusion of local
communities, civil society and women in peace and
reconciliation processes must be given higher priority.
They bring to the table questions and concerns that are
important to the entire population. Greater investment
in gender equality and women's empowerment is
an investment in the stability of societies and the
prevention of conflicts.

Thirdly, conflict prevention and mediation must
move to the forefront of our action. In the Secretary-
General's report on resolution 2171 (2014), on conflict
prevention (S/2015/730), he calls for a collective
recommitment. We agree. Member States must let the

Secretary-General be more hands-on. The good offices
function is too important to be micromanaged.

Fourthly, the United Nations system is fragmented,
which weakens our ability to prevent conflict and
assist in building legitimate and resilient States. We,
the Member States, contribute to such fragmentation
through the way we fund the United Nations. We can
do much more when it comes to coordinating our
bilateral engagements. The review of the peacebuilding
architecture proposes to make so-called peacebuilding
compacts. We need to explore that and other ideas on
how to foster closer cooperation among the main actors
in peacebuilding.

Fifthly, we need more reliable sources of funding
for conflict prevention. It would save lives, but it would
also safeguard development gains. Here is a calculation:
the annual cost of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic is approximately $628 million. The Nordic
countries, indeed, supported the creation ofthe Mission
in 2014. The United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic - in the same
place - had a budget ofmerely $20 million in 2012. It is
of course always difficult to make an exact calculation,
but prevention is much more cost-efficient than the
cure. We also need to invest more resources in building
local capacity for peaceful conflict resolution.

Sixthly, upholding human rights is one of the
fundamental obligations of any Government. Often
we see that deterioration in respect for human rights
can be a telling sign, an early warning, of worse things
to come. By addressing such situations and ensuring
accountability for the violation of human rights, the
worsening of those violations and conflict can be
avoided. It is therefore important that the Security
Council take those issues into account in its conflict
prevention efforts.

In conclusion, the Nordic countries urge the Council
to focus on the primacy of politics in peace operations
and in conflict prevention. The Security Council must
put the politics of inclusion at the centre of efforts to
address the root causes of conflict

