Mrs. Miculescu (Romania): I thank you, Sir, for
this timely debate and warmly congratulate you on your
unsurprisingly excellent stewardship. Let me briefly
touch upon the topic from our national perspective,
which is in addition to the statement delivered by the
observer of the European Union, with which Romania
fully aligns itself.

In this debate reflecting on the lessons learned
from war and means for building perpetual peace, the
first inspiring example that comes to a Romanian's
mind is that of our most distinguished diplomat,
Nicolae Titulescu. Besides playing a major role for his
country during and after the First World War, which we
commemorate today and this year, he played a leading
role in the creation of the League of Nations in 1921,
later becoming its only twice-elected President in 1930
and 1931.

We think of him first because a constant in
Titulescu's activity was his fight for the preservation
of stable borders through the maintenance of peace,
for good relations between both large and small
neighbouring States, for the respect of the sovereignty
and equality of all nations, for collective security and
for the prevention of aggression. In the early 1930s,
realizing the dangers to his own country as well as
to other States in Europe, of the rising extremist
ideologies, Titulescu undertook prolific activity in
the field of regional integration by signing treaties
of friendship and non-aggression with other nations,
primarily conceived to prevent any relapse into old
conflicts. Even today, those documents are seen as
milestones of cooperation among the countries and
nations of the Balkans.

Titulescu identified certain prerequisites for
achieving sustainable peace that are still valid today. He
said, first of all, that winners in war must forget their
hatred and understand that all suffer because of war.
Then, there is a need for all peoples to blend together,
to see each other and to talk to each other about their
common interests. Although primarily a reference to
regional cooperation, this is a clear example of forward-
thinking and a strong plea for the values that became
the basis for the establishment of the United Nations.

In Titulescu's view, which has since then become
Romania's View, the process of building sustainable
peace needs to be based on a shared sense of security;
to aim at achieving stability, while building mutual
trust and knowledge among nations; and to include
careful analysis of divergences and address them all.
The accepted means for resolving conflicts must be
only political and legal; the spirit of human solidarity
must prevail over military strength.

Titulescu strongly believed, as we all do in the
Council today, that war could never be a solution to
a conflict. According to him, there are a number of
targets to be achieved in the quest for a permanent
peace, and they are as pertinent today as they were
in the 1930s. They include international economic
interdependence, the common fight against prejudices,
education for peace, and coordinated action leading
to the eradication of the economic causes of conflict.
Referring to causes that provoke and amplify tension
internationally - causes that are still the same
nowadays - he advocated that the world does not need
a revision of treaties but a revision of its own mindset.
How true that is, even today.

Returning to the present time, Romania tries to
follow the path opened by its illustrious diplomat.
Our diplomacy constantly advocates, for instance,
the advantages of regional cooperation, especially by
building bridges of trust and pragmatic cooperation
among neighbours. Therefore, we have been an active
part of multiple cooperation formats in our region,
such as the South-East European Cooperation Process,
currently under Romanian chairmanship.

Convinced of the huge potential of regional
cooperation, Romania made a substantive contribution
during its previous term in the Security Council
by promoting a resolution on the United Nations
cooperation with regional organizations, within
stabilizing and post-conflict reconstruction processes.
Thus, resolution 1631 (2005), represents the first such
document in the history of the United Nations dedicated
to cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. We continue to truly
believe that such cooperation is one of the keys to
building everlasting peace.

In a world scarred by inequality, intolerance,
conflict and terror, Romania will always be by the
Organization's side in its tenacious and admirable efforts
to strengthen international peace and security, and we
will always find inspiration in the wisdom of Nicolae
Titulescu, who said that diplomats are soldiers of peace
whose will contains only one word - "continue".

