Malta thanks Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for holding today's open debate on the topic "Peacebuilding and sustaining peace: contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity". We also thank today's briefers for sharing their invaluable insights and experiences. The concept note (see S/2020/1064, annex) states that no nation is an island unto itself, and, as an island State, we could not agree more. The coronavirus disease pandemic was unforeseen and unexpected and further underlined the fact that certain challenges do not recognize national borders. Such situations call for more cooperation and a collective response, not isolationism. Unfortunately, the socioeconomic impact of the pandemic is likely to be with us for years to come, and we must focus on ensuring that results achieved in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda on Sustainable Development do not suffer major setbacks. Negative impacts need to be mitigated insofar as possible. The development and security nexus is stronger than ever, and our actions today will determine the results we achieve tomorrow. In this context, we once again echo the Secretary- General's call for a global ceasefire. The multilateral system is more important than ever before, but its efficacy depends on our willingness to continue to invest in this system. Just few weeks ago, we adopted the Declaration on the Commemoration of the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations (General Assembly resolution 75/1). It outlines our achievements, but also warns against complacency. We are not here to celebrate, but to take action. Let us never forget that the scope of the United Nations, born from the ashes of two devastating global conflicts, was to achieve peace and security. Multilateral institutions do not survive without political will, and it is up to us to redouble our efforts to strengthen this system. The international community needs to have all the right tools to ensure that it continues to adapt to an ever-changing world. This, too, applies to the Security Council - and, as the organ entrusted with the maintenance of international peace and security, it must be quick and sufficiently nimble to identify and tackle new challenges. The Peacebuilding Commission continues to play an important role in developing and promoting peacebuilding good practices, and this year's review will serve as an opportunity to continue to build on what has already been achieved. Furthermore, this year marks the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. We again take this opportunity to highlight the importance of the full, equal and meaningful participation of women and youth in all stages of peacebuilding. Malta launched its national action plan on women and peace and security on 30 October. Climate change will have a devastating impact on us all if we do not address it in an urgent and holistic manner. The clock is ticking. This pressing issue cannot be left on the back burner, as any further delays will continue only to aggravate an already worrisome situation. In just a few decades, we have moved from a healthy, green planet teeming with life to a less vibrant place that is losing its natural beauty and biodiversity at an alarming rate. A lack of action in the field of climate change will have serious repercussions on peace and security caused by competition over increasingly limited resources, the loss of agricultural land, crippled health systems and mass displacement due to rising sea levels and the lack of opportunities. It is our duty to identify and act on these new and evolving challenges in a timely manner. We live in an era in which scientific knowledge is growing at an exponential rate, and in which the transfer of information can happen within seconds. We must use this to our advantage by strengthening cooperation and improving the sharing of knowledge. By doing so, we will be better placed to predict and prevent new challenges - or, at least, be adequately prepared for them. We owe all of this to our citizens and to future generations.
