Ms. Mohammed: At the outset, I wish to reiterate
our congratulations to you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and to
express our sincere admiration for your able leadership
in guiding the work of this important United Nations
organ to deliver constructive outcomes. Let me assure
you that you have our full support and cooperation.
I would also like to thank you for convening today's
meeting and giving us an opportunity to share the
views of the African Union (AU) on the situation
in Burundi. Let me also take this opportunity to
thank His Excellency Mr. Michel Kafando, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi, for his
comprehensive briefing.

As all are aware, the African Union attaches great
importance to the restoration of peace and stability in
Burundi and has been very active in supporting the
mediation efforts led by the East African Community. I
would like to take this opportunity to reiterate the AU's
deep appreciation to President Yoweri Museveni, in his
capacity as mediator, and to former President Benjamin
Mkapa, facilitator of the of the inter-Burundian
political dialogue - as expressed by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the African Union at
its just-concluded summit - for their relentless efforts
in assisting the Burundian parties to find a consensual
and lasting solution and agree on a road map for the
holding of credible elections in 2020.

Nevertheless, the general situation and ensuing
economic crisis, which continue to have an impact on
the people of Burundi, remains a preoccupation for
the African Union. The AU supports the need for an
inclusive dialogue through the Inter-Burundi dialogue
process, which has yet to yield the desired dividends.
Consequently, the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission continues to urge all Burundian actors
to demonstrate a spirit of compromise, while stressing
that inclusive dialogue remains the only way to enable
Burundi to sustainably overcome the current challenges
and maintain national cohesion.

It is in that context that, from 5 to 7 November 2018,
the AU Commissioner for Peace and Security and the
former President of the Transition of the Central African
Republic, Her Excellency Ms. Catherine Samba-Panza,
visited Burundi in order to explore, among other things,
ways and means for the African Union to support
Burundi in the preparations for the elections scheduled
for 2020. The African Union continues its support
for the East African Community as it works towards
unblocking the stalemate in the inter-Burundi dialogue,
and urges all Burundian actors to demonstrate a spirit
of compromise. Against that background, allow me to
focus my intervention on the following four key points.

First, concerning the political context, the
Government has commenced preparations for the
elections by establishing, on 31 August 2018, the
Independent National Electoral Commission in
accordance with the Burundian electoral code, adopting
an electoral code and establishing the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, made up of 13 members,
as called for by the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement of August 2000. Following that level of
preparation, the Assembly, at its recent meeting,
expressed appreciation to President Pierre Nkurunziza
and thanked him for his declaration not to run for
re-election during the 2020 presidential election, while
urging the Government and the political parties to work
together to ensure a credible electoral process.

Secondly, with regard to the security situation,
it should be recalled that the situation has remained
relatively stable overall, with intermittent skirmishes
reported along the border separating Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo between national
forces and unidentified armed men.

Thirdly, concerning the humanitarian and
socioeconomic situation, it has presented some
challenges over the past reporting period, especially
in the wake of displacements in the region, as we just
heard. That is compounded by economic recession.
While hundreds of Burundian refugees were voluntarily
repatriated from the Nduta and Mtendeli camps in
Tanzania in 2018, many still remain in doubt over their
final return from their camps to Burundi.

Fourthly, with regard to the human rights situation,
The African Union continues to maintain its human
rights observers and military experts in the country to
monitor the day-to-day situation on the ground. Plans
are under way to increase the number of human rights
officers and military experts, which is critical given
that African Union human rights officers and military
experts are the only foreign observers who have been
allowed to operate in the country.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate the African
Union's commitment to continue supporting all efforts
aimed at finding a lasting, peaceful and consensual
solution to the situation in Burundi. The AU encourages
the Government and the opposition groups to intensify
efforts towards reaching the conclusion of a consensual
and inclusive agreement that is consistent with the spirit
and content of Arusha Agreement of 2000. We further
encourage the Government of Burundi to continue
its preparations for the elections by putting in place
relevant mechanisms and instruments in accordance
with the Burundian electoral code for the conduct of
transparent and peaceful elections in 2020.

