Ms. Sabelo (South Africa): My delegation joins
others in thanking you, Sir, for convening today's
meeting. Similarly, we thank Mr. Ghassan Salame,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), as well as Ambassador Juergen Schulz of
Germany, for their comprehensive briefings.

South Africa remains concerned about the
prevailing security situation in Libya, which continues
to gravely affect peace and security efforts in the
region. However, we are encouraged by the positive
steps taken by the Government of National Accord to
restore the rule of law in Libya and by the subsequent
adoption of the security plan for greater Tripoli. In our
view, that will contribute to improving the security
situation in Tripoli and, in the long term, create an
environment conducive to elections to take place.
We particularly urge the parties to commit fully to
the ceasefire agreement reached in September 2018,
avoid any further escalation of violence and give peace
a chance.

South Africa fully supports the resolve of UNSMIL
to address the conflict in Libya and is also encouraged
by the international support for the implementation
of the United Nations action plan, which would
facilitate a national conference for reconciliation.
We also welcome the positive role being played by
the Libya quartet and urge neighbouring countries
to keep pushing for a negotiated settlement in Libya.
We support the ongoing efforts made by the African
Union (AU) through its Peace and Security Council
and the AU Ad Hoc High-level Committee on Libya,
under the leadership of President Sassou Nguesso. In
that regard, we look forward to a successful outcome of
the Committee meeting scheduled for 5 and 6 April in
Brazzaville. Additionally, we welcome the commitment
of the AU representatives for Libya as they continue
to engage with the main stakeholders in the country to
find a peaceful resolution.

On the humanitarian situation, we remain deeply
concerned about the deteriorating situation in Libya.
However, we welcome all the contributions that have
already been made towards the Stabilization Facility
for Libya and call for the additional funding needed for
the Libya humanitarian response plan for 2019.

South Africa also welcomes the work of the
Women's Empowerment and Support Unit of the
Presidency Council to improve gender equality. We as
a country have experienced positive results in terms of
women participating in the peace process and therefore
view this progressive development as an imperative to
advance peace and security in Libya.

We wish to encourage the parties to the conflict
to find common ground and to reach agreement on the
outstanding constitutional amendments. This process
is critical to ensuring that political agreement can be
successfully implemented and that elections can be
held during the agreed period, and to ultimately putting
an end to the conflict and granting the wishes of the
Libyan people.

On sanctions, South Africa reiterates its support for
the work ofthe Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning
Libya, and we thank the Chair for his report. We are
convinced that a strong message should be sent to all
individuals who are hampering the progress of the
political process in Libya. We believe, therefore, that
the strict implementation of the measures adopted by
the Security Council is crucial to dissuading the parties
involved. At the same time, South Africa believes that
sanctions should not be an end in and of themselves
but, rather, serve as a tool to create stability and build
an environment that is conducive to finding political
agreement for a lasting and durable peace.

