Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), and Ambassador Zahir Tanin, the
Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan, for their statements.

Chad is pleased that Afghanistan has seen
considerable improvements in the past nine months
under the direction of its new authorities and thanks
to the determination of its people. Significant progress
has been made with political and administrative
reforms, despite the fact that major challenges continue
in the security and humanitarian areas, in regional
cooperation and in combating drug trafficking.
Similarly, Chad welcomes the Afghan authorities'
efforts in the political arena, which have enabled it to
proceed to the nomination of a cabinet for the National
Unity Government that includes four women, as well
as the appointment of 15 members of the Special
Commission on Electoral Reform, thus making
concrete their commitment to reforms in that area. We
also commend the start of the third phase of Afghan
civil society's activities in implementing the national
and provincial road maps for peace, with UNAMA's
support, and we encourage those groups to continue
their efforts. The countries of the subregion and the
international community have made huge diplomatic
and political efforts to help restore peace and relaunch
Afghanistan's development. However, much remains to
be done in mobilizing the financial resources needed to
support the Afghan authorities' commendable efforts to
bring those processes to fruition.

Despite the political progress that has been
made, the security situation in Afghanistan is still
worrying. The staggering number of incidents recorded
by UNAMA between 15 February and 30 April,
particularly in the southern, south-eastern and eastern
provinces of the country, which accounted for 71 per
cent ofthe 5,033 cases recorded during that period - as
well as the two separate attacks on Saturday, 19 June,
for which the Taliban has claimed responsibility and in
which at least 17 civilians were killed and several more
wounded - unfortunately testifies to the seriousness
of the situation. Monday morning's car-bomb attack
on the Afghan Parliament in Kabul, which killed at
least one woman and a child and wounded 15 people
in the surrounding streets, is yet more evidence of the
deteriorating security situation. We strongly condemn
all those attacks and call on those responsible, notably
the terrorist groups and armed groups, to immediately
halt such horrific criminal acts. We would like to express
our condolences to the Government of Afghanistan and
to the families of the victims. We wish the wounded a
speedy recovery.

The fact that some terrorist groups have pledged
their allegiance to the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and that there are foreign terrorist fighters
present on Afghan soil means that the international
community must be more vigilant. Furthermore,
concerning the fight against drug trafficking, Chad
welcomes the latest statistics that indicate a decrease in
such traffic and encourages the new Afghan authorities
to work harder to eradicate that traffic completely. On
that point, we would like to repeat our encouragement
to Afghanistan's neighbouring countries and to the
international community to intensify and coordinate
their efforts in the trans-boundary fight against drug
trafficking.

On the deterioration of the humanitarian situation,
especially for internally displaced persons as a result of
natural disasters and for the victims of anti-personnel
landmines, we call upon the international community
to show greater solidarity and mobilization to support
those Victims. In that regard, Chad would like to
reiterate its support for the Secretary-General's appeal
to increase humanitarian assistance aimed at helping
the Afghan people to cope with their food needs and at
helping refugees return to their homes.

In conclusion, we support the Afghan authorities in
their efforts and call upon the international community
to further support the Government. Finally, we would
like to pay tribute to all United Nations and humanitarian
agency staff members working in Afghanistan under
extremely difficult conditions. We encourage them
to continue their commitment, working shoulder to
shoulder with the Afghan people.

