Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): Mr. President, I offer
my sincere congratulations to you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month and to the distinguished Permanent
Representative of Romania for his stewardship of the
Council last month.

My delegation is pleased to address the Security
Council on the situation in Timor-Leste three months
after the adoption of Security Council resolution 1543
(2004). We express our sincere appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his progress report (S/2004/669)
on the activities of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET), and to the
Assistant Secretary-General, Mr. Hedi Annabi, for his
clear and comprehensive presentation of his report and
briefing this morning. We commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, the former Special Representative,
Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, and members of the civilian,
military and police components of UNMISET for their
dedication and invaluable contribution to the process of
nation-building in Timor-Leste.

I am pleased to note that the activities carried out
by the United Nations and, in particular, the
contributions made by UNMISET have continued to
provide a window of opportunity for progress in
Timor-Leste. The United Nations has played an
important role in providing security and facilitating the
country's emergence from conflict. It has helped to
nurture the development of political, economic, social,
legal and judicial institutions. We note in particular the
support given for the public administration and justice
system and for justice in the area of serious crimes, the
support to the development of law enforcement and the
support for the security and stability of Timor-Leste.

The Secretary-General has reported that progress
achieved thus far has permitted a downsizing in the
international presence on the ground. In this regard, it
is encouraging for my delegation to note that the
Government of Timor-Leste has taken several
important steps towards reaching self-sufficiency and
that it has formally assumed responsibility for internal
and external security as of 20 May 2004. At the same
time, we note the Secretary-General's point that
"pending sufficient national income generation, the
development of sustainable national institutions will
continue to be dependant on international assistance"
(5/2004/669, para. 2). This is indeed an important
point for the international community, including the
Security Council, to note. Malaysia will do its utmost
within its capacity to contribute towards assisting the
laudable efforts of the Government and people of
Timor-Leste to achieve further progress.

We are encouraged by the adoption of important
legislation to establish the legal and institutional
frameworks as well as the continued efforts in
promoting a culture of free political dialogue and
resolution of bilateral issues. These advances could not
have been achieved without the full commitment,
determination and strong resolve of the country's
leadership and the support of the people of Timor-Leste
in general.

It is encouraging to note that the next round of
negotiations between Timor-Leste and Australia on the
sharing of petroleum and natural gas resources in the
region will be held next month, in September. We wish
for success in those negotiations so that they may
provide the people of Timor-Leste with the opportunity
to enhance the effectiveness of State institutions,
sustain stability and help improve socio-economic
conditions. In this regard, my delegation hopes that
both parties would redouble their efforts so as to come
to an early and mutually beneficial conclusion on this
issue.

My delegation is also encouraged by the
continued effort by both Timor-Leste and Indonesia to
delineate the land border between them. We hope that
the discussions and contacts between the two countries
will lead to a final agreement on their land border and
better management of the border area in order to
further enhance bilateral relations and cooperation
between the two neighbouring countries. We also note
the statements made by the Permanent Representative
of Timor-Leste and the Permanent Representative of
Indonesia on other efforts that have been carried out
between the two countries to continue to improve
bilateral relations, and we support these.

The Secretary-General has reported to the
Council his assessment of the progress achieved by
UNMISET and the challenges faced by the United
Nations in Timor-Leste. We note the observation made
by the Secretary-General that much remains to be
accomplished during the remaining months of
UNMISET's mandate. It is clear that continued
international assistance is required and that, as the
Secretary General has pointed out in his report,

"Complementary bilateral efforts to strengthen
Timorese public administration, law enforcement
agencies and armed forces are essential for
Timorese counterparts to achieve the necessary
capability in an orderly and sustainable manner".
(Ibid., para. 46)

In ensuring effective implementation of the laws
promulgated for the establishment of the national
security institutions, for instance, it is noted that there is
still a significant requirement for financial and human
resources. It is thus essential for the international
community to allow sufficient time for the Timorese to
acquire the necessary skills and experience,
especially in the core functions in which local
expertise is still lacking. Malaysia has provided some
training in human resources development in a number
of areas. We stand ready to further cooperate with the
Government of Timor-Leste.

As a neighbouring country, Malaysia reiterates
its commitment to the nation-building process and to
the development of Timor-Leste. We have offered
assistance bilaterally and will continue to explore new
areas of assistance with the Government of Timor-
Leste. We continue to fully support the activities of the
United Nations in Timor-Leste, as well as the efforts of
the Government and the people of that country.

