Mr. Fulci (Italy): First, at this meeting of the Council
which is taking place at the beginning of August, I should
like to thank Ambassador Martinez Blanco for the
impeccable way in which he conducted the Council's work
in the month of July. To you, Mr. President, go our
greetings and our best wishes for success. I am sure that,
with your remarkable experience, the Council under your
guidance will perform its duties in the most excellent
manner.

Let me also welcome again, in this public meeting, the
new Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom, Sir
John Weston.

Italy has just cast its vote in favour of the resolution
by which the Council has extended the mandate of the
UNAVEM. III mission in Angola until 8 February 1996. We
voted in favour because the resolution is well balanced,
touches on all the essential points needed to ensure the
progress of the peace-keeping operation there, and strongly
supports the action of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye.

In these days that are particularly difficult for the
international community, it is indeed a source of
satisfaction to note that the peace process in Angola has
entered a road that, we hope, will lead to a definitive
solution to a 20-year-old civil war.

There are growing indications that the parties are
committed, now more than ever, to solving the remaining
problems. After the historic Lusaka meeting between the
President of Angola, Mr. Eduardo Dos Santos, and the
leader of UNITA, Mr. Jonas Savimbi, the contacts under
way between the parties demonstrate a renewed
commitment to the national reconciliation process.

In this regard, the decisions reached by both sides on
an accelerated timetable for the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol, to make up for past delays, are very
meaningful and welcome.

The deployment of the UNAVEM. peace-keeping
mission that is now under day has made a fundamental
contribution to such developments. We are especially
grateful to the countries that have deployed "blue helmets"
in Angola. But, of course, what is and remains fundamental
is the resolve to conclude the peace process shown by both
parties, to which we should like to convey, through our
colleague Ambassador Afonso Van Dunem "Mbinda",
who is sitting with us today, our sincere appreciation and
congratulations.

The positive aspects of the Angolan situation, as
illustrated by the Secretary-General's report, are now far
greater than the negative ones. These negative aspects
should not, however, be underestimated. In particular,
some violations of the cease-fire are still occurring;
progress continues to be slow in troop disengagement and
the establishment of quartering areas; demining is still not
proceeding at the necessary speed.

On the subject of demining, we all know that the
largest number of mines in the world is today to be
found, unfortunately, in Angola. Every day dozens of
innocent people are killed or maimed by these mines.
Their presence still constitutes a serious problem for the
activities of UNAVEM. III also. They are a fundamental
obstacle to the economic recovery of Angola, which
should be the top priority not only for the Government
but also for the international community once the peace
process has been consolidated. In this regard, let me say
once again that Italy, both directly and through the
European Union, is already meeting its obligations.

Finally, the Italian Government has taken due note
of the Secretary-General's appeal for financial support of
the demobilization and reintegration programme. We are
fully aware that any delays in these activities might lead
again to dangerous tensions in the country. We shall not
fail to make our contribution to success in this area also.

