Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to thank France for its
initiative to hold this meeting on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We thank Secretary General
Sellal for making a special trip to host today's meeting.
We also welcome Mr. Tshibanda, Minister for
International and Regional Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Allow me also to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
Mr. Tshibanda for their statements.

Over the years, under the leadership of President
Kabila, the overall security of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has been stable, its economy has grown
rather rapidly, incomes have been on the rise, living
conditions have improved and regional cooperation has
grown closer. We congratulate the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on those
improvements and its tireless efforts towards those
ends.

In November, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo shall hold a general election that will be a
milestone in the political life of the country; arduous
work will be required to ensure its smooth conduct. At
the same time, the country is faced with considerable
challenges in maintaining stability and promoting
economic development. The international community
should continue to provide practical support to the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I wish to take this opportunity to make the
following points.

First, in regard to support for the preparations for
the elections, the Government has made progress on
election preparations. We call upon the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and international
partners to continue to provide financial and logistical
support at the request of the Government. We call on
the parties concerned to respect the Constitution and
laws of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
will of its people, and to refrain from interfering in the
internal affairs of the country so as to ensure that the
general election will be conducted smoothly and lay a
solid foundation for achieving national reconciliation
and lasting peace.

Secondly, with respect to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo's achievement of sustained
stability, the Government has achieved much in its
joint military actions with its neighbours in the fight
against such armed groups as the Forces de'mocratiques
de libe'ration du Rwanda and the Lord's Resistance
Army. However, some rebel activities continue in the
eastern part of the country, and progress in
reintegrating ex-combatants has been slow. The United
Nations and the international community should
continue to support the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in its efforts to stabilize the
situation in its country, provide it with training and
equipment, and assist it in accelerating security sector
reform and completing the expansion of the military
and police forces.

MONUSCO has done a great deal of work to
realize peace and stability in the country, for which we
wish to express our appreciation and support. As to the
future of the United Nations presence in the country,
the United Nations should continue to listen to the
opinion of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

Lastly, regarding economic and social
development, we call on the parties concerned to create
a climate conducive to economic development, attract
domestic and foreign investment, and help the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to assume
ownership of and actively explore its natural resources
in order to turn its resource wealth to development
advantage so that its people will be able to benefit from
a peace dividend as soon as possible. At the same time,
we hope that the countries concerned will strengthen
their cooperation and work with the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in its actions
against the illegal exploitation of natural resources by
the rebels.

