Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for presenting the most recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2015/303) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and Kosovo,
Mr. Dacic' and Mr. Thaci, for their statements.

The Council met fewer than four months ago to
discuss the situation in Kosovo (see S/PV.7377). The
country, which was then coming out of a long-standing
institutional crisis, was the scene of violent protests and
it was feared that extremists and nationalist rhetoric
would take over the national conversation. In that
regard, we welcome the calm that has since prevailed
in the Kosovo political landscape. We welcome in
particular the constructive spirit adopted by the
Pristina authorities, who have shown their willingness
to advance towards the construction of a peaceful and
democratic public space.

That favourable environment has enabled the
country to finally resume the high-level dialogue with
Serbia, as called for by the Security Council for several
months now. We welcome the prospects opened by the
9 February meeting held in Brussels and commend the
efforts to that end by the European Union and its High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
Ms. Federica Mogherini, who visited Belgrade and
Pristina in late March. We give her our full support in
this process.

The meeting in late March was an essential step
towards the effective implementation of the Agreement
of 19 April 2013, a prelude to the normalization of
relations between the two countries that we earnestly
desire. The agreement on justice signed on 9 February
is another step towards the dismantling of the parallel
Serbian structures in northern Ibar, which is necessary
for the future of Kosovo as well as that of Serbia. We
call on the parties to continue their exchanges while
continuing to look to the future. It is no longer only
a matter of working for the formal normalization of
relations, but of rebuilding, in the long run, genuine
neighbourly relations that are mutually beneficial. In
that regard, the development of trade relations and the
legal security of investments will play a key role.

The recent progress should not lead Kosovo or
Serbia to abandon their efforts. The task ahead of
Pristina remains important indeed. We recall in that
regard the importance of establishing an association/
community of Serb municipalities in Kosovo. We believe
that such action is necessary if the Serbian population
is to fully embrace their Kosovar citizenship and cease
to consider themselves, wrongly, as foreigners. There
is no question of establishing an enclave for Serbs, but
instead of asserting forcefully that Kosovo, as a whole,
is also their country. The unitary status of Kosovo will
in no way be undermined by the creation of such a
structure.

The future will also require the consolidation of
the rule of law and therefore a fight against impunity.
We note with satisfaction the steps taken by Pristina
to establish specialized chambers to judge past crimes
revealed by the European Union Special Investigative
Task Force. We call for the rapid adoption by the Kosovo
Assembly of the constitutional amendments and the
law for the establishment of specialized chambers,
previously scheduled for 21 May and now postponed to
29 May. I would also take this opportunity to reiterate
our unwavering support for the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo, which works every day for the
rule of law and security in Kosovo.

I cannot conclude without addressing the European
perspective that we want for the entire region of the
Balkans. In recent years, Serbia has made significant
efforts to move closer to the European Union, through
both internal reforms and improving relations with
its neighbours. We congratulate them once again on
these efforts. We encourage them to pursue the full
implementation of the agreements concluded with
Pristina and reiterate our desire to see it integrated into
the European Union in the near future. We hope that the
first stage of negotiations can now be opened quickly.

We know and support Kosovo's desire to follow
the same path. It will be long and difficult, but is
nevertheless necessary for the future of the country. We
know that the Kosovo leaders are fully aware of what
is at stake. We reiterate our confidence in them and our
full support to their efforts.

