Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): I wish at the outset to take
this opportunity to express Malaysia's most profound
condolences to the Government and the people of Bahrain
and to its Permanent Mission to the United Nations on the
passing of His Highness Shaikh Isa Bin Salman Al-Khalifa,
the late Amir of the State of Bahrain. The late Amir and his
wise counsel will be sadly missed by many world leaders,
particularly those of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference. May the blessings of Allah be upon him.

In considering the situation in Sierra Leone we have
before us the fifth report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone,
document S/ 1999/237, of 4 March 1999, which
recommends that the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL) be extended
for a further period of three months, up to 13 June 1999.
Given the current critical situation in Sierra Leone, and the
important role of UNOMSIL, my delegation supports the
proposed extension as well as the proposed increase in the
number of military observers and human rights personnel
attached to UNOMSIL. Malaysia welcomes the Secretary-
General's intention to re-establish UNOMSIL in Freetown.

My delegation is deeply concerned at the extremely
volatile and fragile situation in Sierra Leone. In this regard,
we welcome President Kabbah's stated willingness to
engage the rebel leaders in a proposed dialogue to be held
under the framework of the 1996 Abidjan Peace
Agreement. The road towards peace ultimately depends on
the successful outcome of the proposed talks. As an
immediate measure, the rebels must agree to a cessation of
the hostilities and a recognition of the legitimacy of the
democratically elected Government of President Kabbah,
which is a central provision of the Abidjan Peace
Agreement. It is vital to ensure that this window of
opportunity for a political solution to the conflict in Sierra
Leone will not be lost.

My delegation shares the sense of outrage felt by the
international community in the wake of the atrocities that
have been committed against the civilian population in
Sierra Leone, for which the rebel forces bear the main
responsibility. These heinous acts - which include
arbitrary killings, mutilations and other appalling human
rights abuses, some of which are perpetrated on
children - must not be allowed to go on with impunity.
They must be condemned in the strongest terms, as in the
draft resolution. The continuation of these acts cannot
conduce to a process of genuine national reconciliation,
which is so essential to the ultimate solution of the
conflict.

We are concerned at the rapidly deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the country and urge that the
safety of persons engaged in humanitarian work in Sierra
Leone be ensured, as well as their access to all parts of
the country.

My delegation is also concerned over reports of
support being given to the rebel forces in Sierra Leone,
including the supply of arms and the dispatch of
mercenaries, which would only contribute to further
aggravating and complicating the situation there. We
would urge strict compliance with the provisions of
existing arms embargoes imposed by the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

The road towards finding a political settlement and
healing the wounds of this horrific war in Sierra Leone
may be a long and painful one. In this regard, the dual-
track approach being pursued so far - combining support
for the military action of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) to maintain law and order with diplomatic
efforts towards a peaceful settlement of the conflict - is
the right approach, and it should be sustained and strongly
supported by the international community.

My delegation wishes to pay tribute to the
ECOMOG forces for their role and contributions in
helping restore peace, security and stability in Sierra
Leone. The courage and determination demonstrated by
ECOMOG forces are highly commendable. ECOMOG
clearly deserves the continued and enhanced support of
the international community, which should continue to
assist ECOWAS with the necessary financial and
logistical support to pay the high costs of keeping their
troops in Sierra Leone. We would also urge Member
States of the United Nations with the resources to do so
to consider providing prompt bilateral assistance to the

 

Government of Sierra Leone in various fields, including the
establishment and training of a new national army.

ECOWAS, through its peacekeeping force, ECOMOG,
has amply demonstrated its commitment to the maintenance
of peace and security in West Africa and is undertaking in
Sierra Leone an indispensable peacekeeping role on behalf
of the international community. In recognition of the
important role played by ECOWAS and ECOMOG in the
context of regional diplomacy, it is imperative for the
international community to extend all assistance and support
to the peacekeeping efforts in Sierra Leone.

At this critical juncture in the conflict in Sierra Leone,
there is a need to ensure a continued and sustained presence
of ECOMOG in that country, rather than its disengagement
from the conflict on the grounds of financial constraints -
which would indeed be a pity. Every effort should therefore
be made to ensure the continued active involvement of
ECOWAS and ECOMOG in the maintenance of peace and
security and the continuing search for a political settlement
of the conflict in Sierra Leone, with undiminished support
from the international community.
