Mr. Thayeb (Indonesia): I should like to begin by
expressing my delegation's appreciation for the diligent
efforts made by the sponsors of this draft resolution. We
are indeed gratified by the unity of purpose that has been
demonstrated by the Contact Group countries in drafting
it, which demonstrates their unwavering resolve, along
with that of the rest of the international community, to
end this terrible and tragic conflict, which has inflicted so
much suffering throughout the region.

Additionally, we are grateful for the
Secretary-General's letter of 6 September 1995 to the
President of the Security Council concerning the
operations of the Mission to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) of the International
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia (ICFY). We would
also like to express our gratitude to the personnel of the
ICFY Mission for their proficient fulfilment of their
responsibilities.

My delegation notes the certification issued by the
ICFY Mission in its reports submitted since the adoption
of resolution 1003 (1995) that the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
is continuing to meet its commitment to close its borders
with the Bosnian Serb-controlled areas of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and also that there have been no
commercial transshipments across the border.

At the same time, however, we cannot fail to note
with concern the continued shortcomings experienced in
the border closure. Of particular concern is the fact that
uniformed personnel continue to cross the border between
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina - a clear violation of the border closure.
My delegation believes that this issue needs to be
urgently addressed. Similar attention needs to be given to
reports of continued smuggling of fuel across the Drina
river.

Clearly, therefore, it is possible to improve the
effectiveness of the border closure. In this connection, my
delegation is confident that the Federal Republic of

 

Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) is fully cognizant of
the imperative need to redouble its efforts to enhance the
border closure by continuing its cooperation with the
Mission of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia.

The Indonesian delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution, for it is our firm belief that the closure of
the international border between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to remain an
instrumental and critical pillar for the achievement of a
negotiated settlement to this crisis.

