I, too, wish you, Madam, every success in connection with your presidency of the Security Council and congratulate you and your country on your commitment to an issue that is dear to us. Indeed, in all parts of the world, the confidence of our citizens in their Governments depends on their ability to guarantee security. That is even more true in the aftermath of a conflict, where peoples traumatized by cycles of violence need strong security institutions, staffed by competent personnel, acting within the framework of the law and respecting human rights, to imagine the future and rebuild it. With resolution 2151 (2014), the Security Council recognized the importance of helping States to improve their performance in the area of security-sector reform in order to consolidate peace. We welcome South Africa's initiative to present a new draft resolution (S/2020/1158) that would enable us to further clarify the issues at stake in this process and achieve further concrete progress. I would like to emphasize three points. First, peacekeeping and special political missions often contribute to the long- term stabilization of host States, which enables them to strengthen their autonomy and thus make a direct contribution to the exit strategy of peace operations. However, such peace operations need to be given a mandate for that purpose. France has strong aspirations in that area with regard to the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic. In that regard, the difficult task of security-sector-reform services within missions, under the authority of the Special Representatives of the Secretary- General, deserves to be actively supported. I commend the work of the organizations that assist those missions in connection with the United Nations, such as the Geneva Centre for Security Sector Governance, which operates in 80 countries and which France supports. Secondly, France advocates a vision of security-sector reform that takes the greatest possible account of the specific characteristics of each country, based on the political will of the host State and coordination among international actors. It is those combined efforts that make it possible to provide a solid foundation for security-sector reform. I am thinking, for example, of the model of the Mali national coordination body, which provides a link between the national armed forces and international partner forces. Thirdly, France considers that one of the keys to success is the carrying out of a set of initiatives at the country and mission levels, so that reforms can dovetail with the needs identified on the ground. It is essential to be able to rely on indicators that are tailored to each mission, which would make it possible to produce, on the basis of regular reports, a reliable summary of the progress made, both in capacity-building and in the implementation of structural reforms. The benchmarks in MINUSMA's mandate relating to the establishment of a reconstituted Malian army illustrate how this mechanism can be used to coordinate political guidance by the Security Council with the efforts of peace operations on the ground, as well as the international community's work in following up with the host State.
