Mr. Somavia (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
It is not pleasant to have to begin an explanation of vote
by expressing regret at such a long-standing lack of
progress in the region. The Secretary-General's report,
which we appreciate, tells us that the peace process
between the Georgian and Abkhaz parties is at a
standstill. Similar terms were used in previous reports.

We especially regret the fact that the leaders of
Abkhazia do not want to understand that the Government
and Parliament of Georgia are making a significant effort
to seek a solution to the problem, having offered
Abkhazia broad autonomy - a situation seldom seen in

 

similar situations. Let us recall that in April the Georgian
Parliament approved a resolution that recommended
granting to Abkhazia a constitution, a parliament, executive
and judicial bodies, an anthem, a flag, a coat of arms and
other state attributes, in addition to exclusive areas of
competence in economic, social, financial and tax
spheres - all in the framework of a unitary federation
within the internationally recognized borders of Georgia.

It is for this reason that the draft resolution which we
are considering today, and to which we give our firmest
support, notes with concern the uncompromising position
adopted by the Abkhaz side, and urges the parties -
particularly the Abkhaz - to make substantive progress in
order to achieve an appropriate political solution.

Of course, the parties must resolve a key issue - the
political status of Abkhazia. For this purpose they have
available to them the good offices of the Secretary-General
through his Special Envoy, the Russian Federation in its
capacity as facilitator, and the support of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. We are grateful to
all of them for their endeavouring.

We would like to express particular support for the
steps taken by the Russian Federation and the role that it is
playing in the search for a solution to this conflict. It is in
a special position, from which, we are convinced, it will be
able to continue to serve the purpose of peace in Georgia.
The leaders of Abkhazia must give serious consideration to
the possibilities being afforded to the Abkhaz people to live
in peace, without losing their national identity, to enjoy
great internal jurisdiction, and to be able once and for all,
together with all the other inhabitants of Georgia, to work
for the development and well-being of the people.

My delegation wishes to thank the personnel of
UNOMIG for the valuable role that they are playing in
Georgia as we renew the UNOMIG mandate. We thank the
Commonwealth of Independent States, the group of
"Friends of Georgia", the Office of the High Commissioner
for Refugees, the Red Cross and all the humanitarian
organizations providing assistance in Georgia.

We wish to highlight in particular the work of those
organizations that are dealing with the humanitarian
situation. As in other conflicts under consideration by the
Security Council, their actions are fundamental. For this
reason it is important that we remember them and
encourage them to continue in spite of present difficulties.

As we reiterate the support of the Chilean delegation
for this draft resolution, we wish to point out that it gives
due attention to the difficult humanitarian situation in
Abkhazia. The draft resolution reaffirms the right of all
refugees and displaced persons to return to their homes,
condemns the ethnically motivated killings and the laying
of mines, and supports the development of a programme
for the protection and promotion of human rights.

We hope that the parties, and above all the Abkhaz
leaders, will take meaningful steps on the basis of this
draft resolution. That would be a clear signal to the
international community. Let us bear in mind that within
three months the Secretary-General will report to us on
whether progress has been made in this respect, and at
that time the Security Council will again have to turn its
attention to the subject and decide what subsequent steps
to take. Let us hope that at that time we will have better
news.

