Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank the Chairman of the Committee

established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999),
Ambassador Mayr-Harting of Austria; the Chairman of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), Ambassador
Apakan of Turkey; and the Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004),
Ambassador Heller of Mexico, for their respective
briefings and for all the work they have done.

With painstaking and protracted efforts, the 1267
Committee has completed the review of its
consolidated list, which has greatly enhanced the
accuracy and reliability of the list. That represents a
significant achievement. China supports the Committee
in its efforts to move ahead with the review of pending
issues, in line with resolution 1904 (2009), continue to
implement its new approach, and improve its efficiency
and transparency, thus upholding the authority and
effectiveness of the sanctions regime against Al-Qaida,
the Taliban and other individuals.

China appreciates the efforts of the CTC to
improve its working methods and to strengthen its
dialogue with Member States. Over the past month, the
CTC conducted an in-depth analysis of the major
difficulties and challenges in the implementation of
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005), helped
Member States to enhance their counter-terrorism
capacity-building, and prepared new policy guidelines
on international judicial cooperation, with positive
results in its work. The Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) played an important
role in assisting the CTC. China welcomes the efforts
of the CTED.

Recently, the 1540 Committee has done much
useful work to strengthen international cooperation,
expand its outreach activities and promote assistance.
We support the Committee's proposal to strengthen the
interaction and cooperation of Member States and
international and regional organizations in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). China hopes that
those that are in a position to do so will provide
developing countries with the necessary assistance to
ease the difficulties that they face in implementing the
resolution.

China attaches importance to the role of the 1540
Committee by participating actively and constructively
in all aspects of its work. Not long ago, Ambassador
Heller visited China in his capacity as Chairman of the
1540 Committee and exchanged views with the
Chinese side on the implementation of the resolution
and the next phase of the Committee's work, which
helped to deepen China's cooperation with the
Committee. China is ready to assist the relevant
countries as far as possible in such areas as
implementing resolution 1540 (2004).

Terrorism remains a major threat facing the
international community, with terrorist attacks taking
place sporadically in various parts of the world. The
United Nations and the Security Council play a core
role in facilitating international counter-terrorism
cooperation. China supports the participation of the
1267 Committee, the CTC and the 1540 Committee in
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, within their respective mandates, in order
to promote the balanced implementation of all four
pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy.

At the same time, China hopes that the three
Committees will pay more attention to the counter-
terrorism needs of developing countries and actively
assist them.

