Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I can be brief, as much
has already been said. I wish to start by thanking the
presidency of the Russian Federation for this month of
work. Your country, Mr. President, did a very goodjob
and you are very good diplomats. I will return to Russia
a little later.

I would like to thank Mr. Geir Pedersen for his
work and his tireless efforts. His insistence has paid
off. I thank him very much for his briefing. Ijust want
to repeat one sentence. He said that the Constitutional
Committee is a promise to the Syrian people for a new
social contract and to achieve that, we must overcome
the deep divisions in the population and build trust and
confidence. I hope the work that is now starting will
achieve this.

As others have said, this is a first step, and the proof
ofthe pudding is in the eating, so we have to see that the
Constitution actually works. It is very important that all
parties be fully committed to this process, including, in
particular, the Syrian regime. What is very important
is that Committee members be able to exercise their
mandate free from threats and intimidation, including
concerning their families.

I would agree with what Jerry just said to the effect
that the Council should accompany this process. The
representative of Kuwait has proposed that we prepare
a statement; Germany would support a statement by
the Council endorsing the work of the Committee and
giving more weight to what has been achieved. Of
course, this is not the only thing we need. We hope that
the establishment of the Committee will now allow the
door to be opened to a broader political process - and
here I can only echo what others, including Jerry and
the representative of Poland, have said - that in this
political process, a political solution can be achieved in
this conflict only if Syrian women are fully involved in
and participate in all the processes, which have to result
at some stage in free, fair and credible elections.

Again, I would like to echo what many have
said before. As Geir said, it is now time for action. I
think that the release from prison of women, children,
handicapped persons and the elderly would send a very
good signal and contribute to this new social contract.
I would also underline that accountability for all the
crimes that have been committed in the country remains
important; we cannot allow impunity to continue or to
gain ground.

Let me end briefly by echoing what my British
colleague said earlier: that we, including Kuwait,
Belgium and Germany, tried very hard to get the
Idlib draft resolution (S/2019/756) adopted here (see S/PV.8623). It was a very simple draft that asked that
all counter-terrorism measures respect international
humanitarian law; I must say that it was very sad that
China and Russia vetoed it, given that 12 countries stood
firmly behind it and wanted to send this humanitarian
message to the people of Idlib.

