The President (spoke in French): I shall now make a statement in my capacity as representative of Belgium. We are very concerned about the situation in Haiti. The political impasse has contributed to a socioeconomic and humanitarian crisis that is hitting the most vulnerable hard. Belgium stresses the importance of political responsibility and urgently calls for an inclusive and open dialogue with a view to organizing free, fair and transparent elections. According to a United Nations survey, nine out of ten Haitians support dialogue. That is a strong message to the political class. Haitian civil society organizations are playing a constructive role, and we commend such organizations as the Fondasyon Je Klere for their important work. The 2018-2019 demonstrations have demonstrated the Haitian people's expectations of good governance and the fight against corruption. This strong involvement of the Haitian people must be taken into account through social dialogue. The Government must address the root causes of instability and poverty in the country. All parties must refrain from violence and resolve disputes by peaceful means. Political negotiations should be based on the broad consensus that Haiti needs constitutional and structural reforms to provide economic opportunities for its people and improve the legitimacy of its public institutions. Impunity and insecurity are some of the main sources of frustration. The judiciary needs to be reformed, corruption must be combated and human rights protection improved. Only then can the political elite regain the trust of the population.We note that the Haitian National Police is working in difficult circumstances. There is a need to further strengthen monitoring and accountability systems. Intimidation and attacks against journalists and civil society representatives must stop, and gang violence must be urgently addressed. Noting the attack on the offices of the Fondasyon Je Klere management yesterday, we remind the Haitian authorities of the importance of protecting the voices of civil society from reprisals. The prevalence of sexual and _ gender-based violence remains alarming. It is therefore vital to put an end to impunity, and we call for urgent judicial follow-up on the inquiries into the massacres, namely those committed in La Saline and Bel Air, and into the allegations of corruption concerning the PetroCaribe funding scheme. We welcome the fact that the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights are attaching great importance to this issue. We are encouraged by the progress made in the validation of the national action plan for human rights. Concerning the work of the United Nations, we support the work of BINUH and of the agencies and funds present in Haiti. The transition towards a new institutional presence in Haiti must be a gradual one, and we call on the Haitian parties to make full use of the mission's good offices. We encourage BINUH to work closely not only with other international stakeholders, including the European Union, but also with Haitian civil society. We eagerly await the completion of the integrated strategic framework. The indicators proposed by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2020/123) will allow us to monitor the progress that the country is making in the key areas of the mission's mandate. In conclusion, Belgium reiterates its commitment to strive alongside the people and the Government of Haiti team to bring about a democratic, peaceful and safe future for the country. We now await tangible measures from the authorities to resolve the political crisis. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.
