Mrs. Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I am
pleased to see Mexico and you, Sir, in the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of April. Your
extensive experience and well-known skill guarantee
the productive and effective management of the work
of this organ.

I also wish to express my appreciation to
Ambassador Jorge Urbina, Permanent Representative
of Costa Rica, for having led the Council mission to
Haiti. His report in that connection contains important
items of information.

(spoke in English)

I also wish to express my delegation's
appreciation for the work that is being done in Haiti by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Hedi Annabi, as well as for Mr. Annabi's briefing
this morning.

Brazil concurs with the key assessment of the
Secretary-General in his latest report on Haiti
(S/2009/129), that despite progress in areas such as
political dialogue and elections, extension of State
authority, the strengthening of security, rule of law and
human rights, there has been a marked deterioration in
the living conditions of the population. In addition,
achievements in the area of security are still fragile.

That assessment corroborates Brazil's View that it
is necessary to maintain the present configuration and
mandate of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), while emphasizing the need for
the international community to support domestic
efforts to improve the socio-economic situation in the
country. Haitians have primary responsibility for and
full ownership of their country's development.
However, they continue to need our unwavering
solidarity and support.

As is widely known, MINUSTAH and the Haitian
authorities have cooperated to dramatically improve
security in the country. Areas of Port-au-Prince and
other cities that were dominated by gangs are now
under the authority of the State, and their inhabitants
can live without fear of violence. However, the relative
fragility of such gains demonstrates that more work is
needed to make them fully sustainable. A key
component of the strategy to achieve that goal is the
reform and strengthening of the Haitian National
Police (PNH) as well as of the judiciary and the
correctional system. Brazil and several other countries
are assisting or preparing to assist the Haitian
Government in these crucial tasks. There is optimism
that the PNH will reach the quantitative and qualitative
goals that have been established, but for this to happen
staying the course is essential. These endeavours are
part of a larger effort to continue investing in capacity-
building so as to endow the country with the
institutional tools it needs to consolidate stability. All
bilateral and multilateral assistance in this regard
should be enhanced at this crucial juncture.

In recent months, the Secretary-General has
redoubled his efforts to attract international attention
and investment to Haiti. His recent Visit, alongside
former President Clinton, testifies to the fact that the
Secretary-General fully shares the view that security
measures alone cannot solve the root causes of Haiti's
problems. As a country that has long maintained that
long-term stability in Haiti needs a combination of
security, national reconciliation and development,
Brazil can only applaud such initiatives.

The sad statistics about poverty in the country are
well known. Reversing them requires that the Haitian
Government and its numerous partners jointly intensify
efforts to overcome the challenges faced by Haitians in
their daily lives. The donor conference to be held in
Washington on 14 April is a unique opportunity for
furthering coordination among stakeholders and for
raising additional resources. The Collier report and the
national strategy document for growth and poverty
reduction provide guidance for formulating and
implementing projects with short-term results.

Financial constraints on donor countries are
currently significant as they themselves struggle with
diminishing revenues. But let us not forget that Haiti's
needs are pressing and very significant. In a time of
crisis, the poorest within and among nations are the
ones most adversely affected. We must not withdraw
our helping hand precisely when they need it most.
Active leadership will be required on our part to ensure
continued commitment to Haiti and its efforts to
address the basic needs of its population.

For Brazil's part, President Lula and Minister for
Foreign Affairs Celso Amorim have, time and again,
reaffirmed our commitment to assist Haiti on its path to
stability and development. This approach sustains our
firm engagement with MINUSTAH. Our troops will
remain in Haiti as long as Haitian authorities and the
international community deem it necessary.

We were pleased to hear this morning the
acknowledgement by Security Council members of the
contribution made by the Force Commander,
General Santos Cruz, and by the troops and policemen
in MINUSTAH. The new Force Commander, General
Floriano Peixoto Vieira Neto, will assume his functions
shortly. We are confident that he will provide the same
quality of leadership as his predecessors.

Our commitment to Haiti also translates into
bilateral and trilateral cooperation projects in a wide
gamut of areas, such as agriculture, fisheries, education
and energy generation.

The coming elections for the senate are crucial,
not only to consolidate Haiti's institutions, but also to
facilitate the legislative work in the upper house of
parliament and therefore help to advance the needed
reforms. Brazil contributed $500,000 for the
organization of the electoral process, which we are
confident will be transparent, fair and credible.

The Brazilian Government is closely following
the current efforts by the Haitian Government to
prepare institutional reforms. We trust that an inclusive
process of consultations will allow Haitian society as a
whole to reach the necessary agreements. Effective and
sustainable democratic governance is a goal to be
pursued with great determination and even a sense of
urgency everywhere, Haiti being no exception.

The upcoming senatorial elections and the donor
conference constitute two major opportunities for Haiti
to reaffirm ownership of its political and socio-
economic development processes. We call upon the
Security Council to send an unequivocal message of its
continuous support for Haiti and for the work being
done by MINUSTAH.

