Mr. Michon (spoke in French) (France): I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly, and Ambassador Costa Filho, who chairs the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings. I would also like to welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Niger, which is currently chairing the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). First of all, I would like to welcome the holding of the presidential elections last November and December. After a period of great uncertainty, the conduct of the polls in peaceful conditions was a major step forward. I would like to commend the responsible attitude of all of Guinea-Bissau's civilian and military actors who made it possible to reach that stage. These positive developments also owe much to the support of the international community in its various components, and I would like to pay tribute in particular to the States of ECOWAS, whose unfailing political, economic and military commitment has borne fruit and which, as we have heard, continues to remain very committed to supporting their regional partner. I also wish to commend the positive role of the Peacebuilding Commission, under the leadership of Ambassador Vieira, and now Ambassador Costa Filho, and the role of the Peacebuilding Fund projects in contributing to the current results. The developments I mentioned serve to show that all the tools we have collectively deployed to respond to this crisis, including the sanctions that have been decided by the Council, have been effective. But despite the progress, the situation in Guinea-Bissau remains fragile. We are still awaiting confirmation of the results of the presidential elections by Guinea-Bissau's Supreme Court, and we hope that the electoral process will be completed as soon as possible and in accordance with the rule of law. The current situation illustrates the extent to which the process in Guinea-Bissau remains to be consolidated. Beyond the elections, as others have said, the restoration of lasting peace and stability also requires significant progress in other areas, including the set of political reforms provided for in the Conakry Agreement of 2016, in particular the revision of the Constitution, which must now be implemented as soon as possible by the new authorities. In that context, France supports the implementation of the transition plan for the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau that we decided in the Security Council, with a view to the Office's closure at the end of the year. However, as the transfer of the Office's various activities begins to take place, we call for the mission in support of security sector reform - which is particularly crucial for the long-term stability of the country - to be effectively taken over. Finally, continued progress, as noted by several speakers, in the fight against organized crime, in particular drug trafficking, will require a strong and sustained commitment from the authorities of Guinea-Bissau, as well as continued support from the international community. We are therefore at a critical juncture, and the coming weeks should allow us to confirm that Guinea-Bissau is truly committed to the path of sustainable stabilization. The supporting role of the region and, more broadly, of the international community and the Council, will continue to be important in the period ahead, and the authorities of Guinea-Bissau can count on France's support for all those efforts.
