The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2001/294, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by a Show ofhands.

In favour:
Bangladesh, China, Colombia, France, Ireland,
Jamaica, Mali, Mauritius, Norway, Russian
Federation, Singapore, Tunisia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1347 (2001).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

Statement by the President


The President: Since this is the last public
meeting of the month and my last appearance before
the Council in my current capacity, I wish to extend to
all of the members of the Security Council and to all
delegations our sincerest thanks for their efforts in
assisting the Ukrainian presidency of the Council at all
stages of the implementation of the programme we
proposed for this month and beyond, for their spirit of
goodwill and cooperation and for their good and
thoughtful advice, even before our presidency started. I
will be leaving New York with the feeling of "mission
accomplished".

On behalf of my delegation, I also wish to thank
the Secretariat and all the departments that once again
displayed their traditional, unfailing readiness to
provide us with very useful and detailed information.
We also extend our thanks to the entire team led by
Mr. Stephanides for their advice, professionalism,
discipline and willingness to work literally 24 hours a
day, including on weekends. We are particularly
grateful for their always active and unwavering
assistance in preparations for the Ukrainian presidency.
I also wish to convey our most cordial gratitude to the
interpreters for their wonderful performance during
these long hours and days of our presidency.

I wish every success to the delegation of the
United Kingdom, which will be assuming this seat in
the coming days. They, like us, will appreciate
members' fullest cooperation.

Expression of thanks to the outgoing President


