San Marino aligns itself with the statement submitted by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict. I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important meeting, and the Secretary-General for his annual report (S/2020/525). San Marino continues to firmly believe in and support the Security Council's children and armed conflict mandate. Thanks to the resolution 1612 (2005), adopted 15 years ago, which established the monitoring and reporting mechanism and the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, we can proudly affirm that we have achieved positive results in our common cause of preventing and ending grave violations against children in armed conflict. In this regard, I would also like to thank Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter and her staff, who, with great dedication, have finalized a terrific number of action plans and commitments. Despite the successful results, we also have to recognize that great concerns remain. The number of verified violations against children is still very worrisome, while education, which should be one of our priorities, is still under attack. We are particularly worried about the impact of the coronavirus disease on vulnerable groups, such as children in armed conflicts. Some restrictive measures adopted, such as the closure of schools, inadvertently expose children to abuse, exploitation and recruitment. In addition, closed schools can easily be used for military purposes. We need to better protect safe and quality education for these children. In this regard, San Marino joined the Safe Schools Declaration, an important tool that promotes the protection of students, teachers and schools, with the aim of allowing young people to continue their education, giving them hope for their future. San Marino also recently co-sponsored General Assembly resolution 74/275, on the International Day to Protect Education from Attack. Furthermore, due to the pandemic, rehabilitation and reintegration programmes for children have been, or will have to be, put on hold. This is very worrisome, since these programmes are crucial for the well-being of these children. While humanitarian need is rising, the humanitarian space is shrinking. We are particularly concerned over the record number of incidents related to the denial of humanitarian access. The new restrictions imposed due to the pandemic risk are worsening the situation. We cannot allow this to happen: the delivery of humanitarian assistance must be guaranteed, especially now. Finally, we should not forget that, as stated in paragraph 15 of the Secretary- General's report, "[p]eace remains the most powerful means to reduce violations against children". Therefore, San Marino calls on all parties to join the Secretary- General's appeal for a global ceasefire. San Marino firmly believes that, especially during difficult times, the international community has to stay united, while fully supporting international humanitarian law and human rights law. This year marks 20 years since the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. We encourage all parties to accede this fundamental instrument for the prevention of the recruitment of child soldiers, as well as other tools, such as the Paris Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups and the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. Together we can continue to achieve positive results for our common cause: to end and prevent horrific violations against children and support their recovery and empowerment for a better and more peaceful future for all.
