Mr. Bonne (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ms. O'Brien and Mr. Fedotov for their
presentations. I would also thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2012/50).

For several years now, the Council has regularly
discussed the scourge of piracy along the Somali coast.
When Mr. Jack Lang presented his report on the legal
issues related to piracy in early 2011, there was a
general sense of urgency. Today, on the eve of the
major conference that will be held tomorrow in
London, the diagnosis remains the same. According to
statistics, the number of attacks against ships along the
Somali coast reached record levels in 2011. It is true
that the number and success rate of such attacks have
decreased over the past few months, but at what price?

We cannot continue indefinitely to support the
immense security efforts that our naval forces provide
in the waters of the region. The pirates are shifting
their base of action by virtue of our presence, while
crews taken hostage are used as human shields and are
increasingly led to land. In other terms, there has yet to
be a structural improvement. Moreover, there is no
credible solution for enticing young Somalis towards
other activities. Nor - and this is the subject of
today's discussion - has there been a consistent,
effective judicial response.

Why do we still lack an operational legal
strategy? Today's two briefings gave us the answer.
The first obstacle, which is enormous, is the absence of
Somali legislation. It is not possible to construct an
entire, efficient anti-piracy system in the region and to
organize legal cooperation without adequate Somali
legislation. The road map called upon the Federal
Transitional Government to adopt such legislation
before 18 May 2012. Today we are told that the
prospects for new legislation will be better after the
end of the transition period, when a new Parliament
will have been seated. We find that information
troubling, as it represents a new delay in drafting
legislation. Our message to the Somali authorities on
this issue is therefore be clear: progress must be made.

The legal framework in Puntland and Somaliland
are no longer operational, according to the Secretary-
General's report. One need not read between the lines
to understand that the legislative effort needed to
address the scope of the problem has not been made.

The second obstacle concerns Somali legal
capacities. We all rightly advocate a Somali solution,
but the Secretary-General's report is unambiguous. The
shortage and poor training of legal professionals, and
the security situation, including in Puntland and
Somaliland, limits the possibilities for such capacity-
building.

Given such challenges, Mr. Jack Lang proposed a
bold solution that involved creating a specialized
Somali court that would be temporarily located
elsewhere, either in Arusha, as Tanzania has agreed, or
somewhere else. I understand that there is a proposal
from Qatar on the table. There is a need to at last take a
practical decision. In the absence of a Somali court
abroad, we are in effect forcing the countries of the
region to bear the lion's share of the legal work.
Kenya, Tanzania, Seychelles and Mauritius should be
commended for their contribution. We will carefully
consider the Secretariat's proposals for capacity-
building in those countries and for creating specialized
courts where none exist. However, it is unreasonable to
think that the countries of the regions can alone
address the full breadth of the problem. Let us not lose
sight of the Somalian solution. It continues to be
relevant.

We estimate that 75 per cent of the pirates
captured are released without prosecution. Others have
estimated the rate is 40 per cent. The Secretariat, in its
report, has proposed a study on the scope and root
causes of this phenomenon, but to us it seems
sufficient to read the report, which explains the legal
uncertainties, to understand the reason for this
phenomenon.

The adoption of effective Somali legislation must
be a priority. All relevant actors, including the United
Nations Office of Legal Affairs, the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the United
Nations Office for Drugs and Crime, must follow up on
that issue and, if necessary, call on the Council in the
event that new obstacles appear. Again, without the
necessary legislation, we can build nothing sustainable.

Our efforts must also focus on strengthening
judicial and prison capacities, not just on the latter
aspect. France believes we must sustain a genuine
Somalization of the judicial treatment of piracy, which
cannot be boiled down to building more prison
capacity in Somaliland and Puntland.

Beyond the training of judges and legal
professionals, as is being undertaken by UNDP with
support from France, we believe it may be useful to
provide assistance to prosecutors in building cases. The
centre in Seychelles must maintain direct contact with
the Somali authorities. Without engaging international
judges or prosecutors, it is still possible to dispatch
advisors to work with Somali magistrates, while taking
due account of security issues. These advisors may not
reside permanently in Somalia. We are ready to work
with members of the Council and the Secretariat to
make rapid and concrete progress.

