Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like, first of all, to welcome the presence at this meeting
of Mr. Kellenberger, the new President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and to thank
him for his important statement. I wish to express to him
Argentina's gratitude and constant support for his
institution's work.

I would like to thank Minister Axworthy for his
presence here in the Council and, through him, to convey
my gratitude to the Government of Canada for having
organized this open debate in which, in addition to the
members of the Council observers and other Member
States are participating. I would also like to commend his
country on the efforts it is making to enhance the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. In our
understanding, this is one of the topics of greatest concern

 

on the Council's agenda, and it calls for an urgent response
on our part.

Recent experience has demonstrated that civilians are
no longer merely the victims of armed conflict; they have
become the targets of the belligerent factions. It has become
common to consider the murder, terrorization, rape and
expulsion of the civilian population from their homes a
military tactic. Sierra Leone, Angola, East Timor and
Kosovo provide examples of a long list of atrocities.

The Council has repudiated these misdeeds on
numerous occasions, but it is not enough for us to condemn
this aberrant conduct; we must find a way to ensure that it
does not recur.

As we said last September in discussing this same
topic in the context of strengthening legal protection for
civilians, the international community has endowed itself
with many important instruments. Despite their limitations,
it can be said that we have developed an adequate body of
law to confront these situations.

Regrettably, this level of development in jurisprudence
is not matched by a similar level of compliance. We must
focus our efforts on shrinking this yawning gap. In this
regard, we wish to reiterate our support for the
recommendations of the Secretary-General, of 8 September
1999, directed at strengthening legal protection; in our
View, these recommendations will be very useful to our
task.

Whereas the international community, as we have just
said, has legal instruments to confront the issue of legal
protection of civilians, the same developments have not
occurred in the field of physical protection of civilians.
Hence the obvious and urgent need to tackle this problem
in order to fill this vacuum.

The Secretary-General's report contains an ambitious
set of recommendations to improve the physical protection
of civilians in armed conflicts, and these relate to various
areas of the Council's work. Many of them can and should
be extensively developed. This is crucial to the concept of
human security and to the new realities that prevail in
armed conflicts.

We are not going to recite a comprehensive listing of
the recommendations of the Secretary-General, but we
would like to draw attention to some aspects that seem
important to us.

First of all, there must be a smooth flow of
communication between the Secretariat and the Council
so that this body will have access to all the information
required to enable it to respond as soon as possible,
including by taking preventive action. Similarly, we must
explore all the possible modalities of cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations.

The Council must have at its disposal a clear set of
rules for the protection of civilians when considering
mandates for peacekeeping operations. These rules must
include measures for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, measures to control
small arms and light weapons and means of controlling
media that incite people to genocide, crimes against
humanity and other grave violations of humanitarian law.

At another level, we are concerned that in many
cases of conflict, access for humanitarian assistance to the
civilian population is denied, in violation of international
law, and personnel providing assistance are attacked.
Many of these attacks, far from being accidental, are
determined specifically by the fact that the personnel
belong to the United Nations or are linked in some
manner to the Organization. This is why we support, as
we said last February, the Secretary-General's
recommendation that we expand the scope of application
of the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations
and Associated Personnel by means of an additional
protocol.

Many of the recommendations that we have just
mentioned concerning the physical protection of civilians
in armed conflict have been reflected in the draft
resolution presented by Canada, which we fully support.

The adoption of resolution 1265 (1999) last
September constituted a fundamental step forward. The
working group created as a follow-up measure has now
finished its deliberations and has presented us with the
results of its work. The Council must take on board these
results and continue its work. This open debate and the
adoption of the draft resolution will be another step in the
right direction. It is time for the Council to take the lead
and set seriously in motion the mechanisms and measures
proposed in the recommendations of the Secretary-
General.

