The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Cuba, Egypt, India, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Norway, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, the
Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia and Yemen,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gillerman
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Alvaro de Soto, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. De Soto to take a seat at the Council
table.

I should also like to inform the Council that I
have received a letter dated 20 July 2005 from the
Charge d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Observer
Mission of Palestine to the United Nations, which will
be issued as document S/2005/472 and which reads as
follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Charge d'affaires of
the Permanent Observer Mission of Palestine to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting
of the Security Council being held tomorrow,
Thursday, 21 July 2005, regarding the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the
Permanent Observer Mission of Palestine to participate
in this meeting in accordance with the rules of
procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Barghouti
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: I should also like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 20 July 2005
from the Permanent Representative of Algeria to the
United Nations, which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request you to allow,
pursuant to rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure, His Excellency Mr. Yahya
Mahmassani to participate in the public debate on
the Palestinian question which is to be held in the
Security Council on Thursday, 21 July 2005."

That letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2005/471.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 to His Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Mahmassani took the seat reservedfor him at
the side ofthe Council Chamber.


The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 20 July 2005
from the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
which reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, I have the
honour to request that I be invited to participate
in the debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, under rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council."

In accordance with past practice in this matter, I
propose that the Council extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Paul Badji
took the seat reserved for him at the side of the
Council Chamber


The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 20 July 2005
from the Permanent Representative of Yemen to the
United Nations which reads as follows:

"I have the honour, in my capacity as
Chairman of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC) Group at the United Nations,
to request that the Security Council extend an
invitation to Mr. Ahmad Hajihosseini, Charge
d'affaires of the permanent observer mission of
the OIC to the United Nations, to participate in
the meeting of the Security Council on 21 July
2005 to consider the recent developments in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including the
Palestinian question, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council."

That letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2005/473.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
His Excellency Mr. Ahmad Hajihosseini.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President,

Mr. Hajihosseini took the seat reservedfor him at

the side of the Council Chamber.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in response to the request
contained in a letter dated 19 July 2005 from the
Charge d'affaires of the Permanent Mission of Kuwait
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, contained in document S/2005/469.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Alvaro de Soto, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General. I now give
him the floor.


