Mr. Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): At the outset, Sir,
allow me to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July. It is the hope of the States members of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) that you will continue to bring the wealth
of your experience and knowledge to bear in steering
the affairs of the Council during your tenure.

The recent Security Council mission to seven
countries in West Africa is yet another manifestation of
the support and concern of the Council for matters
concerning our region. It lends further credence to the
view that the concerted and dedicated efforts of the
international community and the United Nations in
peace operations and the provision of development
assistance to the region represent a viable prospect of
West Africa breaking out of the cycle of conflict and
poverty in order to achieve sustainable peace and
development.

ECOWAS is gratified to note the Council
mission's observation relating to the general significant
progress in peace-building efforts in the region.

The sustained post-conflict peace-consolidation
process in Sierra Leone, in spite of continuing
challenges, is very much welcome. Although the
situation in Sierra Leone has improved considerably,
ECOWAS is still convinced of the need to keep a
residual United Nations force in the country in order to
consolidate peace, enhance security and pursue
ongoing capacity-building programmes. After renewed
calls by ECOWAS heads of State or Government and
the recommendations of the twenty-first report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) (S/2004/228), the Security
Council, in resolution 1537 (2004), extended the
mandate of UNAMSIL until 30 September 2004. It also
decided to keep a residual force in the country with
effect from 1 January 2005, for an initial period of six
months. The issue of the continued retention of a
residual force to consolidate gains merits the
appropriate attention. We are of the opinion that the
United Nations mandate should not come to an end
until all outstanding issues, including the Special
Court, have been thrashed out.

As is generally known, youth unemployment is
especially grave in countries coming out of conflict.
Sierra Leone, therefore, needs the assistance of the
international community to enable it to provide jobs for
the young people who have completed the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme. The absence of jobs for such young people
seriously jeopardizes efforts to consolidate peace in the
country.

We further concur with the mission's
recommendation that donors, particularly those who
are yet to do so, should make the necessary effort to
contribute to support the Special Court for Sierra
Leone. Such continued support from the international
community is needed to enable the State authority of
that sister country to effectively assume full
responsibility for national security by contributing to
the restructuring and strengthening of the security
sector, even as the UNAMSIL adjustment, drawdown
and withdrawal plan takes its course.

On Guinea-Bissau, due notice has been taken of
the mission's recommendation that ECOWAS should
include that country in its regional policies of
containing the proliferation of small arms and other
security threats in the region. In this regard, it should
be noted that heads of State and Government of
ECOWAS, at a meeting held in Abuja in March 2003,
adopted a declaration on a regional approach to peace
and security in which they reaffirmed their
commitment to abide by the ECOWAS Moratorium on
the Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of Small
Arms and Light Weapons. They also, inter alia, adopted
a code of conduct for the implementation of the
Moratorium and the Protocol Relating to the
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management,
Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security. To date, the
implementation of the ECOWAS Moratorium has made
considerable advance, even though a lot still remains to
be accomplished.

With presidential elections scheduled to take
place in a year's time, the international community
should continue its support for efforts to promote
democratic rule in Guinea-Bissau. Also, the country
continues to experience serious problems of payment
arrears and faces the challenge of economic recovery.
The United Nations system, development partners and
the donor community should respond generously to
address the fragile situation in Guinea-Bissau by
providing requisite support to strengthen its national
institutions and address broad and inclusive political
and socio-economic needs.

We therefore wish to add our voice to the call on
the International Monetary Fund to consider the
resumption of a programme for Guinea-Bissau. We also
wish to appeal to the Security Council to join forces
with the Economic and Social Council in calling on
donors to participate in the round table being organized
by the United Nations Development Programme,
tentatively scheduled for November 2004.
The progress made by Liberia since the National
Transitional Government took office and the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) deployed in
October 2003 elicits our commendation. Continued and
deepened support by the international community to
help consolidate the burgeoning gains and effectively
meet the challenges of reconstruction and peace-
building cannot be overstressed. It is with concern that
ECOWAS notes that rehabilitation and reconstruction
efforts appear to have taken a back bench. For
example, reports reaching us indicate that the United
Nations brought the number of days devoted to
rehabilitation and reintegration to five days instead of
three weeks, in spite of the help required with the
rehabilitation of drug addicts, criminals, etc. Relatedly,
as elections are fast approaching, there are still
problems with the repatriation of refugees, and, as
things stand, potentially about 300,000 refugees will be
disenfranchised.

We are informed that so far only a small amount
out of the $520 million pledged for Liberia last
February has been realized. ECOWAS cannot over-
emphasize the imperative need for the international
community to redeem the pledges made.

The concerns raised in the Security Council
mission report over the observed stalemate in the peace
process in Cote d'Ivoire should not go without
comment. The mission's recommendation seeking
appropriate compliance by the parties to the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement converges with ECOWAS's
position on the issue. The substantial contribution of
ECOWAS in maintaining peace and security in C6te
d'Ivoire and the crucial role played by the United
Nations Operation in cote d'Ivoire (ONUCI) in
support of the Ivorian peace process, through efforts
aimed at building confidence among the contending
parties and creating conditions conducive to the return
of normalcy in Cote d'Ivoire, have continued unabated.

In this connection, it should be pointed out that
there have been some positive developments since the
visit of the Security Council mission. As part of
mediation efforts deployed by the leaders of ECOWAS,
a meeting at the highest level on C6te d'Ivoire,
involving the United Nations Secretary-General and
several African heads of State, mainly from West
Africa, was held in Addis Ababa on 6 July 2004, in the
margins of the recent third ordinary session of the
African Union. It aimed at building upon previous
efforts, the most recent of which was the ECOWAS
mini-summit held in Abuja on 20 June 2004, to resume
the political dialogue in Cote d'Ivoire and the activities
of the Government of National Reconciliation. Among
other things, the participants decided that a high-level
meeting of all Ivorian political forces, including
President Laurent Gbagbo and Prime Minister Seydou
Diarra, will be convened in Accra on 29 July 2004 in
order to consolidate consensus over all the essential
issues facing the peace process.

To ensure the success of the envisaged meeting,
the following confidence-building measures were to be
undertaken immediately. President Gbagbo would meet
with the leaders of all Ivorian political forces to
facilitate the resolution of outstanding matters.
Legislative texts envisaged under the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement would be enacted before the end of July. If
necessary, the President of the Republic should
convene an extraordinary session of the parliament.
The Joint Commissions between Cote d'Ivoire and
Burkina Faso on one hand, and Cote d'Ivoire and Mali
on the other hand, would be activated. The heads of
State of Burkina Faso, Cote d'Ivoire and Mali will hold
a tripartite meeting to prepare the ground for a
successful Accra summit on 29 July 2004.

ECOWAS and ONUCI will undertake the
necessary follow-up in preparation for the upcoming
Accra summit. In this connection, I wish to assure the
Council that arrangements are well in hand to hold the
summit, and participation is expected to be at the
highest level.

It may be further noted, by way of example, that,
prior to the just-mentioned mediation effort, in June
2004 the ECOWAS Defence and Security Commission
had approved the establishment of a standby unit of
6,500 highly trained and well-equipped soldiers that
could be deployed immediately in response to any
crisis or threat to peace and security in West Africa.
The unit will include a rapid reaction component of
1,500 soldiers to be known as the ECOWAS Task
Force. It is expected that the rapid reaction force will
be boosted by a further 3,500 troops, forming a
brigade, while the remaining 1,500 would constitute
the reserve force.

Against this backdrop of cautious optimism,
justified concern and constructive action aimed at
achieving redress of the problems bedevilling the
region, we share the Council's sentiments on achieving
a coherent strategy for attaining transborder solutions
to related issues spanning the whole spectrum of peace
operations from conflict prevention to peace-building.

ECOWAS is committed to meeting the challenges
by ensuring, among other things, full operationalization
of the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management, Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security;
the promotion of democracy, good governance and
human rights in all member States; the organization of
democratic elections and the promotion of economic
growth and sustainable development.

To conclude, I wish to restate the gratitude of
ECOWAS to the Security Council for its continued
efforts at seeking enduring solutions to the myriad of
problems that have been visited on the West Africa
region and have further undermined peace, security and
development for the past one and a half decades.
ECOWAS stands united with the Security Council in
the unrelenting quest for sustainable peace and
development in the region.

