Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) (spoke in Russian): First,
allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month, and I thank you for convening this meeting of
the Security Council devoted to one of the most
pressing questions for humanity today.

Tajikistan is fully dedicated to the extremely
important cause of cooperation with the United Nations
and its Member States in combating international
terrorism. For well known reasons, an understanding of
the need for an active fight against terrorism was
formed in Tajikistan even before the barbarous attacks
on the United States on 11 September, which the
Government of Tajikistan has condemned in the
strongest terms. As long ago as November 1999, our
country's Parliament adopted a special law on counter-
terrorism. Today Tajikistan is a party to most universal
international conventions in this area of international
cooperation.

In the fight against international terrorism, we are
continuing to interact with other States parties to the
Treaty on Collective Security and the members of the
Shanghai Organization of Cooperation. The adoption of
resolution 1373 (2001) by the Security Council, of
course, provided a powerful impetus to this fight
worldwide. The resolution served as yet one more
proof of the international community's determination
to cooperate closely to prevent and suppress terrorist
acts.

It is extremely important not only that this
resolution strengthen the instruments existing within
the United Nations system to combat terrorism, but
also that it play a decisive role in developing a global
mechanism to counter terrorism. The Security Council
has assumed the role of leader in this matter.

It is noteworthy that in the short span of 90 days,
the Security Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee
has managed to complete many of its tasks. We
consider that the effectiveness of the Committee's work
is due to a great extent to the purposeful, consistent and
very energetic action of its Chairman, Ambassador Sir
Jeremy Greenstock. We reaffirm our profound interest
in the Committee and in expanding cooperation with it,
including through receiving advisory and technical
assistance. Tajikistan is wholly dedicated to the cause
of fully implementing its obligations and
responsibilities under Security Council resolution 1373
(2001).

In order to harmonize all the legislation of the
Republic of Tajikistan with the Security Council
resolution, a well-developed and very specific special
decree was adopted by the Government. The
coordinating body responsible for the implementation
of the provisions of the Council resolution was the
country's Ministry of Security. By a separate decree,
the President of Tajikistan, Emomali Rakhmonov, the
Central Bank was instructed to take measures,
including the prompt freezing of funds and other
financial assets of persons and organizations that carry
out, participate in or assist in the commission of
terrorist acts.

In the context of counter-terrorism, Tajikistan is
giving close attention to further intensifying the battle
against illegal drug trafficking. We are supported and
assisted in this work by the United Nations Drug
Control Programme. Recent events have again shown
that counter-terrorism is one of the most important
problems facing humanity today. We share the view
that the struggle will be long and difficult. A leading
role in counter-terrorism will continue to lie with the
United Nations and the Security Council. Tajikistan,
for its part, will make every possible additional effort
to expand cooperation with all interested States,
including within the United Nations, in order to make a
tangible contribution to the common fight against
international terrorism.

