Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks Under-Secretary-
General Pascoe for his briefing.

Recently there have been signs that tension is
easing in the Middle East situation, and this could give
rise to new opportunities. The League of Arab States
has held a summit meeting, at which it decided to
relaunch the Arab Peace Initiative. President Abbas of
the Palestinian National Authority and Prime Minister
Olmert of Israel have begun to hold regular meetings. The
international community has intensified its good offices on
Middle East issues. This undoubtedly constitutes a good
start for reviving the Middle East peace process, which has
been stalled for many years. China considers that, given
this situation, all parties should seize this historic
opportunity to step up their cooperation, actively encourage
peace and engage in talks, so as to promote the
achievement of new progress in the Middle East peace
process. For the present we should focus our attention on
the following areas.

First, Palestine and Israel should establish mutual
trust and accommodate each other's concerns. Such
trust has been sorely lacking in recent years, and this
has severely hindered progress in the Middle East
peace process. There is an urgent need to take
advantage of reduced tension and increase efforts to
heighten confidence and dissipate mistrust. Israel
should halt its construction of settlements and the
separation wall, while Palestinians should end rocket
attacks against Israel. The two parties should also find
an early solution to the issue of releasing each other's
prisoners.

Secondly, the two parties should work towards
the early resumption of full talks. The leaders of both
parties should fully utilize the biweekly meeting
mechanism to address, first of all, issues regarding the
living conditions of both peoples, which is their
primary concern. They should seek an appropriate
solution to security and development issues of concern
to both parties, and should reduce their peoples' mutual
hatred and establish a harmonious, positive
environment. Both parties should seize this opportunity
to return to comprehensive talks.

Thirdly, the international community should
support the Arab Peace Initiative, which Arab countries
decided to relaunch at their Summit in March. That
strategic choice illustrates their expectation and desire
for peace and demonstrates their commitment and
willingness to work comprehensively, through peaceful
means and in accordance with relevant international
agreements, to achieve a resolution of their disputes
and conflicts with Israel. That is a positive message for
Israel and the international community. We believe that
the Arab-Israeli conflict can be resolved only through
peace talks between Arab countries and Israel. The two
parties should work together to improve relations and
enhance the prospects for contact.

Fourthly, the international community should
help the parties concerned to achieve speedy
improvement in the humanitarian situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories. As a result of
economic sanctions and the embargo, the humanitarian
and economic situation in the occupied territories is
deteriorating, with people living in disastrous
conditions. The international community should take
substantive steps to ease the humanitarian crisis faced
by the Palestinian people.

China is also very concerned about developments
in the situation in Lebanon. We hope that all political
parties in Lebanon can enjoy unity, resolve their
internal differences through negotiations and reach
agreement on such major issues as the soonest possible
establishment of a special tribunal to consider the
Hariri case. Maintaining national unity, independence
and territorial integrity and achieving unity among the
people, national harmony and development are entirely
the responsibility of the Lebanese people. We hope that
Lebanon will make progress in achieving political
reconciliation. The international community can offer
the necessary assistance, but too much pressure and
intervention will only add fuel to the fire, and will not
be conducive to solving problems.

China has always firmly believed that the
Palestinian-Israeli issue can be properly resolved only
on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the principle of land for peace and political

negotiations to establish an independent Palestinian
State living side by side peacefully with Israel. That is
in the interest of the peoples of Palestine, Israel and all
the other countries of the Middle East. It will also
facilitate the achievement of peace and security in the
region. China will continue to support all efforts that
can contribute to the realization of that goal. We also
favour a greater role for the Security Council in that
regard.

