Ms. Citaku: As always, it is an honour to be with
the Security Council today. Three months ago I was
in the Chamber on the eve of the tenth anniversary of
Kosovo's independence (see S/PV.8176). It has now
been a decade of statehood for Kosovo, and much longer
than that since the end of the war. We have been through
a lot, beginning with a long period of oppression and
systematic human rights violations prior to the war and
culminating with ethnic cleansing. Despite the dire
circumstances and daunting challenges, we never gave
up. With hope in our hearts we persevered, and we have
managed to rebuild our lives from scratch.

The past three months have been marked by the
anniversary of our independence and by reminders of
the steep price we had to pay for our freedom. Every
day there is a commemoration. Every day a new
memorial is unveiled. From Meja to Cusk to Abria, in
towns and villages all across Kosovo, people are united
in remembering the noble sacrifices of the fallen.

Approximately 30,000 young Kosovars will
graduate from high school this year. They will be the
first generation of graduates who have not witnessed
the horrors of war. They are the first generation of
Kosovars to be born in a free country, to grow up
without knowing the fear of oppression and without
being scarred by war. They have no fear, because
freedom is all they know. They were born free, and
free they shall remain. What they demand from us is
a better future, better quality of education and better
jobs. It is what they deserve. However, they also
demand truth about the past. In order to truly move on,
they require closure.

But truth and reconciliation cannot be built on
false narratives or on desperate attempts to establish
moral parity. Every time I come here, to this Chamber,
I feel compelled to remind Council members of our
story, of what happened in the heart of Europe not
more than 20 years ago: a brutal war that left hundreds
of thousands massacred, missing or raped. All those
atrocities - from Croatia to Bosnia to Kosovo - were
committed by the Serbian State machinery. I am
repeating these facts today, and I will continue to
repeat them, because that is the only truth. It is very
disturbing to hear the creative revisionist history of
our northern neighbours. Their narrative is a serious
attempt to rewrite the past, and as such has no place in
this Chamber, or anywhere else for that matter, and it is
about time that we put an end to it.

The States Members of the United Nations, our dear
friends, should recognize the truth. This year Kosovo
was omitted from the report of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2018/250).
International humanitarian organizations and local
non-governmental organizations have collected an
estimated 20,000 accounts of systematic rape and
torture perpetrated by Serbian forces during the war in
Kosovo. Despite the existence of substantial evidence,
no perpetrators of those crimes have ever been brought
to justice. Kosovo's experience with the survivors
of conflict-related sexual violence and its efforts
to address that issue are a valuable example to the
global community. Beyond politics, we are speaking
about basic human rights, which are expected to be
respected universally and unconditionally. By turning
a blind eye to those crimes we are creating the space
for convicted war criminals to not only be represented,
but to also abuse the public platform, and that has been
happening in our neighbourhood. This is not a matter
of my personal opinion, it is a concern raised by the EU
Human Rights Commissioner, who said that

"In recent years, war criminals from Serbia
have been promoted as heroes and role models by
Serbian Government officials, political parties and
the media [and] this is unacceptable for an EU
candidate country".

No wonder we see initiatives for the erection of
monuments to a dictator like Slobodan Milosevic.

I ask the Council, what does this say about the
identity of a society, let alone about the normalization of
relations with its neighbours? Surely, it says a lot about
a commitment to the falsification of the facts when
attempts are made to carve dictators in the stone. In this
toxic environment, the infringement of free speech by
the State feels very normal, as do the systematic threats
to Kosovo Serbs who want to join the Kosovo Security
Force or the Kosovo police. Several local Serbs from
Kosovo were arrested in Serbia because they joined the
Kosovo Security Force.

Let me be very clear on this matter: Serbia does
not have a veto on the establishment of the Kosovo
armed forces. That is a decision to be made only by
the institutions of the Republic of Kosovo. With regard
to the Serbs of Kosovo, it is evident that those people
just want to live better lives and be integrated into their
country. Nevertheless, their aspirations are steadily
quashed by a Belgrade that disrupts on all possible
levels, as they do on most issues.

Just the other day, the Serbian Government banned
a Kosovo karate team from entering Serbia, thereby
preventing our kids from taking part in the European
Karate Championships being held in Novi Sad. Kids
were banned. The Council knows how much effort
Kosovo made to become a member of all sports
federations, and how much joy it brings to our nation to
see our sportswomen and men playing and competing
on behalf of their country. Nonetheless, even today,
we still have to face all sorts of arbitrary barriers
being put up by Serbia. However, in the spirit of true
sportsmanship, young Kosovar athletes did not turn to
anger or hatred, even during one of the most difficult
and heartbreaking moments for them. Instead, they
sent their best wishes to all other athletes who went on
to compete.

That is not an isolated incident. It is part ofa pattern
of obstructionism exemplified by a statement made on
23 March by the Serbian Minister of the Interior, in
which he indicated that he did not want to see clashes
between fans and police over things they do not believe
in and are contrary to their interests.

Unfortunately, it seems that with its decisions
the Government of Serbia is supporting only the
violent and destructive part of Serbian society, at the
expense of those who value peace, support dialogue
and cooperation and want to work, play and compete
together. As stated jointly by the Youth Initiative for
Human Rights in Kosovo and Serbia, it is violence
that should be stopped, not sports. With complete
confidence, I can add that sports was the sole motivation
for our kids when they travelled to the border - they
had no political aim whatsoever.

When we are given the chance to be present, to
participate, to play and to compete, Kosovo excels,
thanks to our athletes, artists and activists alike, who
shine brightly and showcase our core values. Such is
the case with Feride Rushiti, who joined the ranks of
10 extraordinary women from around the world to be
decorated with the International Women of Courage
Award this year. Dr. Rushiti is the founder and
Executive Director of the Kosova Rehabilitation Centre
for Torture Victims. Through almost two decades of
research and advocacy, Dr. Rushiti has secured access
to health care andjustice for the civilian victims of the
Kosovo war.

Our athletes are not the only ones to be turned
away by the Serbian Government. A group of members
of Kosovo's Parliament was recently banned from
attending a regional conference in Belgrade - on
Europe Day, of all days. The conference was supposed
to foster regional cooperation and European integration.

The commitment of the Government of Kosovo
to developing democratic, inclusive and effective
governance that will serve the people of Kosovo
without discrimination begins with the strong rule
of law. Our institutions are committed to the rule of
law. They are addressing the matter with a concrete
approach, through the enforcement and implementation
of the rule of law, accountability, effective institutional
responsiveness and transparency. Our Government is
focused on, and committed to, the full implementation
of the Stabilization and Association Agreement and
European Union (EU)-related reforms guided by the
European reform agenda.

Kosovo's Parliament has now voted on the border
demarcation agreement with Montenegro, thereby
fulfilling the last remaining condition for visa-free travel
within the Schengen Zone. While it was unfortunate
to see that Serbian members of Kosovo's Parliament,
under the constant threats and pressure from Belgrade,
declined to vote in favour of the agreement, this is just
another demonstration of Belgrade's manipulation of
Kosovo Serbs. Serbs in Kosovo should be allowed to
make their own choices, without threats from, or fear
of, Belgrade.

Over the course of the past month, a number of
Serbian Government officials have taken a series of
intentional actions that violate the agreement between
our two countries, which regulates the visits of
officials and establishes procedures for such occasions.
That campaign culminated with a public event hosted
in Kosovo and attended by Marko Durie. That was a
clear violation, which was preceded by and followed by
distinctly inflammatory rhetoric documented by public
statements contrary to the spirit of normalization,
dialogue, integration, peace and stability. As events
unfolded, Kosovo police acted with professionalism
throughout the entire process. Duric's detention and
subsequent arrest are standard procedure for law
enforcement agencies. They are an inevitable outcome
in response to any instance of such actions.

However, that particular violation was not an
isolated act. Similar tactics flouting pre-established
procedure and defiant of the authority of the Kosovo
institutions have been employed by Serbian authorities
on various occasions. I must therefore reiterate that
Kosovo does not tolerate provocation and is committed
to refraining from provocation itself. Serbian officials
must understand that Kosovo can be entered only with
the permission of Kosovo authorities. Should they fail
to obtain such permission and nevertheless enter our
country, Kosovo's institutions will respond by following
procedure, in accordance with the Constitution and
existing laws.

What would happen if, I or any Kosovar
Government official, tried to enter Serbia without
permission? Serbian Government officials, when they
comply with procedure, visit frequently. Following the
incident, Mr. Durie visited Kosovo. Nothing happened,
because he obtained the necessary permission and
followed the procedures.

Kosovo is committed to normalizing relations with
Serbia. We are committed to dialogue, the promotion
of good neighbourly relations and the strengthening of
peace and stability in the Western Balkans region. In
just two days, our leaders will sit together as equals at
the Western Balkans-EU summit. Now more than ever,
it is crystal clear that the EU will not allow ambiguity to
prevail in the region. Serbia must therefore ultimately
recognize Kosovo's independence. Ultimately, it was at
Serbia's request that the International Court of Justice
ruled unambiguously on Kosovo's independence.
Kosovo's institutions launched a working group
for the establishment of the association of Serbian
municipalities. Unfortunately, owing to the intensive
and extraordinary pressure exercised by the Government
in Belgrade, there is a reluctance from the local Serbian
population to participate in the process. What Belgrade
wants is very clear. They want a territorial solution.
On the other hand, we in Pristina want civil solutions.
We do not believe that the creation of boundaries based
on ethnic lines will contribute to peace and stability.
Kosovo is a republic that belongs to all its citizens.
While we hear numbers floated in the Chamber, let
me remind the Council that only in the last elections,
approximately 100,000 Serbs participated and voted.

Listing Kosovo's recognition as one of the top
threats to Serbia's national security is delusional
and harmful to Serbia itself. Kosovo is free and
independent, and that will never, ever change. Let
me also stress that it is misleading to characterize
Kosovo's independence as a defeat for Serbia. Serbia
has lost nothing, because Kosovo was never Serbian.
Kosovo's independence has been scaled by our people's
will, sacrifice and determination.

Allow me also to reiterate that we believe that
the time has come for the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo to close. We also
believe that the resources of the United Nations can
be put to much better use. The Security Council can
choose to maintain an expensive mission in Kosovo.
However, the truth is that there is no role for it.

As I stated at the very beginning ofmy presentation,
the people of Kosovo want to move on. They want
closure. As we failed to deliver that, some of them have
moved on and found peace on their own. They have
risen above the painful past.

Arineta Mula's first hike was a long, steep trail
over the accursed mountains as her mother and her
three siblings fled for their lives in the spring of 1999
during Serbia's brutal war. She was only seven years
old when she became a refugee. but the gripping fear
that the Serbian forces would take her brother forced
her to keep her feet planted firmly on the slippery
and steep terrain. Sounds of artillery and blood
stains accompanied her terrifying journey to safety.
But Arineta decided to make something remarkably
beautiful of that experience. She reckoned that Kosovo
was too precious and our nature too beautiful to only
be remembered and associated with the pains and
horrors of war. Today Arineta is the first woman guide
in Kosovo. She proudly walks the mountain peaks with
tourists coming from Spain to China and elsewhere
in the world, thereby breaking the boundaries set by
politics. Arineta resolved that her trail of escape would
become a trail of hope for a better life and a better
tomorrow - a hope that every single Kosovar carries
in their heart.

