Mr. Valle (Brazil): My delegation is grateful for
the convening of this meeting, which we see as very
timely. I extend warm greetings to you, Mr. Prime
Minister, and to the representatives of the various
regional organizations present here today.

Regional organizations have an increasingly
relevant role to play in the overall international effort
at peace and security. Their framework is more
flexible, and, by definition, they are closer to security
threats and their root causes. As stated in the excellent
non-paper prepared by the Romanian delegation,
regional organizations have unique advantages:

"they are the main depositaries of regional
expertise, major stakeholders when it comes to
regional security and, as the instruments that
organize dialogue and cooperation, are effective
conflict prevention tools". (S/2004/546, annex, para. 3)

We agree entirely. Regional organizations are in a
better position to detect early symptoms of conflict and
to act promptly, thereby preventing intra-State
differences from evolving into intolerance, prejudice,
hatred, killing and massive crisis. Human rights
monitoring is another example of a task best carried
out by organizations closer to the area of observation.

Complementarities between the United Nations
and regional organizations can, and should, be further
developed and utilized, although the Security Council
remains the only legitimate organ to determine
enforcement action. As we see it, the primary role of
regional organizations is preventive. Their main efforts
should be targeted at root causes, and those may be
region-specific. The root causes of conflict in Kosovo
might be very different from those in Darfur, which
might in turn widely differ from the Haitian problem. It
is also true that not all regional arrangements work in
the same manner and regional peculiarities ought to be
respected, but there is a wide array of areas on which
cooperation between the United Nations and smaller
regional or subregional organizations can be enhanced.
Haiti is an issue in which the United Nations could
seek more cooperation from the Organization of
American States, for instance, in the light of previous
political and electoral experience, as mentioned by the
Secretary-General.

The spread of small arms trafficking is also an
area demanding closer cooperation from regional
organizations. Many conflicts escalate today to major
crises because of the widespread access to illegal
weapons. Clashes within societies - between tribes or
different communities - may be ancient, but the arms
they have available now are modern, much more
sophisticated and much deadlier than in the past.
Clashes therefore escalate quickly to widespread
killings and all sorts of outrageous violations of human
rights. That is why we have to pursue our efforts to
tackle the loopholes in the legal transference of arms
that allow a diversion to the illegal market, as we have
consistently stressed.

When the Council discussed complex crises two
months ago, the need for conflict prevention was self-
evident, as is the link between peace and development.
It also became clear that our responses to crises have to
start earlier and encompass a human approach to
security. We should adapt our Organization to the
challenges presented by the complexities of the current
security situation in the world. Revitalization and
institutional change are at the core of our appropriate
response to the needs of the peoples, and the initiatives
undertaken by the Secretary-General have opened a
window of opportunity to reform this institution and to
incorporate new ways of dealing with old and new
threats.

The sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations in
2005 represents the ideal occasion for demonstrating
our renewed commitment to its high purposes and
principles by promoting change - institutional, on the
one hand, and substantive, on the other - by
increasing political commitment to the Millenium
Goals.

Underdevelopment, poverty and hunger are at the
core of most conflicts in the world. They are present
before conflict occurs, they will worsen while conflict
is building up and they will degenerate into major
humanitarian crises even after conflict itself has been
quelled.

Governments, international organizations and
civil society have to get involved in the fight against
the root causes of conflict. Regional organizations can
detect potential threats faster and they can be very
useful in an early-warning system. Together with non-
governmental organizations, they are the natural
watchdogs for the early stages of crises and for
anything with the potential to become a threat to peace
and security and that would require the attention of the
Council. When action is needed, it does not necessarily
entail peace and security operations by the United
Nations alone. The international community can assist
in equipping regional organizations to respond to
immediate threats, as proven very successfully with the
Economic Community of West African States in West
Africa.

I wish to say a word on mechanisms to be used by
regional organizations. They have better access to local
media and we cannot stress enough the role of the
media in the resolution of conflicts. The same holds
true for the prevention of conflicts. Regional
organizations are in a much better position to monitor
the influence that local, national and even international
media exercise over incipient conflicts and to take
appropriate action to defend the free and impartial
dissemination of information.

Political will and creativity are needed to connect
various initiatives and different actors and to make
them work in favour of peace and security. As
President Lula stated during the Global Compact
Leaders Summit, recently held here at the United
Nations:

"At stake is the world we want to build; a world
divided by asymmetries and inaction in the face
of exclusion and misery or a world capable of
transcending irrationality and reconciling
economic efficiency with justice and social
progress."

My delegation believes that the concerted efforts
of regional organizations and the United Nations will
become one of the various important tools for attaining
that political objective.

