Mr. Skoog (Sweden): The Deputy Foreign Minister
of Kuwait also spoke on behalf of Sweden this morning,
so I can be very brief and reiterate some of the key
points that he and others made.

I think that the way in which Idlib is different
from Aleppo, eastern Ghouta and Dara'a has been
clearly stated. The people there have nowhere left to
flee to. The size of the population, 3 million, has been
mentioned, and it includes many children and internally
displaced persons. The catastrophic consequences of a
full-scale military escalation have been highlighted,
not least by this morning's briefers, Mr. John Ging and
Mr. Staffan de Mistura. Many have expressed their
grave concern about the escalating military action
by Syria and Russia, which have been reminded,
along with other parties, of their obligation to protect
civilians in accordance with international humanitarian
law. Theirs is the primary responsibility for preventing
further humanitarian disaster.

It has also been stressed around the table how
important it is that the Astana guarantors, who are
meeting at the highest level today, immediately
implement their own de-escalation agreement in
Idlib and prioritize the protection of civilians. I echo
the many speakers who have emphasized how urgent
it is that the guarantors act now in order to avoid the
enormous humanitarian catastrophe that would unfold
before our eyes if there were to be a large-scale military
offensive in Idlib.

So while it is clear where the responsibilities
lie, it is also incumbent on the Council to continue
to explore all meaningful preventive options. We
have therefore advocated for this meeting in order to
enable the Council to prevent this scenario, to express
our support to Mr. De Mistura and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and to push for
a political solution. We hope that the clear public calls
that have been made around the table today and by the
10 elected members earlier this week and the European
Union members yesterday (see S/PV8344) will have the
desired effect.

But we are also prepared to sit down in close
consultation with Mr. De Mistura today, over the
weekend or whenever, if need be, in order to explore
any concrete meaningful suggestions and proposals
to ensure that the Council also collectively shoulders
its responsibility and explores and fully exhausts all
possible preventive actions.

