The President (interpretation from Spanish): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Argentine Republic.

My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for
preparing and submitting the position paper in document
S/ 1995/ 1, entitled "Supplement to An Agenda for Peace".

This document is as opportune as it is well thought
out. It is as stimulating as it is thought-provoking. It is
just the kind of document that we need during this
transitional period, when it is wise for us to stop -
despite the urgency - and think about results and
experiences, and thereby affirm or correct our course.

As is clear from today's meeting, the Security
Council is beginning a task of discussion and analysis
which will take some time, following the procedures of
the Council in this respect, and which we hope will result
in the necessary definitions and adjustments.

Nevertheless, my delegation attributes special
importance to this meeting, because we believe that the
opportunity to hear the opinion of Member States,
especially those that are now members of the Security
Council, is an exercise that will be of benefit to all.

On this occasion we should like to express our
preliminary views on some of the many questions referred
to by the Secretary-General. We do not intend to make an
exhaustive analysis or to deal with all the subjects
referred to in the report. Throughout this exercise that is
beginning today we shall have ample time and
opportunity to do that. We should, however, like to refer
to some questions that we feel lend themselves
particularly to some comments now.
It is true that, as the Secretary-General says, we are
in a time of transition. This is aptly described in chapter
II of his report, relating to the quantitative and qualitative
changes that have taken place since the end of the cold
war. But we would point that there is a difference
between a disorderly transition and a the well-thought-out
transition that is advocated. It is the same kind of
difference that there is between lightning and a lamp:
both shed light, but the former is ephemeral, dangerous
and not very trustworthy, whereas the latter is constant,
safe, and definitely predictable. That is why the message
sent us by the Secretary-General is so opportune. That is

 

also why there is a need for this debate that is now
beginning, on his initiative.

It is also quite true that we must adopt decisions -
some of them perhaps difficult; but that is usually the way
it is. Otherwise, there might be some doubt about the
maturity of the commitment of Member States to the
Organization. We shall revert to this matter later.

We are concerned at the Secretary-General's reference,
in regard to the new types of intra-State conflicts with
which our Organization has to deal, as firmly as is required,
to the fact that

"Civilians are the main victims and often the main
targets". (S/1995/l, para. 12)

This is a clarion call. It cannot be ignored, because what is
involved is the direct defence of the human being and his
dignity. The international community cannot remain
indifferent to the magnitude of the problem set out by the
Secretary-General, which is at the very centre of
humanitarian law. But we have the sad feeling that, despite
that categorical and accurate affirmation, we have strayed
from the path to civilization. We must immediately
undertake the effort to redress this situation.

We are particularly pleased with chapter III of the
Secretary-General's paper, on the instruments for the
promotion of peace and security.

With regard to preventive diplomacy, we would point
to the efforts and progress during the past few years.

The restructuring of the Department of Political
Affairs has been quite wise. It is now possible to follow up
more closely and thoroughly the tensions that could lead to
regional or international crises. It is always wiser to prevent
or stop conflicts before they break out. But, generally
speaking, this is also the best way to make use of the
meagre resources available.

Sometimes, regrettably, egotism, distrust or petty or
transitory interests make people reluctant today to request
or accept the helpful collaboration of our Organization.
Nevertheless, without the assent of the contending parties,
there is very little, strictly speaking, that the United Nations
can do to prevent conflicts. That is why we would
encourage the Secretary-General to persevere on the path
initiated by this chapter, despite the difficulties or obstacles
he may face.

In this connection, we would like to refer to the
financial solutions that have been proposed, in particular
those for small field missions - small in size but with a
usefulness that would be far from small.

As a preliminary view, we are inclined to choose the
option of using for preventive diplomacy existing credits
for unforeseen and extraordinary activities. We believe
that at a later stage it might be appropriate to have a
specific heading in the budget for activities related to
preventive diplomacy. But, of course, we do not want in
that way to reduce funds that are allocated today to social
activities or activities related to the promotion of
development.

With regard to the maintenance of peace, the
categorical restatement of the traditional philosophy in the
matter is of transcendental importance. The logic of peace
has a price. It is clear today that to forget or overlook this
not only places us on the wrong path, but is also
dangerous.

Consent of the parties, impartiality, non-use of force:
these are the three central pillars of this traditional
philosophy. But if there is not strict and sacred adherence
to them, we shall lose from sight the minimum flexibility
that is indispensable to saving or protecting lives,
particularly of civilians or of those who generously
expose themselves to danger so that our Organization can
accomplish its mission or so that humanitarian assistance
can be given to those who are suffering the consequences
of war. We must express all our appreciation and
gratitude for the work that has been done and the efforts
that have been exerted.

We agree that during these critical times we cannot,
generally speaking, impose peace-keeping operations.
These are technical alternatives, measures of last resort,
after all other efforts have failed.

We believe that the mechanism for consultation
between the Security Council and the Secretariat is
flexible. But improvements can always be made. In
particular, horizontal sharing of information with all
delegations, in time, is indispensable, in respect of
political decision-making by the Security Council.

Here I should like to point out that the Security
Council is not discharging all its responsibilities in the
decisions to start or conclude peace-keeping operations.
We must not fall into the habit of becoming involved in
details. We must be properly and constantly informed

 

about the development of peace-keeping operations,
specifically those that, because of their scope and
complexity, are mutifaceted or require the participation of
large contingents of personnel, exposed to changing
circumstances and, frequently, danger.

The Charter of the United Nations, in Article 41,
confers primary responsibility - I repeat: primary
responsibility - on the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It makes
it clear that the action expected from this body must be
rapid and effective. This is stated expressly. The very
nature of the Council's delicate mission requires this, but
there can be no rapidity or effectiveness if there is no
coordination. That is why the constant, ongoing flow of
information is, I repeat, indispensable for the collegial
efforts of the Security Council.

We would also emphasize the systematic
implementation of consultations between the Security
Council, the troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat - which, indeed, is already part of the routine of
our Organization.

Governments of countries that, with the nobility that
this requires, are contributing troops to the United Nations,
have the right and the responsibility to be heard and to be
informed, on a regular basis, of the military and political
developments relating to the operation in which they are
taking part. They must be able at all times to report to their
people on the progress of their respective operations.

Unity in the chain of command is undoubtedly another
fundamental principle in ensuring the success of these
peace-keeping undertakings. The importance of this
question increases in direct proportion to the dangers or the
risks posed by the tasks being undertaken.

As regards reserve or stand-by forces, the Argentine
Republic was one of the first countries to receive the
Secretary-General's Mission charged with dealing with this
question, and we were also one of the first 35 Member
States explicitly to commit resources and units to this end.

As to the proposal to create a rapid reaction force,
which would be a kind of strategic reserve for the Security
Council, we believe that this is an interesting initiative and
one that deserves careful study in all its aspects, without
ruling out components of a policing nature that could be
incorporated into it.

Let us now turn to the chapter on post-conflict peace-
building. It must be understood that after every conflict
there are socio-economic and humanitarian questions that
must be tackled or resolved if there is to be a lasting
peace. The medium- and long- term consolidation of
ongoing military efforts will depend on successful
reconstruction or rehabilitation. We must be able to count
on having the necessary resources and be sure that
maximum use can be made of them. One example is the
central role played by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) in the Haitian crisis, when, on
President Aristide's return, it was able to resume its
activities in that country. It is now in charge of the
coordination and promotion of all multilateral technical
assistance and of most bilateral assistance in this new
stage of the restoration of democracy.

Depending on circumstances, this could involve
assigning technical, economic and financial assistance
tasks at various levels: development of the institutions
indispensable to the functioning of democracy; respect for
human rights; and tasks related to health, education, the
environment and justice, when related to peace-building.

In this connection, at the initiative of our country,
the Executive Board of UNDP raised the indicative
planning figure for Haiti to the level it was at before the
recent budgetary cut of 30 per cent which affected all
Member States. This is just one example, in our view, of
how economic and political decisions complement each
other. This is an example of the consistency needed
within the framework of a strategy for sustainable human
development in the post-conflict stage.

At the same time, we would like to refer to the
potential of the General Assembly's recent resolution
49/139 B, regarding the participation of "White Helmets",
volunteers in United Nations activities in the area of
humanitarian assistance. This is on the understanding that
this initiative will make it possible to channel into peace-
keeping efforts all the energy that can be mobilized in the
private sector. We are anxiously awaiting proposals that
have been requested of the Secretary-General regarding
the implementation of this mechanism.

Finally, we would like to mention the excellent
experience accumulated over the past few years regarding
assistance in electoral processes. This has allowed
conflicts that otherwise might have dragged on to be
resolved harmoniously. In the post-conflict period much
valuable experience has been acquired recently,
experience upon which much can be built.

 

As regards cooperation and coordination between the
United Nations and regional organizations, since the
Agenda for Peace was first circulated there have been a
number of instances of tasks being divided between our
Organization and regional organizations of various levels
and types. Although it is not a matter now of drawing up
a balance sheet, we would say that on the whole the results
have been positive, and we should encourage the
continuation and strengthening of these experiences. We do
not want to lay down strict guidelines for the modalities of
such cooperation, although - just as an indication - we
regard as relevant the principles set forth by the Secretary-
General in paragraph 86 of his Supplement. We are
convinced that these principles must be evaluated and
applied on a case-by-case basis, since the subjects of this
cooperation may be extremely diverse, depending on
circumstances, as we have seen.

If a conflict is subject to direct action by the Council,
it is evident that the most important part of the management
of the conflict rests with the Council itself, and that the
assignment of tasks and the division and coordination of
work and responsibilities all fall within the scope of
Security Council decisions. We must bear in mind the -
at times - scant similarity between the procedures of the
political bodies of different international organizations, and
attempt to make them compatible. The same applies to the
ability of regional bodies to react; the resources and
information available to them; and the duration of the crisis,
depending on the sphere it occurs in.

As regards disarmament, my delegation would like to
make a few brief comments. Argentina believes that since
the Summit meeting of the Security Council on 31 January
1992 significant progress has been made in the area of non-
proliferation, disarmament and arms control. It is time to
reaffirm that the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction is a threat to international peace and security,
which falls under the jurisdiction of this Council. The
Government of Argentina attaches special importance to the
1995 Conference on the review and extension of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The
Congress of the nation approved the Treaty in law 24.448,
and the ratification instruments are now being deposited.

My delegation fully agrees with the general guidelines
laid down by the Secretary-General regarding "micro-
disarmament". This can play a central role in the prevention
of many conflicts. We are convinced that the proliferation
of light weapons throughout the world and the illegal traffic
in them are a complex challenge that must be faced
immediately by the international community.

Regarding the proliferation of anti-personnel mines,
we would like to repeat that my country, sharing the
growing concern of the international community, has
declared a five-year moratorium on their export, sale and
transfer. We therefore support the establishment of a
permanent regime to eliminate these weapons.

I shall now refer briefly to economic sanctions, an
instrument almost as old as international relations
themselves, since Pericles himself, in 432 BC, first used
them, in his memorable Megaria decree. The main thing
to remember is that they are specifically to be found in
Article 41 of the Charter as an instrument available to the
Security Council. They have sometimes been used
successfully, as in the case of the former Southern
Rhodesia and later with regard to South Africa. However,
since 1990 economic sanctions have been imposed
repeatedly by the Security Council in various forms, and
recent experience has shown, as the Secretary-General
suggests in his report, that there must be an in-depth re-
examination of the way in which the sanctions have been
applied.

The case of Haiti, inter alia, is an example. On the
one hand, sanctions were improved step by step, in so far
as that was possible without losing their effectiveness, in
order to try to focus them on those responsible in the de
facto Government. At the same time, effective measures
were planned to control the impact on the humanitarian
situation and assure the supply of food and medicine.

The Argentine Republic believes that sanctions
should be resorted to in exceptional cases and should be
interpreted narrowly, for they are an instrument of
deterrence or coercion, not a penalty.

It is time to review the procedures of the Sanctions
Committees and the processes involved in renewing
sanctions. We should consider periodically reviewing the
various sanctions regimes in order to bring them into line
with the conflicts that initiated them.

At the same time, these are a useful instrument
available to the international community. Sanctions, even
if because of their stigmatizing, can prevent or postpone
the use of a more serious measure: military force, which
we should turn to only as a last resort. Therefore,
economic sanctions must be used as a flexible instrument
that is adapted to a particular situation and that can be
adjusted when the political objectives established by the
Council are attained.

 

The management of sanctions always requires a
difficult combination of prudence, reasonableness and
firmness. To be effective they must be rigorously precise
and meticulously customized so as to reduce the possibility
of causing unnecessary damage and of building up the
resistance of those on whom they are imposed. They must
be applied by the entire international community, and
without exception, and with the same criteria. Furthermore,
during the shortest possible period of time in which they
can begin to take effect, we must be able to evaluate their
results and their efficacy.

It should be pointed out that the utilization of
sanctions has not yet been combined with the alternative
of resorting simultaneously to incentives, so that reward and
punishment are intertwined in coherent policy plans
intended to influence or modify behaviour that threatens
international peace and security. This alternative holds great
possibilities and opens up a wide field for thinking about
enriching the instruments at the disposal of the international
community to make its work more effective and, perhaps,
its policies less onerous.

Providing the United Nations with the necessary
resources to deal with its responsibilities as the central
institution in the conduct of international relations is the
responsibility of all. The attainment of this objective will
contribute significantly to the consolidation of peace in the
world and will also enhance the Organization's credibility.

Obvious though it may be, it must be repeated -
because of the considerable sums of money still owed to
the United Nations - that there can be no effective
operation without Member States' proper fulfilment of their
financial responsibilities, in accordance with their clear
obligations under the Charter.

With respect to the financial crisis affecting us, I wish
to say that we should not shirk our responsibilities. We
shall continue to work tirelessly in the framework of the
General Assembly to respond to the Secretary-General's
timely initiative and to try to provide permanent and
suitable solutions. As long as some Member States are still
very much in arrears in their contributions, the great
potential of the United Nations for peace and development
will never materialize. What is worse, the international
community will continue to send a negative signal vis-a-vis
the United Nations, that of a lack of genuine commitment
to the ideals and principles that inspired its creation half a
century ago.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

