Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends Sweden for the initiative of holding today's
open debate on conflict prevention and sustaining
peace and welcomes you, Foreign Minister Wallstrom,

to New York to preside over this meeting. China
salutes Secretary-General Guterres as he assumes his
new functions, thanks him for his statement and looks
forward to his greater engagement in the promotion of
the cause of the United Nations and the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Peace is the common aspiration and lofty goal of
humankind. However, today's world, far from being
peaceful, is marred by alternating escalation in regional
hotspot issues, the spread of terrorism and brewing
traditional and non-traditional security challenges.

A comprehensive and durable peace remains
elusive. How to effectively prevent conflict and build
sustainable peace is an important issue facing the
United Nations and the vast majority of its Member
States. I wish to emphasize the following points.

First, it is essential to forge a correct security
concept. In today's world, countries are interconnected
and affect each other in terms of security. No single
country can achieve absolute security purely on its own,
nor can any country reap security from the insecurity
suffered by others.
The international community must firmly uphold
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations; foster a common, integrated, cooperative
and sustainable new security concept; build a global
partnership based on dialogue instead of confrontation
and partnership instead of alliance; bring to the fore
the crucial role of the United Nations and its Security
Council in putting an end to wars and maintaining peace;
and build a common security architecture based on
equity, justice, joint contributions and shared benefits.

Secondly, efforts must be made to promote
common development. As peace and development are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing, the causes of
security threats such as war, conflict and terrorism all
can be traced back to poverty and underdevelopment,
and, as such, relevant solutions are also to be found in
development. It is important to effectively implement
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development; forge
a global governance concept based on the principle of
achieving shared growth through joint reflection and
by pooling our strengths; seek development prospects
through openness, innovation, inclusiveness and mutual
benefit; properly tackle global challenges such as
climate change and the refugee crisis; help developing
countries to enhance their ability to eliminate poverty
and achieve self-development; and, ultimately, achieve
common development and promote durable peace.

Thirdly, preventive diplomacy and peacebuilding
must be strengthened. It is important to maintain a
general direction towards peaceful peaceful solutions
to disputes. Differences should be resolved through
political means such as dialogue and negotiations.
It is imperative to help countries emerging from
conflict enhance their own abilities in the areas of
political security, economic development and social
integration, thus solidifying the foundation for peace.
United Nations organs such as the General Assembly,
the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission must implement
their respective functions and leverage their respective
advantages, working synergetically to uphold the
sovereignty of the countries concerned and respecting
their views and focusing on their needs.

Fourthly, the diversity of civilizations must be
respected. There is no superior civilization, culture
or religion. There must be mutual respect and equal
treatment among all civilizations, cultures and
religions. The United Nations should advocate a culture
of peace by affirming that harmony can be achieved
through diversity and strength attained by embracing
inclusiveness and differences. The United Nations
should actively promote dialogue and exchanges
of mutual learning among different civilizations,
cultures and religions. Countries and the international
community at large must work together, practice
openness and inclusiveness, and seek common ground
while respecting differences, so as to make dialogue
among civilizations a bridge to greater friendship
among nations and a linchpin of world peace.

China is a defender and a builder of world peace
and has made positive contributions to the promotion
of peace, progress and the development of humankind.
At the series of summits held on the occasion of the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations, China's
President, Xi Jinping, called for carrying forward the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and for the building of a new international
relationship with cooperation and a win-win philosophy
at its centre and the forging of a community with a
shared future.

China is ready to work hand in hand with the rest
of the international community for the maintenance of
world peace and achieving shared development.

