Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Let me begin by expressing
our profound grief at yesterday's devastating
earthquake in Haiti. On behalf of the people and
Government of Brazil, I would like to convey our
heartfelt sympathies to the Haitian people and
Government and our concern about the United Nations
peacekeepers and staff members who have been
affected. Brazil is present in Haiti through the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
Our contingent, including an engineering company, is
assisting in the rescue efforts. We have also taken
measures to send humanitarian assistance, and the
Minister of Defence is in route to Haiti as we speak to
lead a needs-assessment mission and to oversee our
relief efforts. I am sure that, with the help and
solidarity of the international community, the Haitian
people, known for its resilience and courage, will
overcome that very difficult and tragic situation.

I wish to congratulate China's delegation on
organizing this debate and for providing us with a
concept paper (S/2010/9) to guide it. I thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his statement, and I extend a
warm welcome to the representatives of regional and
subregional organizations, in particular Mr. Victor Rico
Frontaura, Secretary for Political Affairs of the
Organization of American States (OAS).

The United Nations Charter foresaw the
importance of cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. It laid the foundations
for such cooperation, which is never an abdication by
the Security Council of its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Rather, it is an effective means by which the Council
can discharge its responsibility.
The corpus of Security Council resolutions and
presidential statements recognizes the importance of
engaging regional and subregional organizations
throughout the cycle of conflict, from prevention to
reconstruction. We are pleased that the draft
presidential statement before us today adopts the
balanced approach that we favour, dedicating as much
attention to conflict prevention and post-conflict
peacebuilding as to peacekeeping.

Preventive diplomacy is an issue dear to my
delegation. It is the surest path to peace and should be
actively pursued by the Security Council and the
Secretariat. We support the efforts made by Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon in that regard.

The active involvement of regional and
subregional organizations in preventing conflicts is
often a decisive factor for success. Some of their
unique advantages are a particularly rich network of
contacts with relevant actors, the ability to closely
follow events on the ground and to draw on an in-depth
knowledge of the conflict and political dynamics of the
region, and a lesser risk of being perceived as
interfering in the internal affairs of countries.

In that context, the United Nations can help to
develop or strengthen the preventive diplomacy and
early warning capacities of regional and subregional
organizations. We welcome the Council's willingness
to seriously look at innovative ways to further that type
of cooperation.

In some cases, the prevention of conflicts means
addressing some of the root causes that may lead to
conflict, in particular social and economic
underdevelopment. There too, cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations may be useful. In Latin America and the
Caribbean, for example, which are largely free from
threats to international peace and security, the United
Nations could make a positive contribution to the
continued stability of the region by increasing its
cooperation with the OAS in that area, in particular
with a view to helping countries to attain the
Millennium Development Goals in a timely manner.

The potential advantages of regional and
subregional organizations are also valuable when
prevention fails and conflicts arise. In such cases, our
first and firm choice must be the peaceful settlement of
the dispute. Here again, the Security Council will have
to judge whether peace is best served through its direct
action or in cooperation with partners in the affected
region or subregion.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional or subregional organizations has also proven
beneficial in the domain of peacekeeping. That is
evident, for example, in the collaboration between the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and the
OAS in Haiti, and especially in the active relationship
between the United Nations and the African Union.

We support the increased cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union envisaged in
the presidential statement of October 2009
(S/PRST/2009/26), especially the acceleration of the
Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme. We look
forward to its full and timely implementation. More is
needed, however. The support to troops in the field
must be more agile and substantial; operation
coordination and political dialogue should improve;
and resources should be provided in a more timely and
predictable way.

Because they are each unique and the product of
a specific political culture, regional and subregional
organizations can offer invaluable specialized
assistance to the Security Council in the discharge of
its primary responsibility. That is a solid foundation for
fruitful and mutually beneficial cooperation.

Finally, Brazil supports the draft presidential
statement that is before the Council today and thanks
the Chinese delegation for its timely preparation.

