Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Madam President,
allow me to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of this Council. My delegation also
joins in thanking the Nigerian presidency for its
initiative of convening this open debate.

Under the United Nations Charter, the Security
Council bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
effective implementation of this noble mandate hinges
on the trust and support of all States Members of the
United Nations, the coordination and cooperation of
regional and subregional organizations, and the
persistent efforts of the Organization itself to explore
durable solutions to conflict situations around the
world.

My delegation upholds the principle that States
should act so as to prevent, in their international
relations, the emergence or aggravation of disputes or
conflict situations, in particular by fulfilling their
obligations under international law. We also believe
that it is the duty and responsibility of all States, in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, to use peaceful means to settle any
dispute that is likely to endanger international peace
and security. We are encouraged to note that the culture
of prevention is indeed gaining ground, as is the
understanding to strengthen and give support to the
tools used in response to situations that could
potentially lead to the outbreak of violence.

As noted in the concept paper contained in
document S/2010/37l, we acknowledge that early
warning, preventive diplomacy, preventive deployment,
practical disarmament measures and post-conflict
peacebuilding are interdependent and complementary
components of a comprehensive conflict prevention
strategy. In this regard, we believe that the sooner we
act to prevent conflict, the greater are the chances of
success.

Consistent with its democratic tradition,
Botswana is fully committed to the implementation of
existing international instruments, as well as of
respective principles and rules governing the peaceful
settlement of international disputes. We support the
declarations and resolutions of the General Assembly
that call for the strengthening of the capacity of the
United Nations to respond effectively and efficiently in
matters relating to dispute or conflict prevention.

As an embodiment of the collective will of
African countries to achieve unity, peace and security,
the African Union has the legitimacy and the political
and moral authority to handle conflict prevention and
resolution of conflict situations throughout Africa. It is
important to recognize that the African Union has
declared the year 2010 as the Year of Peace. We
believe that the Year of Peace will provide impetus to
peace and security efforts on the continent and give
better visibility to ongoing and past efforts of the
African Union on the ground to speed up the
implementation of commitments made by African
countries in various treaties. In this regard, we
acknowledge that, in recent years, the African Union
has played an increasingly important role in addressing
conflicts on the African continent and has made
invaluable contributions to maintaining world peace
and security.

To this end, it is gratifying to note that progress
has indeed been made on a number fronts. This
includes the creation of the Peace and Security
Council, the African Standby Force and a Panel of the
Wise responsible for mediation and preventive
diplomacy. However, securing reliable sources of
funding and building preventive diplomacy capacity
and expertise at the national and regional levels remain
among Africa's most serious challenges.

We recognize the importance of enhancing
coordination amongst the relevant bilateral and
multilateral donors to ensure predictable, coherent and
timely financial support to optimize the use of
preventive diplomacy tools, including mediation,
throughout the conflict cycle. In this regard, the Group
of Eight (G-8) Africa Action Plan of 2002, which
makes specific commitments to supporting peace and
security in Africa, needs to be pursued vigorously. This
includes support for African efforts to resolve armed
conflicts on the continent. The G-8 countries had also
committed to assist with disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration. It is important that these countries
deliver on the pledges they have made in this regard.

We believe that the Security Council should
continue to strengthen its cooperation with the African
Union, and particularly with its Peace and Security
Council, in order to fully utilize its regional early
warning mechanisms and peacekeeping capacity.

In conclusion, we reiterate our conviction that the
United Nations has the potential to fulfil, in a practical
manner, an effective function through collective and
preventive diplomacy.

