Mr. Eldon (United States of America): It gives
me great pleasure to welcome Ambassador Klein back
to the Council. He has done an outstanding job of
reinvigorating the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) with a vibrant, results-
oriented concept of operations, and we are grateful for
his dedication and work.

We fully support the extension of UNMIBH's
mandate for another 12 months, and we are encouraged
that this extension is backed by a clear strategy for
completing the Mission by December 2002. As the
Secretary-General makes clear in his latest report, this
is a realistic objective that can be reached if we provide
UNMIBH with the resources it needs to get its job
done.

My Government supports the priorities
established by the Peace Implementation Council at its
last ministerial meeting - refugee returns, economic
reform and the strengthening of State institutions. We
have set aside significant resources for work in these
areas, including $67.2 million to support minority
refugee returns and close to $2 million for the new
State Border Service. We will also continue our
significant contribution, currently more than 10 per
cent of the total force, to the International Police Task
Force (IPTF).

We are encouraged by the positive developments
referred to in the Secretary-General's report. It is
inspiring to see the dramatic increase in refugee
returns, even of minority groups to areas that saw some
of the most dramatic violence during the war. This
would be more than a trend if some Government
officials and other individuals would stop blocking the
return of these courageous men and women. We must
send a clear message that we will not tolerate this
obstructionism.

In that regard, my delegation fully supports
aggressive use by the High Representative and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) in Bosnia of the mandates provided by the
international community. We should seek to remove or
restrain all those standing in the way of Dayton's full
implementation - the war criminals remaining at
large, the organized criminals and the national
extremists. In that regard, with respect to the Peace
Implementation Council ministerial meeting, I would
simply note that the Belgrade regime has done nothing
since the December 1998 Madrid ministerial meeting,
which it walked out of, to merit its participation in the
Peace Implementation Council. The ministerial is, after
all, a meeting of those interested in advancing the
peace in Bosnia, and that purpose speaks for itself.
We are encouraged by signs that the nationalism
and hatred of the past is slowly albeit too slowly
giving way to new respect for democracy and the rule
oflaw. In that regard, the new democratic Mesic-Racan
Government in Croatia has had a positive impact on the
Croat community in Bosnia, and we are seeing positive
developments in Mostar, which only recently was
labeled the most divided city in Europe. We are also
seeing slow but continuing progress in setting up the
State Border Service, a key element of the New York
Declaration agreed to by members of the joint
Presidency during their appearance in the Council last
November. Certainly, more work needs to be done in
the area ofjoint institutions, and we support the efforts
of the international community in Bosnia to reinforce
progress in that area.

Finally, let me speak to the issue of judicial
reform. My Government commends the work of
UNMIBH's judicial system assessment programme
over the past two years. It has highlighted critical
problems in the Bosnian judicial system and has made
important recommendations. Its mandate, however,
restricts the programme to passive monitoring and
assessment activities. We understand that the Office of
the High Representative has drafted a plan for next
steps on judicial reform and is working with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) on a programme that can implement the
recommendations of the judicial system assessment
programme. We continue to believe that the OSCE,
with its experience in rule-of-law and judicial-reform
issues, and with its extensive field offices in Bosnia, is
the organization best suited actively to assist the Office
of the High Representative in this mission. We would
welcome the addition of the Council of Europe and
other regional organizations in an effort led by the
Office ofthe High Representative and the OSCE.

