Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): I
thank the Assistant Secretary-General, Mr. Kalomoh,
for his briefing.

At the outset, Mr. President, permit me to
associate the United Republic of Tanzania with the
statement to be made by the Permanent Representative
of Malaysia, Ambassador Hamidon Ali, on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

Since the last briefing, much has happened in the
Middle East. Key developments on the political front
have been the formation and the swearing-in of a
Hamas-led Government on the one hand, and on the
other, the successful conduct of Israeli elections, won
by Mr. Ehud Olmert's Kadima party. These
developments are an important aspect of the political
landscape, and it is important that both Israelis and the
Palestinians in the region recognize this. We urge that
these delicate moments of change be met patiently and
calmly by both sides. The end of the electoral season
should provide a possibility for focusing seriously on a
better future for both Palestinians and Israelis, who
have been living in violence, instability and fear for so
many years and who are still desperately waiting for
peace.

It is our strong belief that the Hamas-led
Government, which was sworn in yesterday, will be
able to come to terms with the new realities of the
region and decide once and for all to disarm, renounce
violence, recognize Israel and sign up to past peace
agreements as a sure way of removing a major hurdle
in the peace process. Prime Minister Ismail Haniya
should recognize the imperative of a two-State
solution, where Israel and Palestine live side by side in
peace and security.

On its part, any new Kadima-led Government in
Israel must also come to terms with the new realities
and prepare to work with the Hamas-led Government
as their new negotiating partner. They need to freeze
settlement activity, stop barrier construction and end
attacks on Palestinians. Hurried unilateral actions by
Israel in trying to fix its borders will not bring about
peace.

We are deeply concerned over the recent upsurge
in violence in the West Bank and Gaza. We call for the
new leadership to exercise restraint and patience and
take deliberate measures to reduce tensions in this area
and restore calm. The parties should appreciate the
delicate nature of the situation and seek to work
closely together for a lasting solution to the challenges
they face.

We are encouraged by the efforts of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Alvaro de Soto, who on 16 March met
with members of the diplomatic Quartet in Brussels to
discuss assistance to the Palestinian Authority. It is our
view that the international community should continue
to be fully involved, despite the difficult stage that the
peace process has reached. Efforts should focus on
impressing upon the parties that unilateral actions will
not work and that negotiations provide the only
credible alternative for a viable solution.

It is also our view that blocking the flow of funds
and resources to the Palestinians will only make
matters worse and increase the suffering of many
innocent people. Such actions must be discouraged.

Finally, we believe that the international peace
plan - the road map - should be given a renewed
chance in these changed circumstances.

