Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): I would like to join
others in commending you, Mr. President, for
convening this open meeting of the Security Council to
consider once again the HIV/AIDS issue, this time in
the specific context of peacekeeping operations. Your
personal presence here today is greatly appreciated by
us all.

Let me also express our appreciation to the
delegation of the United States, and in particular to
Ambassador Holbrooke, for taking the initiative on this
issue during the United States presidency of the
Council in the month of January this year and for
following it up six months later. We commend the
United States for its continued commitment and
leadership on this enormously important issue.

Today's briefing by Dr. Peter Piot, Executive
Director of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), more than ever before
underscores the pandemic character of HIV/AIDS and
its debilitating effects on societies, not just in the most
affected continent, Africa, but also in several other
parts of the world. The update by Dr. Piot, and the
latest report on the global HIV epidemic released
late last month by UNAIDS - paints a disturbing
picture of the spread of the disease in the worst
affected countries. The report shows that the ongoing
spread of the HIV/AIDS pandemic in these countries is
reversing years of declining death rates and causing
alarming rises in mortality among young adults. This,
in turn, drastically alters the population structures in
the most affected regions.

Today's debate focuses on HIV/AIDS in the
context of peacekeeping. As more and more United
Nations peacekeepers are deployed in conflict areas,

 
some of which are afflicted by the AIDS Virus, there is
the imperative need to protect them from being
infected from this deadly virus and to ensure that they
do not unwittingly spread the disease themselves. This
can only be done, first, through proper orientation and
training before their deployment in mission areas, so as
to raise their awareness of the potential risks of being
infected, and, secondly, through a stringent regime of
regular medical check-ups and HIV testing in
accordance with established procedures, and offering
them prompt treatment when necessary.

We are gratified that AIDS awareness and
orientation are beginning to be addressed both by the
United Nations and by troop-contributing countries.
But it is important to ensure that AIDS-related
programmes be undertaken not on an ad hoc basis, but
that they be made an integral and mandatory part of the
orientation and training for peacekeepers before their
departure to mission areas. The members of the
international community with the capacity to do so and
UNAIDS, which has the expertise, can play an
important and constructive role in this area. In such
training sessions it is essential to drive the point home
to the would-be peacekeepers about the seriousness of
the AIDS Virus and their debilitating effects on
themselves, should they be infected, and of the equally
grave risks of their spreading the Virus to others,
including their loved ones upon their return. This
message is particularly important given the daredevil
mentality on the part of some soldiers prone to taking
unnecessary risks. This is particularly true in the case
of those soldiers who are in the most sexually active
and adventurous age group. This therefore presents a
particular challenge to trainers. Yet, being the most
disciplined members of society, military personnel
could provide an ideal opportunity in which HIV/AIDS
prevention education can be provided to a large,
captive audience in a disciplined, highly organized
setting.

AIDS spreads indiscriminately - to rebel groups,
national armies, and peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers alike - in AIDS-afflicted areas, hence the
importance of sensitizing all United Nations and other
international workers operating in conflict zones to the
risks involved. In this regard, there should be increased
coordination and cooperation on HIV/AIDS matters
between and among relevant United Nations and other
international agencies operating in AIDS-afflicted
areas. Peacekeepers and other international workers
must be made to realize that in the HIV/AIDS virus
they confront as deadly an enemy as the traditional
enemies they usually come in contact with.

The International AIDS Conference in Durban,
South Africa, which concluded just last week, revealed
another disturbing aspect of HIV/AIDS in afflicted
areas, in that, according to experts, Africa's armed
conflicts have played a major role in the spread of
HIV/AIDS. Reports on this particular subject from the
Conference have indicated that infection rates among
combatants, including those in some national armies,
are as high as 50 per cent. According to one report,
combatants, whether rebel or Government, are not
merely the most vulnerable to HIV infection; they are
also the most likely to spread it.

This claim is corroborated by a recent United
Nations report which indicates that infection rates of
sexually transmitted diseases are two to five times
higher in the military than among civilians. The
problem is compounded by the fact that when troops
cross borders, they sexually abuse local populations,
using rape as a form of intimidation. This has been
widely alleged by international relief agencies and was
alluded to by the Minister of Health of Namibia,
Dr. Amathila, who sadly reflected on these unfortunate
occurrences when she addressed the Council last
January. These are the realities of the conflict situations
to which we are sending our peacekeepers, and they
must be taken into cognizance in formulating any
strategy to combat the virus.

The Durban Conference on AIDS also dwelled on
the important but sensitive issue of cheap and
accessible drugs. In order to meet even the most basic
care and prevention needs, numerous calls have been
made for dramatically increasing spending on
combating the HIV/AIDS virus. However, the United
Kingdom-based Panos Institute revealed at the
Conference that it would take $60 billion dollars to buy
anti-retroviral drugs for all the people living with
HIV/AIDS who need them but cannot pay the price.
The Institute has also pointed out that money is not the
only resource necessary to ensure successful drug
treatment. It has also indicated that in order to ensure
the effectiveness of the medication, those undergoing
treatment must have access to regular laboratory tests
and skilled personnel with the ability to interpret those
tests and to advise on appropriate treatment. The
procedure is as expensive as the medications
themselves.

It is perhaps not surprising that the single most
contentious issue of the Durban Conference focused on
access to care and treatment. Two points require special
mention: first, the role of community mobilization in
changing the actions of the pharmaceutical sector; and
secondly, the importance of creating an international
political and legal consensus to support differential
pricing.

My delegation, in the earlier debate on HIV/AIDS
in this Council, drew attention to the fact that
compulsory licensing was allowed under the World
Trade Organization but that, regrettably, with support
from their powerful and influential friends, the giant
pharmaceutical companies have thus far denied
developing countries the right to produce cheaper drugs
to save the lives of their people. As my Prime Minister,
Dr. Mahathir Mohamad, put it during the fifth
International Conference on AIDS in Asia and the
Pacific, held in Kuala Lumpur recently, it is regrettable
that profit is taking precedence over the need to save
people's lives. This is a sad commentary on the current
situation. Indeed, faced as we are with the greatest
pandemic since the bubonic plague, every effort should
be directed towards serving humankind instead.

We would like to commend UNAIDS for starting
a new dialogue in May among five pharmaceutical
companies and United Nations organizations to explore
ways to accelerate and improve the provision of
HIV/AIDS-related care and treatment to developing
countries. We note that the companies have responded
to the call made by Secretary-General Kofi Annan
inviting the private sector to engage in partnerships to
expand the global response to HIV/AIDS and to
support the International Partnership against
HIV/AIDS in Africa. Similar calls have been made by
other personalities, including the heads of United
Nations organizations - in particular Mrs. Brundtland,
Director-General of the World Health Organization;
Mr. Wolfensohn, President of the World Bank; and
Dr. Piot himself, whose advocacy efforts have been
instrumental in drawing leading companies into
cooperative action to help meet the challenges posed
by the pandemic. We also note that Mrs. Bellamy,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF), and Dr. Sadik, Executive Director of
the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), have
also been involved in these discussions and have
actively promoted effective alliances with the business
community.

My delegation hopes that these efforts will be
expanded to include partners from other sectors. This is
indeed a promising step in a long-term process and an
opportunity for committed Governments, donors, civil
societies, people living with HIV/AIDS, and private
industry to enter into discussion to scale up access to
care in ways that respond to the specific needs and
requests of individual countries.

In conclusion, my delegation is pleased to support
the draft resolution before the Council and will play its
part towards its full and effective implementation.

