Mr. Haekkerup: First and foremost, I wish to
give thanks for the support given by the members of
the Security Council for the Mission. I will certainly
bring to the members of the Mission - the men and
women working there - the Council's kind words
about what they are doing.

Some aspects that came up in this part of the
interventions are very important to address. In
particular, security and violence in Kosovo were very
much in the picture.

I might perhaps explain a little more about
developments over the last year.

Criminality in general is high in Kosovo. It is
also high compared with the rest of the region, but not
extremely high compared with the rest of the region.
We have had a development whereby violence has been
decreasing; ethnic violence, especially, has gone down
by 40 per cent. So the more serious crimes have been
decreasing, even if the overall level of criminality
generally is very high. This is not to say that we have
reached a level that is good. Ethnic violence is still far
too high. It is an exception to the region, in the sense
that generally ethnic violence is not high. So we should
continue our efforts. But even if we have 50,000 KFOR
soldiers and 8,000 UNMIK police Kosovo Police
Service officers, that is not enough to stop violence. Of
course, as we improve our capabilities we will do
better, especially with the creation of pillar I, the
justice and police pillar, and the additional resources
will be helpful in achieving better results.

But it is also a process involving the people.
When it is said that the security of Serbs is threatened,
that is right. They have to live in enclaves; they have to
be under protection. Of course, one can, as an
individual, take a risk as a Serb and walk down the
streets of Pristina, but it is a risk. It is a smaller risk for
a woman than for a man, but it is still there. In any
case, there is the risk of being pointed at, because it is
a small community, as the Council knows, and
everybody knows everybody else, so people might
point at a Kosovo Serb. What we are still lacking to
some extent is having some Albanians come forward in
that situation and ask "So what?" But this is also
starting to happen, and it is the change in people's
mentality that is exactly what this whole process is
about. There are a lot of good people in Kosovo, both
Serbs and Albanians, who used to work together, live
together, know each other and be friends, and they are
gradually coming to the fore. We want these people
back, and they should be able to set the agenda, not the
people who committed the atrocities in the past. The
situation is changing, but it takes time and patience.
We have to continue and sustain this effort.

I would also like to express thanks for the good
remarks about strengthening our law enforcement
capabilities. I especially thank member countries for
giving us the capabilities, especially in the area of
organized crime. We have tried to pass many
regulations in the past half year, adding legislative or
judicial possibilities for addressing organized crime
and terrorism, arms smuggling, trafficking in women
and so forth. But getting the right legislation is only
half of it. The other half is getting the capabilities.
Here the creation of an organized crime bureau is
essential. It will give us the possibility of turning
intelligence into evidence. Members must realize that it
will take some time to infiltrate these organizations,
follow them and know what their pattern of actions is
before we get results. But the fact that we are building
the capabilities now bodes well for the future. If we do
not do it now, we shall not be able to address organized
crime further down the road.

There were also some comments, especially from
the Yugoslav Ambassador, on the security situation. I
fully agree that the security situation and the freedom
of movement of Kosovo Serbs and some members of
the other communities is not good enough, and our
entire aim is really to change that through the means
that we have. But this will not prevent them from
safely participating in the election, because we will
organize the election in such a way that it will be
possible for Kosovo Serbs in our communities who
might feel threatened to go and vote without fear; we
will simply organize it so that they can vote in the
enclaves where they live and work.

So it is not in that way that there is a security
threat to participation in the elections. It is very
important to underline that. There will be e and we
may already see the first signs - during the election
campaign, and maybe shortly after it, an increase in
political violence, but that will not only be inter-ethnic.
That will certainly also be Albanian-Albanian violence
associated with the process of having elections.
Nevertheless, we will do our utmost to avoid it. We are
putting many resources into trying to make
campaigning Serb politicians from Serbia proper,
Kosovo Serb politicians and Albanian politicians as
secure as possible during this election campaign. We
are dedicated to that. We should be able to deliver the
necessary security and cooperation with KFOR.

Ambassador Durrant had a question about the
flow of arms into Kosovo. We have done a lot to
address this. We passed the regulation on illegal
weapons possession. Both KFOR and UNMIK
police - KPS - have done a lot to deal with this. I
have to say - and I know that you know this - that
this is an area where multi-ethnic cooperation works
very well. Not so long ago we had a big weapons cache
in the Pec region, a truck coming into Kosovo. I do not
think it was meant to stay in Kosovo; it transited
Kosovo and most likely would have continued and the
weapons would have ended up in Macedonia. But it
came through Montenegro, from Bosnia. Fortunately,
police in Bosnia have been able to get their hands on
the people behind this. Of course the weapons came
from different locations inside the region and outside
the region. So it is not a Kosovo phenomenon. In this
case it was very clear that Kosovo was only a transit
area for these weapons.

But this case underlines the importance of
working together, trying to address trafficking in arms
and in women, and of course organized crime in
general. Therefore I wish to stress that we are
committed to it; we will continue our efforts. It is one
of our priorities, to try to stop this sort of thing.

On returns, I would just make one remark. It is
pointed out that in two years we have seen only 80
persons return. But it has to be clear that these are the
first returns, and that is the important thing. I had
discussions with Kosovo Albanian leaders, and they
supported the principle of return. The Interim
Administrative Council made a decision on a
declaration on the principle of returns, and we now see
the first returns.

It is a fragile process. It is very important that we
do not get a negative response from the Kosovo
Albanian population, and therefore we try to handle it
carefully, knowing that if the first returns fail it will be
much more difficult to have returns on a larger scale.
Up to now it has worked out very well, and I appreciate
that everybody understands the sensitivity of this. On
the other hand, one should never doubt the
commitment of UNMIK to continue returns, and on a
larger scale. We will certainly be ready to put forward
our plans as we approach the next season of returns.

I would like to thank Ukraine for the remarks
about providing training for civil emergencies for the
KPC. It is a very important process to develop that
capability.

I would also like to say that Ukraine had - I
think it was a Norwegian metaphor: sailors should
know where the harbour is. I fully agree with that. But
I have to say that when I accepted to be the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for this
mission I had to realize, reading resolution 1244
(1999), that that was not the case. The resolution of
course has a goal, but there is no answer to the question
about what the final settlement is going to be. This is
what makes the mission interesting and challenging: to
move toward the harbour without knowing precisely
where we will land - but getting closer to the
coastline. I think that is exactly what provisional self-
government is about.

Finally, I would like to underline that, as the
Yugoslav Ambassador clearly said, provisional self-
government does not prejudice the final status. It is
very clear, in how we have defined the powers of the
provisional self-government, that questions about the
final status or the sovereignty are not part of the
mandate. That is a reserved power and will be dealt
with when we come to the final political settlement. I
want to underline that point so that there is no doubt
about what is the position in that regard.

