Mr. Umemoto (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to express my appreciation to the Nigerian presidency
for its leadership in convening today's open debate on
an issue that is important for all of us.

As other colleagues have mentioned, there is no
doubt that security sector reform (S SR) is one of the most
significant elements in peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and conflict prevention. Japan fully recognizes its
importance and has implemented programmes in the
field, such as those in Afghanistan. Let me point out one
challenge in dealing with security sector reform. The
concept note prepared for this debate prepared by the
presidency (S/2014/238, annex) emphasizes that there
is an excessive focus on "hardware" issues relating to
training and equipping the security sector, compared
to efforts to enhance the delivery of "software"-related
support. With regards to this software-related support,
I believe that enhancing inclusivity in the security
sector, especially in the context of rebuilding post-
conflict States, is critical.

The reason is simple. If components and members
of the military and police are not inclusive enough in
the eyes of local people in post-conflict States, those
security institutions may be perceived as either biased
or serving only specific political groups. This mistrust
between local people and the security sector can easily
lead to a relapse of violent conflict as we have often
witnessed in the past.

Recognizing these challenges of inclusivity in
SSR, last week, along with the Tanzanian and Slovak
Missions, the Japanese Mission co-hosted a seminar
entitled "Inclusivity in rebuilding States: focusing
on the inclusivity in SSR". It was part of a series of
seminars on inclusivity in rebuilding States that
Japan has co-hosted since last year with Tanzania.
In the seminar, prominent panelists consistently
emphasized that it was crucial for post-conflict States
to invite different political, social and ethnic groups,
including traditional leaders and women's groups, into
the decision-making and implementation process of
building the new security sector. By doing so, these
institutions can enjoy legitimacy and impartiality in the
local community.

The discussions at the seminar clearly suggest
that this dimension of inclusivity should receive more
attention and focus in the context of United Nations
assistance in SSR. Rather than putting too much focus
on the number and equipment of officers in military
and police sections, the international community and
the United Nations must pay more attention to and show
commitment in supporting an inclusive and nationally
led process in designing, planning and developing the
security sector so that a wider range of local people
may participate in the process of creating new security
sectors. This inclusive and participatory process will
help local people perceive those institutions as their
own military and police, functioning based on the rule
of law and not on their affiliations to political leaders.
I believe that the United Nations, perhaps through
its good offices functions, should and can help and
facilitate more such inclusive and participatory process
among all stakeholders.

In closing, let me reiterate that Japan is ready to
continue to provide assistance for Security Sector
Reform in post-conflict situations.

