Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation welcomes the holding of this
Security Council meeting on preventing terrorists
from acquiring weapons, which is being held at the
very beginning of the Egyptian presidency and which
we hope will be constructive. I can assure you, Sir,
of the full support of the Senegalese delegation in the
discharge of your important task.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
our briefers today for the quality of their briefings,
which reaffirm our conviction of the imperative need
to prevent terrorists from acquiring all weapons at all
costs, including conventional weapons, weapons of
mass destruction and cyberweapons. I would, in that
connection, like to thank Mr. Yury Fedotov, Mr. J ehangir
Khan, Mr. Weixiong Chen and Mr. Emmanuel Roux.

After having procured and transferred the funds
necessary for financing their activities and having
implemented an efficient communications strategy,
including through the dark Net, and recruited and
trained combatants to carry out operations, terrorist
groups need to acquire the weapons and the technical
and logistical means to execute their cynical plans.
It was with that in mind that the Security Council,
which is responsible for providing the international
community with the means needed to prevent and,
where relevant, eliminate those multiple threats,
adopted several resolutions, including resolutions
1373 (2001) and 2195 (2014) on financing terrorist
activities, resolution 2178 (2014) on the recruitment of
foreign terrorist fighters, and resolution 2354 (2017) on
a comprehensive international framework to counter-
terrorism narratives, as well as travel bans that affect
a number of terrorist groups. It is for those reasons
that Senegal voted in favour of resolution 2370 (2017),
which we have just unanimously adopted, with the
hope that it can provide one of the missing pieces in
the framework for preventing terrorism. Accordingly, I
would like once again to thank the Egyptian delegation
for having initially proposed it.

In that resolution, the Security Council reaffirms
its decision to prohibit all forms of support, whether
active or passive, for entities or individuals involved in
terrorist acts, including by eliminating every possible
means of supplying such support to terrorists. The
resolution calls on Member States to take the necessary
legal measures against anyone who deliberately
provides arms to terrorists and to ensure the secure
management of small arms and light weapons, improve
their traceability and strengthen capacities in the legal
sphere, as well as in the technical area of border control.
In the same vein, in calling on Member States to fully
implement the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, the resolution pays
particular attention to improvised explosive devices, as
well as other non-conventional weapons. Accordingly,
we welcome the attention accorded to arms embargoes
in the resolution as an important means of controlling
the influx of arma.

The Senegalese delegation is, however, of the
opinion that the resolution just adopted would have
gained in scope had it integrated the obligation
incumbent on Member States to prevent the direct or
indirect delivery, the sale, and the transfer of weapons to
terrorists originating in their territories or with regard
to terrorism carried out by their citizens. Although it is
not included in the text of the resolution, that obligation
warrants the full attention of the Security Council at
a time when we are intensifying our efforts to prevent
terrorists from acquiring weapons. My country therefore
regrets the resolution's failure to mention disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes in
countries and regions affected by conflict, while, even
according to the fifth report of the Secretary-General
on the threat posed by ISIL (Da'esh) to international
peace and security and the range of United Nations
efforts in support of Member States in countering
that threat (S/2017/467), the return of foreign terrorist
fighters to their country of origin or their immigration
to other countries represents one of the most pressing
challenges facing the international community.

Given the growing number of conflicts
throughout world, especially in Africa, we fear that
terrorist groups and other combatants could use
poorly executed disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes to their advantage so as to
draw demobilized troops into their ranks, which is a
possibility that could also aggravate the problem of
porous borders. That is why in his 2006 report, entitled
"Uniting against terrorism: recommendations for a
global counter-terrorism strategy", the Secretary-
General warned,

"In order to prevent terrorists from acquiring
weapons in conflict zones, it is critical to establish
more stringent control over small arms and
ammunition and to put in place more effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes" (A/60/825, para. 46).

That speaks to the scale ofthe challenge to be overcome,
which demands that the international community and,
in particular the Security Council, take a holistic and
integrated approach to ensuring consistency in the
collective action of the Organization.

With the adoption of increasingly complex
resolutions, which are therefore becoming
increasingly difficult to implement, we will never be
able to emphasize enough the importance of better
coordinating and pooling the work ofall the components
of the international community. In that regard, the
establishment of the new Office of Counter-Terrorism is
particularly important, with its five primary functions,
including steering actions carried out through the
various anti-terrorism mandates delivered by the
General Assembly and reinforcing the coordination and
consistency of the activities of the 38 United Nations
bodies and external entities that constitute the special
team to combat terrorism, which is responsible for
the balanced implementation of the four pillars of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

In conclusion, the Senegalese delegation would
like to draw members' attention to the importance of
constructively disseminating and making accessible
what is required in the fight against terrorism through
the holding of seminars and regional workshops that
provide information and training for the benefit of
Member States, in particular the most disadvantaged
Member States, namely, a manual of best practices on
support and guidance for victims of terrorism. The
series of regional meetings that the important Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), currently chaired most ably by Bolivia,
has continued to hold worldwide is also focused on such
awareness-raising and training.

To conclude, my delegation would like, once again,
to state that further efforts are necessary to finalize the
drawing up and adoption of an international convention
on counter-terrorism. The draft of that convention has
been negotiated for decades within the United Nations,
and its adoption is due.

