Mr. Brencick (United States of America): The
delegation of the United States welcomes the
participation of His Excellency President Gusmao and
Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta in today's important
meeting. We thank the President for his presentation as
well as his efforts to consolidate democracy, peace and
justice in his country. We also thank Special
Representative Hasegawa for his report and for his
personal efforts to consolidate peace and stability in
East Timor. He and his colleagues in the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) are doing
excellent work in East Timor.

As other members have noted, the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2006/24), along with the
recommendations of the recent United Nations
electoral assistance needs assessment mission for East
Timor, underline the significant strides that have been
made by the Government and the people. We
congratulate them on their achievements.

The various United Nations missions to East
Timor have been good models for peacekeeping and
for post-conflict peacebuilding efforts. They have
come in when they were needed, performed what they
were set up to do and ended when the need for them
had passed. UNOTIL is scheduled to complete the job
it was created to do, and we believe it should end when
its mandate expires in May 2006.

We recognize, however, that formidable
challenges for East Timor remain. Ending UNOTIL
does not mean, and should not mean, ending assistance
to Timor, since the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Bank and a variety of bilateral
donors can and should continue to provide advice and
assistance to the Government of East Timor. We will be
working to ensure that such international assistance is
continued, to help East Timor in its process of nation-
building and reconciliation.

The United Nations recommendations for
assistance to East Timor's first post-independence
elections, expected to be held next year, illustrate how
the United Nations can continue to be helpful while
fully respecting East Timor's sovereignty. We fully
support the provision of such assistance by the United
Nations Electoral Assistance Division to help the
Government of East Timor set the stage for free and
fair elections and to further advance a young nation's
democratic development.

We strongly support a credible process to
determine accountability for the crimes against
humanity committed in East Timor in 1999. We share
the hope expressed by other members that the
Secretariat will soon brief Council members on the
comprehensive report prepared last June by the United
Nations Commission of Experts.

Finally, we are encouraged by the seriousness and
diligence with which members of the bilateral
Commission for Truth and Friendship have begun their
work. We look forward to further progress and are
hopeful that the Commission will pursue its work in a
way that generates full confidence in its conclusions'
and is transparent, holding public hearings, naming the
names of perpetrators, protecting witness
confidentiality and involving the international
community.

