The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Austria, Belarus, Croatia,
Denmark, Egypt, Finland, Germany, India, Ireland,
Italy, Norway, Pakistan, the Philippines, Portugal,
Singapore, Slovakia, South Africa and Thailand in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation ofthe President, Ms. Wensley
(Australia), Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria), Mr. Ling
(Belarus), Mr. Simonovic' (Croatia), Mr. Bajer
(Denmark), Mr. Aboulgheit (Egypt), Ms. Rasi
(Finland), Mr. Kastrup (Germany), Mr. Sharma
(India), Ms. Murnaghan (Ireland), Mr. Vento
(Italy), MrHanningstad (Norway), Mr. Ahmad
(Pakistan), Mr. Mabilangan (Philippines), Mr.
Monteiro (Portugal), Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore),
Mr. Tomka (Slovakia), Mr. Kumalo (South Africa)
and Mr. Jayanama (Thailand) took the seats
reservedfor them at the side ofthe Council

Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2000/1072, which contains the text of a
letter dated 6 November 2000 from the Permanent
Representative of the Netherlands to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a paper on decision-making by the Council
on mission closure and mission transition.

Although there are a number of open Council
meetings scheduled for this month, it is today's
meeting which should be seen as the piece de
resistance of the Dutch presidency. The title of our
theme has nothing to do with the Netherlands'
imminent exit from the Security Council, but it is a sort
of goodbye present and, as presents go, it remains to be
seen whether everybody will like it once it has been
unwrapped.

Before opening the floor to what promises to be a
lively discussion, I should like to say a few words to
render account of what we have done.

The way we have spelled out the theme of today's
debate - in an annex to a letter from me in my
national capacity addressed to the Secretary-General -
is somewhat unorthodox. The contents of the annex are
even more so. The Security Council does not often
embark on an open debate on the basis of a document
which contains terms such as "miserliness", "parochial
motives" and "double standard". In our View, however,
a debate on the Security Council's decision-making
process with regard to the termination of peace
operations can be productive only if we aspire to a
degree of openness that is not normally associated with
an open Security Council meeting.

In order to achieve that degree of openness, it was
inevitable that the line between my function as
President and the contribution I made in my national
capacity would temporarily become somewhat blurred.
But I can assure members of the Council that that
phase has now passed. The sole purpose of our annex
was to focus this debate, and we will soon see to what
extent it has been successful.

The question we would like to see addressed
today is whether the Security Council can improve its
performance in the matter of decision-making on the
termination or transition of peace operations. The
question is not specifically treated in the report
(8/2000/809) of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations chaired by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, but it
clearly dovetails with what that report has to say about
Security Council decision-making. There is an obvious
link between greater clarity about the termination of a
peace operation and the clear, credible and achievable
mandates that the Brahimi exercise demands for those
peace operations to begin with. We expect to hear
suggestions for improvements in a variety of fields
such as analysis and planning, political will,
commitment and leadership, and resources and
funding.

But a realistic discussion should also take into
account that there can never be an absolute guarantee
that a peace operation, once begun, will be pursued
until the conditions are fulfilled for an orderly
transition to post-conflict peace-building. A peace that
once seemed fit for keeping may suddenly melt away,
and we should also study the question of how, in such a
situation, the United Nations can limit the damage
caused by the inevitable early termination of the peace
operation.

That is all I wanted to say by way of introduction
to the debate. The floor is now open.


