Mr. Mohammad Kamal (Malaysia): My
delegation joins previous speakers in welcoming High
Representative Wolfgang Petritsch back to the Security
Council. We too are grateful for his written report and
for his briefing this morning, which highlighted the
continued progress in, as well as the many remaining
challenges and obstacles to, the implementation of the
Peace Agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We take this opportunity to reaffirm once again
our full support for Ambassador Petritsch's ongoing
efforts to further consolidate the path to a self-
sustaining peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We recall that following the initiative of
Ambassador Petritsch, the Peace Implementation
Council, meeting in Brussels last May, set three key
strategic targets for advancing the Bosnian peace
process: the strengthening of State institutions, a
comprehensive economic reform, and the accelerated
return of refugees and displaced persons.

We have supported, and we endorse, this three-
pronged strategy, just as we did the concept of
ownership espoused by the High Representative and
the New York Declaration, adopted by the Bosnian
joint Presidency almost a year ago. Like others, we
believe that all these efforts provide a clear framework
within which the international community and the
leadership of all Bosnian constituent peoples should
work together and make progress in the peace process.

As was made clear in the report, and in the
briefing by Ambassador Petritsch just now, some
progress- albeit still limited in many cases- has
indeed been made in those key areas. We take note of
the re-establishment of the Council of Ministers and
the appointment of its Chair, as well as of the recent
constructive performance of the joint Presidency. At
the same time, we recognize the fact that many of the
important decisions had to be imposed by the High
Representative or were made after his direct
intervention, as is evident from the recent cases of the
establishment of the State Border Service, the single
national passport and the amendments to the law on
succession to the Bosnian Presidency. This state of
affairs is rather unfortunate, or, at least, regrettable.

The international community- which, clearly,
includes the High Representative himself- would like
to see the Bosnian leaders and politicians increasingly
assume greater responsibility for working together and
engaging constructively to strengthen Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a State and promote the effective
functioning of its common institutions - a paramount
responsibility that is in line with the concept of
ownership. Clearly, this warrants much stronger
commitment and political will on the part of the
Bosnian leadership to work together for the common
good of the country.

My delegation welcomes the ruling by the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
was issued on 1 July 2000, regarding the
constitutionality of all three nations in both Bosnian
entities, as well as the Bosnian State as a whole. We
view this ruling as a significant contribution to the
strengthening of the statehood of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We, too, are pleased to note the considerable
improvement in the situation in the city of Mostar and
the Herzegovina-Neretva canton, which has led to the
unification of, among others, the city administration,
the cantonal judicial system and the cantonal Ministry
of the Interior. We recall that the existence of parallel
structures in this canton was a matter of concern which
the Security Council specifically highlighted in a
statement to the press last March. At the same time, the
recent development pertaining to the implementation of
the final arbitration award for the district of Brcko is
equally encouraging.

My delegation is also encouraged to see the
recent increase in so-called minority returns, which,
according to rough estimates, is more than double the
number of such returns during the same period last
year. However, the overall return process has been
rather slow, and further determined efforts should
therefore be made to promote it. Political and
administrative obstructions to the return process must
be addressed effectively while efforts are being made
to foster economic, educational and labour-market
opportunities for returnees. We further believe that the
full and rigorous implementation of the package of
property legislation will contribute to a further increase
in the rate of return. We note with concern that the
implementation of this legislation in certain areas,
particularly in eastern Republika Srpska and the
Croat-controlled municipalities of Herzegovina,
remains dismal, largely due to political impediments.

The judicial system assessment programme has
carried out important work that can contribute
significantly to the ongoing efforts to reform the
Bosnian judiciary. My delegation strongly supports the
continuation of this work and the need for concrete
follow-up actions in this area. We therefore welcome
the establishment of an independent judicial
commission that will lead to the implementation of the
judicial reform programmes.

Finally, while my delegation fully respects the
decision by President Alija Izetbegovie to resign from
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 12
October 2000, we feel that his departure from this
important office will certainly be a great loss to the
peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. My
delegation would like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to President Izetbegovie, who is an outstanding
statesman and a respected leader in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and who has worked assiduously for
peace in that country and the region. President
Izetbegovie has undoubtedly made an enormous
contribution to and personal sacrifices for the political
independence and territorial integrity of the State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the well-being of its
people. We hope that, in his new capacity, President
Izetbegovic' will continue to contribute to the peace
process in his country.

