Mr. Rama: In his opening remarks, Ambassador Heusgen very kindly mentioned that I play a sport that is all about jumping higher than the others. But I want to make sure that everyone knows that I see the Albanian chairmanship of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) as a mission to remain on the ground. I am well aware that what we, Albania, can contribute to doing in 2020 is not to compete with any of the giants that are involved in formulas, contact groups, forums or formats because it is up to them to push for an ultimate solution. What we can do and how we can add value is not to forget that, while there are discussions at the highest levels and exchanges such as the one we witnessed, there are people dying. I want representatives to know that more than 4 million people on both sides of the contact line, who have benefited from the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine facilitating ceasefires, are part of that tragic daily life. Let me recount that since December 2019, there have been 20,000 incidents, including 7,000 explosions, and 69 people killed after the ceasefire was declared and accepted by the sides. That is not an insignificant number although, in general, the number of casualties has dramatically decreased. I would join those who praised President Zelenskyy because I think that he is contributing, through not easy steps, to opening up a more intense and more fruitful dialogue. The exchange of a large group of detainees on 29 December was particularly important. But I also wish to underline that there is something factual. I do not want to take the difficult path of taking sides but I wish to say something factual, namely, that there is a widespread sentiment based on facts that the Ukrainian side is talking with proxies. That is the problem. Something much more substantial is therefore needed on the Russian side by way of contribution and influence because we all know that it can have an important influence on the sides on the ground. I visited the area and, as I shared with you, Mr. President, one cannot believe the situation, even being there. It is like a post-apocalyptic film, with 10,000 people on average walking to cross a tiny river through a bridge whose width is that of an ambulance, not larger. Incidentally, an ambulance can still not get to its destination because there is not yet an agreement to allow even terminal patients to reach hospital. They have to get out of the ambulance and walk. There are patients who die while walking in extreme cold -I can say that I had never experienced anything like that - and wind. Ninety per cent of those 10,000 people are elderly people. They have to cross to the other side to get their pensions and for pharmaceuticals. I do not think that it is difficult for both sides to reach a common understanding regarding those people, who belong to God, while they are asking if they are Russians or Ukrainians and eligible for this or that. It would be appropriate to give them the opportunity to bring their dying family members to hospital without having to stop in the middle of the way. So that is what I think we can, and will, try to do during this year. In answer to the question of the Estonian Ambassador about how the OSCE and the United Nations can do more, we must cooperate more because, after the United Nations, the OSCE is the second largest organization, with 57 member States, | billion people and very many issues. Frankly, we have to do more to make sure that what was agreed in 1975 remains valid. Territorial integrity, stability and sovereignty should be respected. In 1975, I was a pioneer with a red scarf in a country that was the North Korea of Europe - the only country that not only refused to join the OSCE but bashed the Helsinki Final Act as a new law for the degeneration of both the West and the East. Coming from such a place and looking at the world today, I can say that the Helsinki principles are still valid. However, while following current developments, it often seems that those principles are being used to fight each other rather than as a basis for coming together to resolve our issues.My final point is that I think the possibility of a United Nations peacekeeping operation in the area under discussion should not be excluded. That is because there is something very disturbing about the situation there. The Special Monitoring Mission has brought about a lot of a lot of change and has, as my Russian colleague said, made an important contribution. However, that is only during the day. Once night falls, it is back to bases and there are explosions and shooting. We have been able to make good progress thanks to the use of technology, because while the Special Monitoring Mission personnel cannot monitor the entire border 24 hours a day, video surveillance can. A United Nations peacekeeping operation should therefore be considered by all, particularly as a tool to give the process substance in the minds of all those who must guarantee the ceasefire, given that ongoing work to implement agreements, formulas and formats may take a long time. I was very impressed that one of the Council members today brought up the need to implement something that was already decided in 2008. From 2008 to 2020 - a dozen years - people have died, people have suffered and risking their lives while the conflict is still unresolved and may remain so. That is all I have to say here. The OSCE and the United Nations can do what the parties to the conflict, and perhaps the facilitators, too, are not able to provide - a better life for the normal people who are going through hell while the back and forth continues. The situation is not particularly promising as it could continue for ages. The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.
