The President: As this is the first formal meeting
of the Security Council in the month of March, I should
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Rafael Dario Ramirez
Carrefio, Permanent Representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, for his service as President of
the Council for the month of February 2016. I am sure
I speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Ramirez Carrefio and
his delegation for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Non-proliferation/Democratic People's Republic
of Korea

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Albania, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Norway, Palau,
the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, Turkey
and Vanuatu to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2016/202, which contains the text ofa draft
resolution submitted by Albania, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, the Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Senegal, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, Ukraine,
the United Kingdom, the United States, Uruguay
and Vanuatu.

The Council is ready to proceed to a vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)


The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2270 (2016).

I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.


