The Secretary-General: I welcome wholeheartedly
the draft resolution the Council is about to adopt and I
am greatly relieved that it provides for a full and
immediate cessation of hostilities. It is absolutely vital
that the fighting now stop. Provided it does, I believe
that this draft resolution will make it possible to
conclude a sustainable and lasting ceasefire agreement
in the days ahead, and I hope that this could be the
beginning of a process to solve the underlying political
problems in the region through peaceful means.

But I would be remiss if I did not tell members
how profoundly disappointed I am that the Council did
not reach this point much, much earlier, and I am
convinced that my disappointment and sense of
frustration are shared by hundreds of millions of
people around the world. For weeks now, I and many
others have been calling repeatedly for an immediate
cessation of hostilities, for the sake of the civilian
population on both sides who have suffered such
terrible, unnecessary pain and loss. All members of the
Council must be aware that this inability to act sooner
has badly shaken the world's faith in its authority and
integrity.

Since 12 July, when Hizbollah launched an
unprovoked attack on Israel, killing eight Israeli
soldiers and kidnapping two, both Lebanon and Israel
have been thrown back into the turmoil of war, death
and destruction.

According to the Lebanese Government, over
1,000 Lebanese have been killed and over 3,600
injured. Around a quarter of all of Lebanon's
inhabitants, close to a million people, have been
displaced. Too many of the victims have been children.
In fact, more children than fighters have died in this
06-4649]

conflict. Israeli bombing has turned thousands of
homes to rubble. It has also destroyed dozens of
bridges and roads, with the result that more than
100,000 people cannot reach safety; nor can relief
supplies reach them. Such devastation would be tragic
at any time. That it has been inflicted on Lebanon's
people just when they were beginning to make real
progress towards political reform and economic
recovery makes it all the more so.

Israelis, for their part, have been newly awakened
to a threat which they had hoped, with good reason, to
have escaped when - as the Council certified on my
recommendation - they withdrew from Lebanon six
years ago. Some 41 Israeli civilians have been killed,
and hundreds of thousands have had their lives
disrupted - being forced into shelters or to flee their
homes - by rocket attacks from Hizbollah, which has
launched its fire indiscriminately, to sow the widest
possible terror, making no effort to distinguish between
civilian and military targets and also endangering
civilians on its own side by firing from the midst of
heavily populated areas.

Nor has the damage been limited to Lebanon and
Israel. A region that could ill afford another chapter of
violence and another source of instability has been
inflamed further still. Extremists have been given new
ammunition. The United Nations itself has been a target
of protest and violence, despite the Organization's
humanitarian efforts, including those of our valiant
peacekeepers in the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL), to reach people trapped in the
crossfire. UNIFIL has had to cope with a situation for
which it was neither mandated nor equipped.

I am full of pride and admiration for the
courageous men and women who serve under the
United Nations flag, and indeed for all the
humanitarian workers; they have shown incredible
courage since 12 July in carrying out their duties in the
midst of intense fighting, which has injured 16 United
Nations personnel and, tragically, caused the deaths of
five others.

Indeed, UNIFIL's tenacity has made possible the
diplomatic solution that you, the members of the Security
Council, have just forged. Without it, you would have
had to face the difficult prospect of UNIFIL's
withdrawal. Indeed, you may yet have to face it in the
hours and days ahead if the immediate cessation of
hostilities called for in the draft resolution does not hold.
06-4649]

So, this draft resolution comes none too soon, and
it marks a vital step forward. I am glad that Council
members have been able to resolve their differences,
accommodating many points of view, and I hope they
will adopt this text unanimously. Having done so, they
must work with equal determination to make what they
have agreed fully effective on the ground.

First of all, humanitarian convoys and relief
workers must be given a real guarantee of safe passage
and access to those who need help. As soon as the
fighting stops, the daunting challenge of helping
people to return to their homes safely and rebuild their
lives begins.

Secondly, the draft resolution rightly has at its
core Lebanon's sovereignty and territorial integrity,
consistent with Council resolutions 425 (1978), 1559
(2004) and 1680 (2006). The international community
must give the Lebanese Government all possible
support, so that it can make that sovereignty effective.
The Government, acting through its regular armed
forces and police, must be able to assert its authority
throughout the country and on all its borders,
particularly to prevent illegal and destabilizing flows
of arms. Only when there is one authority, and one gun,
will there be a chance of lasting stability. The Lebanese
State, like any other sovereign State, must have a
monopoly of the use of force on its own territory.

That implies, of course, a full and swift Israeli
withdrawal from Lebanese territory. We now have a
clear scenario for achieving that.

The decision of the Lebanese Government to
deploy 15,000 of the country's armed forces to the
south is a significant development. But, ready and
willing as the army may be to undertake this task, the
Government itself has acknowledged the need for help.
This makes the Council's decision to strengthen the
mandate and the numbers of UNIFIL a vital ingredient
of the package.

Now, UNIFIL faces a new task, perhaps even
more difficult and dangerous than its previous one. It
must be robust and effective and ensure that no vacuum
is left between the Israeli withdrawal and the
deployment of Lebanese forces. Obviously, if it is to
carry out this new mandate, it needs to be augmented
with the utmost urgency and provided with
sophisticated military capabilities. The Council cannot
afford to relax for one minute. I urge its members to
consult closely, and at once, with both existing and
potential troop contributors, with a view to generating
the additional forces needed as quickly as possible,
before the situation on the ground once again spins out
of control. And I urge the Council to make sure they
have the equipment they will need.

I also appeal to all potential donors to respond
swiftly to requests from the Lebanese Government for
financial help as it struggles to reconstruct its
devastated country.

Some may well be reluctant to do so without
solid assurances that, this time, peace is here to stay.
Such assurances are indeed essential. And they must
rest not only on the cessation of hostilities or the
deployment of an expanded peace force, but on the
resolution of fundamental underlying political
problems, including the release of prisoners, starting
with those who have been taken hostage, and a
resolution of the Sheba'a farms issue in accordance
with resolution 1680 (2006).

I will therefore lose no time in taking up the role
assigned to me in today's draft resolution. We have just
had a terrible lesson in the dangers of allowing
problems to fester. We must by now all know that,
unless we address unfinished business, it can and will
take us unawares.

The Lebanese Government will meet tomorrow,
and the Israeli Cabinet on Sunday, to review the
resolution. Over the weekend, I will undertake to
establish, with both parties, the exact date and time at
which the cessation hostilities will come into effect.

Lebanon has been a victim for too long. Mired in
an incomplete political transformation since the end of
the civil war, it has remained an arena in which both
domestic and regional actors could play out their self-
interested schemes. Such exploitation of a vulnerable
country is shameful. It has undermined the laudable
efforts of many Lebanese citizens to consolidate their
country as a sovereign, independent and democratic State.

The country and its people deserve better. They
deserve the full support of the United Nations in their
effort to cast off the chains of external interference and
domestic strife. Doing so will require both the
establishment of national consensus among Lebanese
and constructive cooperation, based on mutual
goodwill and sustained dialogue, by all relevant parties
and actors at the regional level, including the
Governments of Syria and Iran.

Indeed, over the past five weeks we have been
reminded yet again what a fragile, tense, crisis-ridden
region the Middle East has become - probably now
more complex and difficult than ever before. It is now
undergoing changes, shifts and realignments on a scale,
and of a strategic significance, not seen since the
colonial Powers withdrew at the end of the Second
World War. Perhaps even more ominous than the
physical destruction are the changes in perception that
have been occurring, both inside the region and beyond
it. The Middle East, which has long figured at the very
top of the Council's agenda, is likely to remain there
for years to come.

The draft resolution that the Council is about to
adopt is only one step towards the comprehensive
approach that is needed. Other steps will need to be
taken - many others. In order to prevent yet another
eruption of violence and bloodshed, the international
community must now be prepared to offer sustained
support and assistance for the political and economic
reconstruction of Lebanon, and also to address the
broader context of crisis in the region.

In particular, we must not turn our backs on the
bloodshed, suffering and hardship that have continued
to afflict Palestinian civilians in Gaza and the West
Bank, or the danger from Qassam rockets that
continues to threaten the Israeli communities bordering
the Gaza Strip. Progress in the Middle East peace
process would undoubtedly facilitate the resolution of
conflicts elsewhere in the region, and vice versa.
Therefore, the various crises in the region must
henceforth be addressed not in isolation or bilaterally,
but as part of a holistic and comprehensive effort,
sanctioned and championed by the Council, to bring
peace and stability to the region as a whole.

The parallel crises in Lebanon and Gaza over the
past few weeks have demonstrated, once again, that
there are no military solutions to this conflict. War is
not - I repeat, war is not - the continuation of
politics by other means. On the contrary, it represents a
catastrophic failure of political skill and imagination
- a dethronement of peaceful politics from the
primacy which it should enjoy. By taking the first step
today towards ending the fighting in Lebanon, the
Council is belatedly reasserting that primacy - as the
founders of this Organization expected it to do.

Only political solutions will be sustainable in the
long term. The peace treaties between Israel and Egypt,

06-4649]

and between Israel and Jordan, are expressions of
stable political arrangements and agreements. Through
these treaties, the leaders of the countries concerned
have courageously brought stability and peace to
borders that were previously beset with violence, and
thus to their peoples. Ultimately, similar arrangements,
based on foundations that are well known to all of us,
will have to be put in place along all the borders where
there is conflict. Only comprehensive solutions can
bring lasting peace.

The United Nations stands for a just solution to
all these issues. We stand for security for Lebanon, for
Israel and for the region. We stand for a comprehensive
solution, and must therefore do our utmost to address
all the separate but intertwined issues and conflicts in
the region, whether manifest or latent. Delays will only
mean more lost lives, more shattered hopes and a
further decline in the standing and authority of the
Council and the Organization.

We must spare the people of Lebanon, of Israel
and of the wider region any further bloodshed - both
now and in the months and years ahead.

