Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
the President, Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon, World
Bank President Kim, Special Envoy Prodi, Ambassador
Antonio and Special Representative Reveyrand De
Menthon for their briefings and for calling the Council's
attention to the challenges and opportunities we face in
the Sahel.

My Government welcomes the United Nations
and the World Bank's joint commitment to acting as
partners in the region, as they are also doing in the
Great Lakes. We hope that the partnership will succeed
in mobilizing both internal and international efforts to
achieve political and economic progress.

As the briefings make clear, countries in the Sahel
continue to be plagued by cross-cutting challenges that
fuel cycles of violence and impede economic progress.
Porous borders and ungoverned and undergoverned
spaces across the vast region facilitate the flow of
illicit arms and narcotics, while also providing terrorist
groups with safe havens within which they can train
and plan future attacks. Civil strife and other social
disruptions contribute to widespread food insecurity.
The result is chronic suffering, giving way at regular
intervals to large-scale humanitarian crises.

The visit of the Secretary-General last month to the
region - joined by Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Ms. Dlamini-Zuma, European Union
Commissioner Piebalgs and African Development
Bank President Kaberuka - underscored the area's
importance and the need to build on prior initiatives
that respond to its many overlapping problems.
Accordingly, we commend the European Union and
World Bank pledge of $8 billion in new assistance
over the next five years to advance the strategic goals
laid out in the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel. We urge partners and Governments to lend
additional backing to that and associated measures.

I would also like to recognize the efforts of Special
Envoy Prodi to emphasize how critical it is that regional
Governments take the lead in identifying and designing
solutions to the diverse and interrelated dilemmas that
they confront. We encourage the entire United Nations
system to embrace those efforts and to push ahead
vigorously in implementing the integrated strategy. To
that end, the United States has been and will remain
an active partner in trying to advance the three goals
of the strategy: to strengthen governance, to improve
regional security capabilities and to develop long-term
plans for resilience.

In many respects, better governance is the starting
point for progress in every other arena, including
economic development, public safety and the peaceful
resolution of debilitating conflicts. Recognizing that,
the United States is currently examining ways to step
up its efforts across the Sahel-Maghreb region to bolster
democratic institutions. We believe that in the Sahel,
as elsewhere, an open and inclusive political system
can provide a foundation for problem-solving, while
simultaneously reducing the appeal of violent extremist
groups.

Building security capacity, especially in States
where the political institutions are fragile is difficult,
but essential. Working through the Trans-Sahara
Counterterrorism Partnership, the United States is
helping to enhance the ability of 10 countries in the
Sahel and the Maghreb to combat terrorism, strengthen
regional security cooperation, discredit radical
ideologies and assist communities that are most at risk.
The Partnership is an ongoing effort that is informed by
local experience and supported by many leaders in the
region. It recognizes the value of development aid in
responding to the political grievances and day-to-day
needs of people who might otherwise be tempted, in
their desperation, to join or support extremist groups.

Strategies to improve security and extend the rule of
law are more likely to achieve their goals where citizens
have reason to hope and are integrated into communities
that are becoming stronger and more cohesive. In a
parallel effort, the United States is also working closely
with Germany, the United Nations Regional Centre for
Peace and Disarmament in Africa, and other allies and
partners to prevent illegal trafficking in ammunition
and arms.

Through the Global Alliance for Resilience
Initiative in the Sahel, my Government is engaged with
States in the region, the World Bank, the United Nations
and other stakeholders in a vital initiative to reduce what
has become a chronic need for emergency assistance.
By coordinating our efforts to build resilience, we
are enhancing the capacities of individuals, families,
communities and entire countries to prevent, adapt
to and recover from civil strife, natural disasters and
similarly disruptive events. To the extent that those
initiatives succeed, people in the region will be less
vulnerable to stress of all kinds and better equipped to
achieve sustainable and inclusive growth.

The United States commends the United Nations for
making resilience a core pillar of its regional strategy,
and the World Bank for its recent investment pledges
aimed at improving infrastructure and supporting
economic development in rural areas, where the most
vulnerable populations live.

Although the challenges facing the Sahel remain
daunting, we are seeing progress. Many African
countries are deeply engaged in combating terrorism,
brokering peace and fostering their critical economic
and social gains. Looking ahead, we must continue to
respect the leadership, ownership and entrepreneurship
of our African partners. We are hopeful for the
future because we know that the goals of improved
governance, greater security and more resilience
that we seek respond to a yearning that exists among
people throughout the Sahel region, for a chance to
live in larger freedom, with greater prosperity, greater
security and more peace.

With those goals in mind, let us move ahead to
implement our integrated strategy in full cooperation
with one another.
