Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I should like at the
outset to thank you, Madam President, for having come
to New York to the Security Council to preside over
this meeting. Let me also say that this meeting is not
just timely but also important, and that the theme of the
maintenance of international peace and security, with a
focus on peaceful societies and conflict prevention, is
definitely what we need at this time.

In this landmark year of the seventieth anniversary
of the United Nations, important reviews of fundamental
normative and operational tools are taking place,
namely, peace operations, peacebuilding and the role
of women in peace and security. This is also the year in
which the General Assembly has adopted the Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), with the international community more than ever
aware of the need to strengthen prevention and the
nexus between peace and security, human rights and
development.

In fact, it is universally understood that without
peace and security and respect for human rights, the
Sustainable Development Goals cannot be achieved and
our collective commitment, enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, of saving succeeding generations
from the scourge of war will remain only a dream.

Our statement will focus on three issues: the root
causes of conflict; the response ofthe United Nations in
the context of preventing and addressing conflicts; and,
briefly, Angola's experience in conflict prevention and
resolution. It is our conviction that with determination,
preventive action and political will, war can be avoided.
It is also our conviction that to achieve that goal, we
must act first and foremost upon its root causes, which
include, principally, political, economic and social
exclusion.

Political exclusion is expressed by the refusal to
extendpolitical representation andthe rightto participate
in political life to large sectors of the population or to
specific social, racial or religious groups of people
inside a country. As political exclusion is unacceptable
by any standard, it has the potential to cause dissent,
thereby propelling those groups into conflict.

The holding of democratic elections; institutions in
which citizens recognize themselves; and the primacy
of the rule of law are fundamental prerequisites for
political inclusion and the building of peaceful societies
and a fundamental tool for conflict prevention.

Economic exclusion, emanating from the unequal
distribution of wealth and a lack of economic
opportunities for the citizens of a given country,
result, in general, in unemployment, poverty and
underdevelopment, culminating in social tension and,
frequently, in conflict and violence. When economic
exclusion is coupled with an authoritarian political
system, those elements combine to trigger conflict,
since the political authorities are in general unable to
engage in dialogue, hear grievances or engage in seeking
the peaceful resolution of conflict. The non-observance
of due respect for human rights and collective liberties
is among the main causes of the outbreak of conflicts
that we have seen in the world. Respect for the other,
despite political, social and national differences, is the
basis for social peace and a sentiment of belonging to
a community.

To build peaceful societies, the existence of a
free and responsible citizenry, aware of its duties, is
an imperative, as is a culture of peace, tolerance and
the acceptance of the differences inherent in social
plurality.

The main responsibility for addressing the root
causes of conflict lies with State authorities. The
United Nations can and should support national
efforts to sustain peace and prevent conflict. As we
have heard, in 2015 the United Nations is engaged in
a process to review its peacebuilding architecture.
Angola and Australia are honoured to co-facilitate the
intergovernmental phase of that process.

The report of the Advisory Group of Experts (see S/2015/490), to which earlier speakers have referred,
draws certain conclusions that are relevant to our current
debate. The concept of sustaining peace outlined in the
report calls for a systemic response from the United
Nations before, during and after an armed conflict and
for an urgent bridging of the existing silos that impede
efficient delivery by our Organization.

The report also calls for change in the mindset and
perception of conflict prevention by States Members
of the United Nations. Angola shares the belief that
a new approach is needed that considers that conflict
prevention and resolution as an area of intervention
for not only the Security Council but also other United
Nations main bodies, namely, the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council. We further believe
that it is only by creating the necessary synergies among
these organs that the United Nations will be able to act
transversally in addressing conflict prevention, taking
into consideration the three pillars: peace and security,
development and human rights.

The maintenance of international peace and
security should focus primarily on conflict prevention
and peacebuilding efforts aimed at resolving the root
causes of conflict and, in so doing, seek long-term
solutions aimed at sustaining peace.

Let me now share some of our experiences in
Angola. On 11 November, Angola commemorated
its fortieth anniversary, a day of vital significance in
our country, which was embroiled for many years in
a military conflict that deeply affected it. The loss of
an untold number of human lives and the destruction
of the social and economic infrastructure obliged the
Angolan people to find ways to stop the war and initiate
the process of rebuilding. From this it emerged that a
deep-rooted quest for peace was vitally needed to build
in Angola a peaceful society for future generations.

After the signing of a peace agreement in 2002,
Angolans had a strong resolve to address the root
causes of the conflict and start a genuine process of
fundamental reconstruction and peacebuilding. One
of the measures taken was the granting of a general
amnesty to all combatants who accepted the ceasefire
and peace agreement. In the Angolan context, this
has had major importance in ensuring the lasting
peace that has prevailed since 2002. Angola engaged
in demining; a disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process; and the voluntary collection of
small arms and light weapons in order to control their
flow. It also established a democratic institution and
a legal review process, as well as institutional actors
in support of individual and collective freedoms, such
as the Ombudsman. After the end of the war, two
general elections took place, and in 2017 a new ballot
initiative will be held. Angola has a relatively fast-
growing economy, plural opinions are expressed, and
civil society is making headway. The nation is stronger
and moving towards harmonious development. A lot
remains to be done, but the results achieved so far give
us hope for a brighter future.

In the international arena, Angola has been
supporting other countries in conflict prevention and
resolution efforts, while sharing its experiences and
strengthening its participation in peacebuilding efforts,
particularly in the volatile Great Lakes region. The
Kimberly Process of diamond certification, of which
Angola is currently the Chair, is a concrete instance of
multilateral cooperation on the critical issue of natural
resources fuelling conflicts. It has played a crucial
role in sustaining peace in the country while it turned
diamonds from a tool of war into an instrument ofpeace
and sustainability.

Angola has consistently advocated dialogue as a
means to diffuse tensions, promote understanding and,
ultimately, address the root causes of conflicts. That
has been our commitment in return for the support our
country received from the United Nations and from
which it benefitted during the most difficult years of
our recent history.

