Mr. Skraeic' (Croatia): As this is the first time my
delegation is taking the floor this month, we would like
to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency
for the month of August and assure you of our full
support. I would also like to take this opportunity to
thank Ambassador Le Luong Minh of Viet Nam and his
delegation for their excellent work last month. My
delegation would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Pascoe for his informative briefing, as well as
Ambassador Wolff for his update on the ongoing
efforts on the part of the Multinational Force in Iraq
and the Permanent Representative of Iraq for his
remarks.

The present report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) (S/2008/495) once again has shown that Iraq
is making strong, albeit measured, progress, especially
in the security and political fields. Croatia welcomes
the assessment, made by the Secretary-General in
paragraph 56 of his report, that "Thanks to concerted
political and military efforts there has been
continued improvement in the security situation across
Iraq". We believe that these efforts, aimed at creating
an adequate and reliable, as well as a safe and secure,
security environment for all Iraqis, are commendable.
Although we note that casualties among both
Iraq's security forces and the civilian population
continue to occur at unacceptably high levels, we have
noted with satisfaction the increased cooperation and
partnership demonstrated by local officials with the
Government, which has been coupled with renewed
efforts by the Iraqi Security Forces to break the cycle
of violence. This strengthened cooperation with local
elements has proven to be crucial to the success of a
number of security operations conducted during the
reporting period against rebel or terrorist groups, with
increasing levels of success.

That said, we do recognize, as is mentioned not
only in the report of the Secretary-General, but also in
the draft resolution of UNAMI's extension, that many
security challenges remain in Iraq. More needs to be
done to ensure civic and political freedoms, and the
wider human rights situation throughout Iraq remains
alarming. While we understand the many challenges
associated with simultaneously attempting to
strengthen and uphold the institutions of democracy
while faced with armed rebel groups and criminal
gangs responsible for abductions, assassinations and
numerous other crimes, we hope that in addressing
these issues the Iraqi police and security forces will
manage to strike the necessary balance between public
safety and upholding international humanitarian and
human rights law on the one hand, and the need to
stamp out the operations of these criminal gangs on the
other.

While it goes without saying that security must
be a prerequisite for any successful political process,
we also need to keep in mind that democracy is an
ongoing practice that requires both time and resources
to succeed. We welcome UNAMI's continued work
with Iraq's Independent Electoral Commission and
welcome what was just mentioned by the Permanent
Representative of Iraq: that with UNAMI's
professional guidance and assistance, the Government
has been able to overcome the remaining problems
associated with the passing of the new provincial
election law, including on the inclusion of women
candidates. The adoption of the election law will not
only provide a platform in which local elections can
take place this year, but will also give ordinary Iraqis a
chance to make a difference in those areas with which
they are best acquainted: their local communities.

The constitutional review impasse continues to be
of concern for my delegation, especially as the
stumbling blocks to the success of this operation are
being revisited time and again. We hope that the
Constitutional Review Committee, which itself
recognizes that the stumbling blocks are mainly
political in nature, manages to use the time requested
until the end of this year in order to address these
issues and finalize its report.

Moreover, we continue to be concerned with the
persistent and ongoing problems associated with the
passage of laws on hydrocarbons, especially when
taking into account Iraq's increasing oil revenues,
which need to be managed effectively and responsibly
for the benefit of all Iraqis. We hope that the committee
of central and regional Government officials,
established to resolve these outstanding issues, will
complete its work in a timely manner.

Croatia also welcomes the confidence-building
efforts being conducted by UNAMI with regard to
helping to address the issue of disputed internal
boundaries, with the analyses conducted and presented
on several areas in northern Iraq. It also hopes that the
Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan regional
government will continue to use the good offices and
advisory role provided by UNAMI to find a solution to
the internal boundaries question as soon as possible.

We recognize that, as was mentioned in previous
reports, wider regional cooperation and dialogue are
crucial for the long-term stabilization and prosperity of
Iraq and its surroundings. The active and willing
engagement of neighbouring countries in strengthening
Iraq's international standing is essential in this process.
We are pleased to see that a number of neighbouring
countries 4 Bahrain, Jordan, Kuwait and the United
Arab Emirates - have announced that they will be
resuming full diplomatic representation in Baghdad.
We welcome especially the visit by Turkish Prime
Minister Erdogan to Iraq in July this year. This, along
with Iraq's accession to the Gulf Cooperation Council,
the successful holding of the third expanded
Ministerial Conference of the Neighbouring Countries
of Iraq, held in Kuwait in April this year, as well as the
high-level International Compact with Iraq Annual
Review Conference, held in Sweden in May, are all
vital for Iraq's continued reconstruction and
development.

Allow me to finish by reiterating Croatia's belief
that UNAMI, under the able leadership of Special
Representative De Mistura and his staff, continues to
be well placed to undertake a central and leading role
in the international efforts aimed at helping Iraq
overcome the plethora of challenges it is still faced
with, including but not limited to its role in assisting
the central and local governments in advancing
political as well as economic dialogue, assisting in the
constitutional reform process and facilitating dialogue
on the regional level.

The progress achieved thus far gives us hope that
the Iraqi people are determined to overcome these
challenges so as to transform Iraq into a fully
integrated and consolidated member of the
international community. We support them in that goal.

