Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Mali congratulates Sweden on the
organization of this debate on a topic of great relevance,
namely, conflict prevention and sustainable peace. I also
congratulate the Secretary-General for his outstanding
presentation of his vision this morning on this issue.

I would like to make some comments in my
national capacity.

For too long, conflict prevention has remained
unattractive to the international community, including
our Organization, which does not find it urgent. Alarm
bells are heard only when conflicts erupt and become
more complex. The various theatres of conflict in
the world, including my own country, are edifying
examples of that.
We need to reinvigorate preventive diplomacy. That
requires greater cooperation among regional, national
and international mechanisms for prevention and
peacebuilding. It also requires good neighbourliness,
peaceful coexistence, the non-use of force, mutual
understanding and respect, enhanced international
cooperation, and a culture of peace and dialogue among
religions, regions and civilizations.

Poverty is one of the main causes of conflict in the
world. The most vulnerable groups in our societies,
particularly women, youth, children and the elderly, are
the primary victims. Extreme poverty, climate change
and despair expose young people in our countries to
terrorism, violent extremism and migration, which
has been a source of the humanitarian crisis in the
Mediterranean. And yet solutions exist.

At the national level, our States must improve
governanceandcreateconditionsandequalopportunities
for all citizens. At the international level, we need
to implement the decisions and recommendations of
the major international conferences on financing for
development, so as to reduce the effects of poverty.

Conflict prevention is needed above all, and we
must refrain from creating crises and limit military
interventions, which often go against the advice of the
countries of the region, especially when "after-sales
service" is not provided. Indeed, it has been established
by now that the military action in Libya in 2011 has
had collateral effects on Mali and all the countries of
the Sahel. Preventing conflict also means working to
strengthen the capacity of the specific mechanisms set
up by regional organizations, particularly the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States, which make use of early warning tools.

In conclusion, I would like to highlight the need for
an inclusive and global approach that takes into account
women and youth in the analysis and implementation
of conflict prevention and peacebuilding strategies.
Nobody should be left out if we want lasting peace in
the world.

