The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

I would like to begin by thanking Special
Representative Zerrougui for her briefing. I appreciate
her efforts to promote peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and China will
continue to support her work. I would also like to thank
Ms. Mbela for her briefing.

The Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has recently been working actively to maintain
domestic peace and stability, promote dialogue among
all the political parties and ease intercommunal
tensions in the Kasai region. The Independent National
Electoral Commission is fully functioning and forging
ahead steadily with preparations for the elections. This
is a clear demonstration of the firm commitment of the
Government and the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to safeguarding national peace and
stability with a Congolese-led approach and achieving a
smooth transfer ofpower by holding peaceful elections.
China commends the efforts of the Government and the
Electoral Commission in that regard.

The Security Council and the international
community should fully respect and acknowledge the
aspirations and efforts of the Government and people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the same
time, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is still
facing challenges on issues such as mutual trust among
political parties and armed groups in the eastern part
of the country. Moreover, there is a risk that the Ebola
epidemic in certain north-eastern regions may spread.

While respecting the Democratic Republic of the
Congo's sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity, the Security Council and the international
community must provide it with constructive assistance.

The priority now is to ensure that the elections
are held smoothly. All of the country's stakeholders
should act in the country's fundamental interests,
resolve their differences peacefully through dialogue
and consultations and work together to advance the
electoral and political processes.

The international community should respect the
right of the Government and people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to lead the political process.
The African Union and the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, as well as other regional
and subregional organizations, should enhance their
coordination and cooperation and play an active role
in mediation.

The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) has played an important role in the
maintenance of peace and stability in the country.
China hopes that MONUSCO will continue to enhance
its communication, coordination and consultation with
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and perform its functions in accordance with its
mandate.

The international community should continue
to respond actively to the appeal for humanitarian
assistance to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
support the work of the World Health Organization and
the International Committee of the Red Cross with a
view to containing the Ebola outbreaks.

China will continue to work with the international
community to achieve peace, stability and development
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, based on
national ownership, as soon as possible.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

