Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to thank
France for its leadership of the Security Council this
month and for convening this debate. I would also like to
thank my esteemed friend Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his briefing, and the Secretary-
General for his report on the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2015/151). I would also like to express my sincere
appreciation to Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi and his
team at the Permanent Mission of Spain for their hard
work in facilitating the draft resolution on UNAMA's
mandate and for their dedication as penholder on
Afghanistan on the Security Council.

When the Security Council established UNAMA,
in 2002, to assist the Government of Afghanistan
and the Afghan people in laying the foundations for
sustainable peace and development in the country,
Afghanistan was in a fundamentally different situation
than it is in today. At that time, the State was unable
to function. The Government could barely provide
services to the Afghan people. The country was almost
bankrupt. Its national and international legitimacy had
been eroded. Its institutions and its civil society were
almost completely destroyed. Millions of Afghans had
fled the country, and Afghanistan had lost most of its
human capital.

The United Nations was instrumental in efforts
to establish the Afghanistan we know today. From
forging the Bonn Agreement in 2001, in the aftermath
of the Taliban regime, and coordinating international
civilian assistance over the past 10 years, to supporting
presidential and parliamentary elections, the United
Nations has supported Afghanistan's move from a
prolonged period of internecine fighting and bloody
civil wars to a new era of democracy and national unity.

As a result of our joint efforts, we have created
new institutions and critical infrastructure, made
unprecedented economic progress, built a capable and
well-trained army and seen the flag of Afghanistan
rise in the most remote parts of the country. Millions
of Afghan refugees have returned home, and a new
generation of educated Afghans has emerged to lead
the country towards a brighter future.

There was tremendous progress and change in
the past year in particular. Afghanistan completed its
political and security transition in line with the goals
set out at the Kabul, Bonn and Tokyo Conferences, and
it is now embarking upon the transformation decade.
In the summer of 2014, millions of Afghan women and
men cast their votes in historic presidential elections,
which marked the first-ever transition from one
democratically elected President to another. At the end
of 2014, the International Security Assistance Force
mission ended and the new NATO Resolute Support
Mission was established to provide training, advice
and assistance to Afghanistan's national defence and
security forces. Those forces are now fully responsible
for the security of the country.

As we welcome the renewal of the mandate
of UNAMA, it is important to note that today's
Afghanistan is not comparable with the Afghanistan
that UNAMA was established to support in 2002. It is
even different from the situation upon which last year's
mandate extension was based.

Afghanistan is gearing up to become a full partner
to the community of democratic nations. As it does
so, it is essential that the United Nations support
to Afghanistan be consistent with the new realities
on the ground and the goals of the transformation
decade. It must fully reflect the principles of Afghan
national sovereignty, national leadership and national
ownership, the successful completion of the transition
process and the initiation of the transformation
decade. It must align precisely with the Government's
national priorities. It must be effective, accountable
and coherent. And it must reflect the fact that the
Government of Afghanistan is ready to fully assume
the leading managing and coordinating role over all
assistance and development programmes, as well as the
international community's efforts in Afghanistan.

To that end, we welcome the Security Council's
request that the Secretary-General initiate a process
to conduct, within six months of the renewal of the
mandate, a full examination of the role, structure and
activities of all United Nations entities in Afghanistan, in
full consultation and engagement with the Government
of Afghanistan and key stakeholders, including the
donor community, in the light of the completion of
the transition and the beginning of the transformation
decade and in accordance with the principles of Afghan
national sovereignty, national leadership and national
ownership.

While an initial review of the role and activities
of the United Nations in Afghanistan took place at the
request of the Government of Afghanistan in 2011, the
process put forward in today's draft resolution will
allow us to fully engage with all stakeholders over the
next six months through a new, thorough and extensive
mechanism that will refine the framework of our
partnership and our relations with the United Nations
in a new era.

The Government of Afghanistan is determined
to do its part to build an Afghanistan that is ready to
stand on its own feet, take full responsibility for its own
affairs and assume its rightful place as a full and equal
partner of the international community. To realize that
vision, President Ashraf Ghani devised an agenda for
reform entitled "Realizing Self-reliance", which was
presented to the international community in London in
December 2014. At the core of that agenda is a compact
of stability and prosperity at the national, regional and
international levels.

At the national level, the Government of Afghanistan
is committed to enhancing our focus on the well-being
of the citizen through concrete commitments, including
eliminating corruption, tackling poverty, strengthening
good governance and the rule of law, promoting human
rights, including women's rights, and restoring fiscal
stability and economic growth.

At the regional level, the Government of Afghanistan
has embarked upon a new phase of engagement with
our neighbours, the wider region and the Islamic
world based on trust, cooperation and shared interests.
Increased cooperation is essential not only to achieving
lasting peace and stability in the country and the
region, but also to enabling Afghanistan to become a
hub for regional trade and integration and a land bridge
of prosperity for all. To that end, the leadership of the
country has engaged in a series of consultations and
dialogues with neighbours and countries in the region
to develop new and deepen existing trade, transit
and energy links and to enhance cooperation and
confidence-building measures.

At the international level, the new Government
has reinvigorated its international partnerships, as
evidenced by the early signing of the Bilateral Security
Agreement with the United States and the NATO-
Afghanistan Enduring Partnership. The upcoming
visit of the high-level delegation of Afghanistan to the
United States, led by His Excellency President Ashraf
Ghani, will provide an important opportunity to deepen
those commitments. In addition, the Government has
set a new tone in its dialogue with the international
community, including by expanding its partnerships
with many countries that supported Afghanistan in the
past decade. Those renewed commitments are votes
of confidence in a peaceful, stable Afghanistan and in
the belief that peace and security in Afghanistan are
essential to regional and global stability.

Lasting peace and security are critical to building
a prosperous and stable Afghanistan and to ending
the vicious cycle of fragility in the country. That
is particularly true at a time when violence affects
increasing numbers of civilians and when the crippling
triple threat of terrorism, extremism and criminality
threatens to undermine the future of the Afghan
people and the wider region. That is why the peace
and reconciliation process is the first priority of the
Government of Afghanistan. Afghans from all walks
of life are united in their urgent call for peace, and
their active involvement is crucial to the success of the
reconciliation process. As President Ghani said,

"The peace process is not a monopoly of the
Government; all our nation should take part in it."

It is time for those still engaged in fighting to heed the
widespread call for peace and play their part in building
the country's future.

We welcome the new phase of cooperation between
Afghanistan and Pakistan towards the shared goal of
peace and reconciliation. It is essential to the success
of the peace process and heralds a new era of relations
between our two brother nations. We also welcome the
support of all our partners, particularly in the region
and in the Islamic world, and would like to express our
appreciation to the People's Republic of China for its
help in facilitating the peace process.

The renewal of UNAMA's mandate is a testament
to the continuing partnership among Afghanistan,
the United Nations and the international community.
The Council's call for an examination sends a clear
message of dedication to long-term, effective support to
Afghanistan. All of our collective efforts over the past
13 years, the blood spilled and the lives lost, have been
aimed at enabling Afghanistan to become a full member
of the international community as a stable, peaceful
and democratic country. The time for Afghanistan to
take full responsibility as a sovereign nation has come.
With the support of the international community, now
and in the future, we can achieve that critical goal.

