Mr. Enkhsaikhan (Mongolia): My delegation also
would like to express its appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for taking the initiative of convening this open Council
debate on this issue. We believe that this question,
especially its far-reaching implications not only for
individual States but for international peace and security in
general, demands that it be taken up in the Council without
delay. Our appreciation and thanks also go to the Vice-
President of the United States and to the Secretary-General,
as well as to the representatives of the United Nations
agencies for their briefings and contributions to the Council.

My delegation fully agrees with the previous speakers
that the spread of infectious diseases, in particular the
proliferation of the most deadly infectious diseases such as
HIV/AIDS, especially across the African continent, has
become one of the most disturbing human security issues
facing the world today. It has indeed become a security
issue in its broader sense.

Since the first cases of AIDS surfaced in 1981, this
disease has killed almost 14 million men, women and
children worldwide. By 1998, there were over 30 million
people worldwide infected with HIV/AIDS, of whom 23
million were in Africa. It is estimated that 87 per cent of
the world's children infected with the HIV virus live in
Africa. The statistics also vividly demonstrate that with
only 13 per cent of the world's population, Africa alone has
about 70 per cent of the world's HIV/AIDS cases. These
and many other disturbing data cited earlier demand the
urgent attention of the international community and that
effective adequate ways to control and stop this deadly
disease be found.
Throughout 1999, the international community,
including this Council, devoted increasing attention to the
question of strengthening peace and security, as well as
promoting socio-economic development in Africa. It is
yet further recognition that global peace and security are
interdependent and therefore cannot be ensured unless
peace and prosperity prevail on the African continent as
well. Tackling the AIDS issue is an important component
of this, since durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa will not be achieved without effectively fighting
AIDS, protecting and preventing the entire population of
the continent from this disease that truly threatens the
very basis of human security.

We concur with the view that the scourge of this
epidemic can be removed and prevented only by joint
efforts, with the active participation of Governments, non-
governmental organizations, civil society and international
organizations.

The United Nations can and should play an
important role in assisting Governments and peoples to
fight against this rapidly growing scourge. It is clear that
one of the root causes of the rapid spread of this disease
is directly connected with poverty. This is confirmed by
the fact that about 44 per cent of Africans and 51 per cent
of those in the sub-Saharan region, which is most affected
by HIV/AIDS, are living in absolute poverty. It is
therefore my delegation's belief that the broad programme
of development assistance and poverty eradication
provided by the international community to African
countries must be directly linked with the intensive
programme of assistance aimed at promoting education,
especially health education, as well as health care.

My delegation associates itself with others in urging
the United Nations and its relevant agencies and bodies to
take decisive measures to address this challenge properly.
We also urge the international financial bodies not to
reduce but, to the contrary, to increase the resources
aimed at assisting African countries. We believe that
effective preventive measures should also be supported by
intensifying research work to eliminate and defeat this
scourge.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate once again our
support for the United Nations efforts to break the virtual
wall of silence regarding this scourge, to take effective
measures to stop the proliferation of this deadly disease
and to reverse it in the nearest future. I hope that today's
discussion in the Council and the follow-up debates will

 

contribute in a practical way to achieving concrete results
in the battle against this evil.
