Mr. Motoc (Romania) (spoke in French): I would
first like to say that the delegation of Romania fully
associates itself with the statement to be made by the
Irish Presidency of the European Union. I will
therefore be brief in my statement in my national
capacity.

Romania is profoundly concerned at the current
situation in the Middle East following the death of
Hamas leader Sheikh Ahmed Yassin in a targeted
operation by Israeli security forces. Yesterday, the
Council of the European Union condemned that
extrajudicial execution of the leader of Hamas and
seven other Palestinians by Israeli forces. It also
recalled its repeated condemnation of terrorist acts
committed by Hamas.

We are facing an extremely dangerous situation
that threatens to further aggravate the security situation
in the region. Actions of this kind could imperil the
efforts made thus far to relaunch the dialogue between
the parties and to find a peaceful solution to the Middle
East conflict.

We fully recognize the right of the State of Israel
to defend itself and to ensure the security of its citizens
against terrorist attacks, which have caused the death
of hundreds of innocent people. Ending the cycle of
violence, suppressing terrorism and dismantling its
infrastructure remain top priorities. However, the
perfectly legitimate fight against terrorism should not
undermine efforts to arrive at a ceasefire and to create
the necessary conditions for resuming negotiations.

At this particularly difficult moment, both parties
must refrain from all violent actions, which only
further inflame the situation, cause greater suffering
and reduce all chances of regaining the path of peace.

Romania reaffirms its commitment to working
with the parties and all other members of the
international community to combat terrorism, while
respecting the principles and the rules of international
law. The implementation of the road map must be
resumed without further ado. This settlement plan has
been accepted by the parties, and it is the only one that
offers an appropriate framework to reach, through
negotiation and with the support of the international
community, represented by the Quartet, a just and
lasting solution based on the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and the vision of two States living
together in peace and security within secure and
internationally recognized borders.
