Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Madam President,
for organizing this open debate, and I thank the briefers
for their briefings.

Japan remains committed to supporting a two-State
solution. We continue to believe that the most realistic
solution to the conflict is two sovereign States living
side by side within secure and recognized borders.
Lasting peace and security can be achieved only through
negotiations between the parties. However, at present,
there is little trust between the parties and we do not see
momentum towards renewed direct negotiations. Each
of us has a role to play in overcoming that impasse.

For our part, Japan is committed to continuing
its unique confidence-building measures to create an
atmosphere conducive to meaningful negotiations.
The role of the United States remains important. The
international community must engage with the parties
to bring about meaningful peace negotiations towards
a solution in line with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and the internationally agreed parameters.
Progress will require leadership by both parties. At the
same time, we must work to maintain people's faith in
the possibility of a political settlement. I would like to
highlight three points.

First, the serious economic and humanitarian
situation in Gaza needs to be urgently addressed.
Japan commends the efforts of Special Coordinator
Mladenov and his team in defusing violence and
providing economic and humanitarian interventions.
We are committed to supporting the implementation of
the package agreed at the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians. We ask for the support of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to ensure that the people in
Gaza will benefit from the package. The return of the
Palestinian Authority to Gaza is crucial.
Secondly, the continued settlement activities
and the demolition of Palestinian-owned structures
deprive the Palestinian people of hope and undermine
the viability of a two-State solution. Japan once again
strongly urges Israel to cease those activities.

Thirdly, we believe that investment in the next
generation is important. As Prime Minister Abe
mentioned in the general debate last month, we will
start a new programme to invite elementary and junior
high school teachers from Gaza to Japan each year.
With regard to investment in the next generation, the
role of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) remains
important. We are pleased with the tangible outcome
of the ministerial meeting held on 27 September,
which Foreign Minister Kono co-chaired. During the
meeting, Japan announced new assistance to UNRWA
of $4.5 million to help with the electricity shortfalls in
Gaza, in addition to the assistance already committed
to and dispersed this year. Japan is also continuing
its long-standing Israel-Palestine youth invitation
programme, which marks its twentieth anniversary
this year. The international community must stand
united to maintain the viability ofa long-term political
settlement. Japan is ready to enhance its political
engagement with both parties.

In Syria, the agreement between Russia and
Turkey has brought about a provisional ceasefire in
Idlib, which must be made permanent given the threat
facing its more than 3 million civilians. Advancement
of the political process is fundamental. Japan therefore
strongly supports the efforts made by Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General De Mistura over the years,
especially for the establishment of the constitutional
committee. Japan will continue to deliver humanitarian
assistance to all Syrians facing difficulties, no matter
who controls the area.

