Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): My delegation thanks
Assistant Secretary-General Mueller, Assistant
Secretary-General Khiari and Director Marcaillou for
their briefings.

The humanitarian situation in Syria remains
alarming. I believe that everyone in the Chamber is fully
aware of that. Humanitarian concerns are continuing
to grow as nearly 180,000 people have been displaced
and civilian casualties have been reported since the
escalation of hostilities began in north-east Syria.
Humanitarian concerns are also continuing to grow
because thousands of civilians have been killed since
the escalation of hostilities began in late April in north-
west Syria. And humanitarian concerns are continuing
to grow as camps are overcrowded and humanitarian
assistance is overstretched. Those concerns are real
and need to be addressed immediately. Indonesia
appreciates all efforts from the relevant parties to assist
with the situation on the ground and ease the suffering
of civilians. My delegation also appreciates the relevant
agreements that have been reached with the aim to
de-escalate conflict and cease military operations. We
sincerely hope that those agreements can be respected
and fully implemented. In that context, I would like to
focus on three elements.

First, the hostilities must end permanently. It is
essential to take all appropriate steps to protect the
civilian population, including those people that are in
internally displaced persons camps. All parties need
to ensure that their activities are based on respect for
international law and international humanitarian law.
All parties need to ensure that the ceasefire agreements
will not only be on paper but also, and most important,
truly felt by the people on the ground. In addition,
protecting civilian infrastructure remains crucial. We
note in that regard that the United Nations Headquarters
board of inquiry commenced its work on 30 September,
with the mandate to investigate a number of specific
incidents in which there was destruction of, or damage
to, facilities on the United Nations deconfliction list
and United Nations-supported facilities in north-west
Syria since the signing of the Idlib memorandum.
With regard to the activities of the United Nations
Mine Action Service (UNMAS), we note that, for its
part, UNMAS has played an important role to protect
civilians and limit the threat of mines, explosive
remnants and improvised explosive devices in Syria.

Secondly, we cannot overemphasize the need for
all parties to facilitate immediate, safe, unimpeded and
sustained humanitarian access to the areas requested,
and in particular to populations in need. During this
challenging moment, humanitarian access is indeed
crucial. We commend the United Nations and its
humanitarian workers who are working tirelessly to
deliver life-saving humanitarian assistance.

Thirdly, my delegation wishes to stress that the
hostilities must not disrupt the progress on the political
process. Indonesia is pleased to note that the launching
of the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned Constitutional
Committee is still on schedule. The launching and the
process that will follow need to remain on track. The
international community needs to redouble its efforts
in supporting the work of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen.
As reported by the Secretary-General, Syria
remains one of the greatest humanitarian crises of our
time, and we have the obligation to ensure that this
crisis comes to an end. It is not going to be an easy
process, but it is indeed doable.

As we celebrate United Nations Day today, it is my
delegation's fervent hope that we will spare no effort in
strengthening our collective work to support the peace
process in Syria based on the spirit of the 74-year-
old Charter of the United Nations - the Charter that
continues to be valid and that will continue to be our
collective guiding principle, in particular in saving
succeeding generations and uniting our strength to
maintain peace and security.

