Ms. Juul (Norway): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the five Nordic countries, namely, Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway.

We welcome Indonesia's initiative to hold this
timely debate. We fully agree that quality training and
capacity-building are crucial for improving the safety,
security and performance of peacekeepers. I will make
three points, based on our experience and the current
challenges facing United Nations peacekeeping.

First, the Nordic countries cooperate to provide
a wide range of training courses that are vital for the
effective implementation of peacekeeping mandates.
Those courses are open to all Member States, which
means that a wide range of valuable perspectives are
brought to discussions. The Nordic countries are also
supporting the review and updating of the United
Nations police training architecture, in line with
the Strategic Guidance Framework for International
Police Peacekeeping.

Secondly, we strongly support the emphasis on
innovative approaches to make training more effective.
The in-mission training carried out by the Nordic
Mobile Training Team in Mali is one example. The
team from Finland and Sweden trained more than
400 soldiers and officers from Burkina Faso, Cote
d'Ivoire, Egypt and Liberia during a five-week period
in Timbuktu. The training focused on strategies to
cope with the demanding security environment in the
mission area, such as counter-attack tactics, medical
first aid, escorting and patrolling. That was a pilot
project. We found it to be of great value to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. However, we also saw the need for
well-coordinated preparation on the part of all those
involved prior to the training period. We are therefore
looking forward to learning from the project and
sharing best practices, including with other countries
that provided or received that training.

Thirdly, if we are to improve the safety, security and
performance of peacekeepers, training should focus on
crisis management. That includes casualty evacuation
and medical evacuation. It should also focus on the
protection of civilians. Situational awareness is vital, as
is good conduct and a gender-sensitive approach. We are
convinced that, if peacekeepers take a gender-sensitive
approach, it will enhance their capacity to engage
with local communities in promoting reconciliation
and peace.

Special efforts must be made to ensure that women
are included in all training activities. Moreover, those
who have been trained must actually be deployed. A
greater number of women peacekeepers will result in
more effective implementation of mandates. Relevant
training also needs to focus on work to prevent,
investigate and prosecute serious crimes committed
against peacekeepers.

The Nordic countries are long-standing and
consistent supporters of United Nations peacekeeping,
and efforts in training and capacity-building will
remain integral elements of our support.

