Ms. Hailu (Ethiopia) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I would like to begin, first of all,
by congratulating your country on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of June 2016. I would also like to thank you, Sir, for
convening this debate on the protection of civilians in
the context of peacekeeping operations. This meeting
could not be more timely and relevant in the light of
the specific recommendations made by the report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(HIPPO) (S/2015/446) and the Secretary-General's
implementation report on the protection of civilians
(S/2016/447). I also thank the briefers for their briefings
this morning.

(spoke in English)

We all know that peacekeeping has evolved and
adapted itselfto changing security circumstances. That
is why most, if not all, of the peacekeeping operations
authorized by the Security Council today have
protection-of-civilians mandates. There is no doubt that
the primary responsibility for protecting civilians rests
with the host country, but in situations where that is
not possible and innocent civilians are at risk, United
Nations peacekeeping operations cannot and should not
remain indifferent. The shirking of responsibility by
peacekeepers for the protection of civilians in the face
of dire circumstances is indefensible.

We are pleased to note that the HIPPO report has
recognized that fact. For us in Africa, that is a very
important matter, and we believe the lessons learned
from the bitter experiences of the Rwandan genocide
should never be forgotten. That is why we have made
a paradigm shift from the principle of non-interference
to one of non-indifference in grave circumstances
involving human rights Violations and crimes against
humanity. That perspective is clearly enshrined in the
Constitutive Act of the African Union.

Although there has been much progress in setting
the normative frameworks for the protection of
civilians, challenges persist with respect to translating
such a mandate into action in the field. Undoubtedly,
there needs to be significant improvement in the
provision of peacekeeping operations with clear and
succinct protection-of-civilians mandates. But no
matter how elegant or elaborate the mandate, unless
it is put into practice by those that are in a position
to make a difference, not much can be achieved. The
enormous gaps in terms of the readiness, capacity and
training of United Nations peacekeeping operations in
carrying out protection-of-civilians mandates should
also be seriously looked into and adequately addressed.

Ethiopia is one of the leading troop-contributing
countries to United Nations peacekeeping operations.
The protection of civilians is, therefore, very relevant to
our peacekeepers, who are deployed in some of the most
volatile situations in Africa. It is not a matter of theory
but a practical challenge, one that our peacekeepers
face on a day-to-day basis, risking their own lives. That
is why we attach great importance to the protection of
civilians and why we are one of those countries that
have endorsed the Kigali Principles on the Protection
of Civilians. For us in Ethiopia, subscribing to those
principles was not difficult as such, because we believe
that our peacekeepers are already practicing them.

It is encouraging to note that a number of countries
have committed themselves to upholding those
principles, and we hope they will eventually become
the norm in United Nations peacekeeping. That will
certainly go a long way towards addressing the gaps in
the implementation of protection-ofcivilians mandates
in peacekeeping operations.

