Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank you most sincerely, Sir, for your work at
the helm of the Council this month and for your rapid
response to the request of the Arab Group to convene a
meeting on the deteriorating situation in the Palestinian
territories occupied by Israel. As the President of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, my country
understands the importance of holding such frequent
meetings on an urgent basis. We all understand the
dangerous nature of the situation in the Palestinian
territories since Israel's most recent campaign of force
and the eruption of chaos caused by its invasion of
occupied Palestinian territories.

Television networks and independent press
reports have provided coverage of the situation in the
occupied Arab territories, which offers clear evidence
of the heinous acts carried out by the Israeli troops.
These acts are not in keeping with the conduct of a
modern, civilized country and a Member of the United
Nations. In recent days, Israeli troops have savagely
pursued their operation to liquidate the Palestinian
population, particularly in the Jenin refugee camp,
where Israeli forces are doing everything possible to
hide the inhuman nature of their crimes. However,
coming days will reveal the true scale of the crimes
perpetrated by the Israeli occupation forces, crimes
which are added to the others that Israel has
perpetrated since its creation. Such Israeli acts
constitute State terrorism designed to eliminate the
presence of Palestine and Palestinians. They are war
crimes against innocent civilians and a flagrant
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention, of 1949.

My delegation calls upon the Security Council to
compel Israel to comply with Security Council
resolutions, particularly the recent resolutions 1397
(2002), 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002). Israel must end
its occupation of the occupied Arab territories in
general and the occupied Palestinian territories in
particular. The efforts of the Secretary-General and of
the United States Secretary of State are praiseworthy
because they are intended to bridge the differences in
the viewpoints of the parties. An international force
should be dispatched in order to protect Palestinian
civilians.

