Mr. Zhang Junan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Ambassador Osorio for this briefing.
Over the past two years, Ambassador Osorio and his
team have made great efforts to advance the work of
the Committee, for which China expresses its thanks.

China always attaches great importance to the
work of the Committee and will continue to closely
cooperate with other members of the Committee to
enable the Committee to fulfil its responsibilities in
a balanced, pragmatic and effective matter. China has
taken note of the midterm report submitted by of the
Panel of Experts, acknowledges the efforts made by its
members, and hopes that they will continue to carry
out their work in a rigorous and appropriate manner
according to the mandate of the resolution and under
the guidance of the Committee.

The Iranian nuclear issue is of concern as regards
the authority of the international non-proliferation
regime and peace and stability in the Middle East
region. Because of the complexity and importance of
the issue, the international community must seek a
comprehensive, long-term and appropriate solution.
In that connection, the right of Iran to the peaceful
use of nuclear energy as a State party to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons should be
respected. All parties, including Iran, should fulfil their
international obligations, including those contained in
Council resolutions.

At the same time, the international community
should relentlessly conduct dialogue, cooperation and
diplomatic talks towards a peaceful settlement of the
Iranian nuclear issue. Over the past year, China and
other concerned Member States have made productive
efforts towards relaunching the dialogue over the
Iranian nuclear programme and setting it on the right
track.

In the current context of major changes in the
situation in the region, it is all the more important to
firmly maintain and promote the process of dialogue.
The dialogue has currently entered the substantive
stage, and the parties should continue to work under
the principle of gradual progress and mutual respect by
showing greater goodwill, flexibility and pragmatism,
as well as enhanced mutual trust through engagement.
They should seek common ground and solve their
differences in pursuit of a realistic and sensible
settlement.

We also hope that Iran and the International
Atomic Energy Agency will maintain and enhance
their dialogue and cooperation, and agree as soon
as possible on an action plan aimed at resolving
outstanding issues. The relevant Council resolutions
should be comprehensively implemented, but sanctions
are not their final goal. China is a firm supporter of
diplomatic solutions, and is not in favour of putting
excessive pressure or imposing new sanctions on Iran.
We always oppose the use or threat of force. China
will maintain an objective, equitable and responsible
approach, working tirelessly for peaceful negotiations
and playing its own role in preserving the common
interests of the international community.

