Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
Following the signing of the Framework for Peace,
Security and Cooperation for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, we find ourselves at a key
turning point in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The framework process, which included a personal
engagement from Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, has
breathed new life into efforts to find a durable peace
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where over 5 million have lost their lives since
1998.

In the light of the renewed commitments from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, its neighbours and
the international community laid out in the Framework,
the Security Council has acted today to ensure that
the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO) supports the Framework
agreement in its efforts to address the root causes of
the conflict.

Given the introduction of the Intervention Brigade,
the United States has been particularly mindful of the
need to set MONUSCO up for success by streamlining
the other tasks that MONUSCO, particularly its military
component, are tasked to do. We underscore today that
efforts to protect civilians and neutralize armed groups
must remain at the forefront of tasks for MONUSCO
and are duties that MONUSCO peacekeepers must
do their utmost to perform. We recognize the need
for continued coordination with the civilian side in
those efforts, particularly to ensure the protection of
children and women and to prevent the continuation of
the horrible streak of sexual violence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In that regard, we fully
support MONUSCO's continued role in human rights
monitoring, which we see as a key part of protecting
civilians.

The Security Council has demonstrated its
commitment to achieving peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo by authorizing the intervention
brigade today. We call on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo Government to meet its commitment
to the parameters in the Framework, particularly in
implementing credible security sector reform. We also
call on the neighbours of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to meet their commitments in the Framework
agreement.

As we look ahead, we welcome the Secretary-
General's appointment ofMary Robinson as his Special
Envoy for the Great Lakes Region and will support
her efforts to craft and ensure the implementation
of a political process that complements the work of
MONUSCO to bring lasting peace to the citizens of the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

