Mr. Ryan (Ireland): Following our mission to
Kosovo under your efficient leadership, Mr. President,
and the most recent report of the Secretary-General,
this meeting enables us to assess developments
in Kosovo and to focus on the way forward. I am
grateful to Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his
comprehensive introductory comments.

As Ireland fully associates itself with the
statement that will be delivered later by the Permanent
Representative of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union, I will highlight only a few issues of particularly
pressing concern.

Despite the progress made, we see clearly the
difficulties that remain in Kosovo, and we see clearly
also the deep-rooted divisions between the different
communities. As President Putin said to us last Sunday,
the task assigned to Special Representative Haekkerup
is "Herculean". However, we have no doubt that the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) will
achieve their mandates to implement resolution 1244
(1999), and we support fully their work in this regard.

It is clear that the only possible future for all the
people of Kosovo is a multi-ethnic society based firmly
on respect for minority and human rights. As part of
the Security Council mission to Kosovo, I urged the
communities' representatives to develop the special
courage to participate in the process towards achieving
this. In so doing, I drew parallels between the
Northern Ireland Good Friday Agreement and the
Constitutional Framework in Kosovo - both of which
provide for multi-ethnic structures, without prejudicing
the character of an eventual, final constitutional status.
Of course, both processes require courage,
perseverance and generosity of spirit on all sides.

Ireland understands very well the profound
concerns expressed by the Serbs about the security
situation in Kosovo. Most of those who remain in the
province live in ghettos. Their freedom of movement is
severely restricted, and they exist in a climate of
constant fear. We welcome the recent decision by the
Special Representative to establish a new police and
justice pillar, and the promulgation of three UNMIK
regulations. It is essential to make further early,
quantifiable progress in the security area, including
regarding the illegal importation of and trafficking in
weapons and the recovery of existing illegally held
weapons. During the course of the mission, we told the
ethnic Albanian representatives in the clearest terms
that all terrorist activity must cease. We must sustain
and reinforce that message so that they can be in no
doubt whatever as to the refusal of the international
community to countenance any form of extremism.

While we welcome the opening of the UNMIK
office in Belgrade, and the various meetings between
the Special Representative and President Kostunica, we
believe that the Mission must liaise even more closely
with the administration there, including on conditions
which could lead to the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons.

President Kostunica has already accepted the
Constitutional Framework and has encouraged Serbs to
register for the elections. It is now essential that he
encourage them to vote. Like many Council members, I
was impressed by the honesty and realism displayed by
the President, Foreign Minister Svilanovic and Interior
Minister Zivkovic, and I have no doubt that they will
use their influence wisely and positively. In the
interim, all parties must work to develop the essential
components of a positive climate for Serb participation
in the elections. Those components were discussed
frankly with us by President Kostunica.

I agree strongly with Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno's earlier statement that Mitrovica plays a
central role in the political dynamics of Kosovo as a
whole. A comprehensive strategy which includes
political, social and religious elements is essential to
address the situation there. The parallel structures in
northern Mitrovica must be removed. The economic
situation and the high level of unemployment - which
serve to fuel extremism - also need to be improved
systematically and steadily, as they need to be
elsewhere in Kosovo.

The lack of progress in relation to missing
persons is clearly a source of great contention for both
communities, for whom it is a cause of common
suffering and disquiet. During the mission we delivered
messages to the relevant parties about this and about
the need to release remaining political detainees.

We believe the mission had a useful, practical
effect in that it underlined the full support of the
Security Council for UNMIK and KFOR; it sent strong
and unambiguous messages to all sides; and it imparted
an important signal from the Council as to the
importance of the high priority of sustained contact and
cooperation with Belgrade.

