Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I want to begin by
offering my condolences to all of those affected by the
attacks in Burkina Faso and Mali in recent days. The
United Kingdom condemns in the strongest possible
terms the violent actions of those intent on undermining
stability in the region. They will not succeed. I would
also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Wane
for his briefing today.

The United Kingdom has consistently welcomed
the creation of a Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) joint force and its objectives to tackle terrorism,
organized crime, people-smuggling and human
trafficking. We are encouraged by the early progress
that has been made since the adoption of resolution
2359 (2017) and look forward to the joint force
mobilizing and implementing its operations. We echo
the importance, spelled out in resolution 2359 (2017), of
the protection of civilians, respect for human rights and
the integration of a gender perspective.

In his briefing, Assistant Secretary-General
Wane described the resource challenges faced by the
G-5 Sahel joint force. It is important that its needs be
clearly set out, so that the international community
can explore supporting its operations and finances,
including through the donor conference that we heard
about today. The United Kingdom is offering training
support, including through the European Union, and we
continue to explore what more we can do.

We welcome the recent announcement by France
and Germany of the new Sahel alliance and fully
support this initiative. We urge all Council members to
examine how they can provide further assistance, as we
ourselves are doing.

We were reminded again in recent days of the
security challenges facing the region. The international
community is committed to confronting these problems,
and the United Kingdom believes that the joint force is
an important regional component of these efforts.

In addition to military efforts, however, we need
to tackle the political challenges. We welcome the
progress that has been made, but we urge all Malian
parties to speed up the implementation of the peace
agreement and to continue their dialogue. Important
steps have been taken in recent months, and we hope
and believe that these will continue.

May I conclude on a personal note by thanking you,
Mr. President, and colleagues around the table for your
welcome to me here today and to say how much I am
looking forward to working with all Council members.

