Mr. Adom (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My delegation welcomes this briefing
on the humanitarian situation in Syria.
I thank Mr. John Ging, Director of Operations and
Advocacy of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, whose briefing
informed us about the continuing humanitarian
challenges, linked in particular to the ongoing hostilities
between the parties to the conflict in Syria. In that
regard, the warning of an imminent Syrian offensive
against Idlib only increases our concern.

Despite the unanimous adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 2401 (2018), the long-awaited
stable humanitarian pause, indispensable for the
delivery of humanitarian aid, including medical
evacuations, is unfortunately struggling to materialize.
I recall that the resolution called on all parties to cease
hostilities in order to create the conditions necessary for
unrestricted and sustainable access by United Nations
humanitarian convoys to the besieged areas in order to
put an end to the plight of millions of Syrians.

Unfortunately, despite the Council's urgent
appeals, military clashes are still ongoing, as indicated
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/777), and
the escalation of violence spares neither schools
nor hospitals. They are contributing thereby to the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Syria. In
the north-west of the country, the report states that the
total numberofpeople inneed ofhumanitarian assistance
in the governorates of Aleppo and Idlib has increased by
more than 570,000 since early 2018, reaching a total of
4.2 million. Thousands of evacuees from the south-west
have been transported to Idlib - a town that recorded
the arrival of nearly 130,000 displaced people between
March and August. The worrisome deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in Syria is further exacerbated
by the difficulties encountered by humanitarian actors
in assisting populations in distress.

In that particularly difficult environment, where
humanitarian actors are risking their lives to restore
hope to millions of Syrians, C6te d'Ivoire would like to
commend the courageous actions taken for the return
of some 147,000 civilians to Raqqa city since the end
of hostilities in October 2017, despite the spread of
explosive remnants of war in that city. My country
also welcomes the continued cross-border delivery of
humanitarian assistance by the United Nations and
its specialized agencies, which has helped more than
3.3 million people in need.

In view of the deteriorating humanitarian situation,
C6te d'Ivoire recalls that it is incumbent on the warring
parties in the Syrian crisis to respect their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. It urges them in particular to refrain
from impeding the delivery of humanitarian aid. It
endorses the Secretary-General's appeal to all parties
to the conflict, Syrian civil society and all other actors
to cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic, with a view to conducting the
necessary investigations and bringing to justice before
international courts those who have committed serious
crimes under international law since March 2011.
The lack of consensus in the Council on the Syrian
issue further exacerbates the impasse in the political
process and jeopardizes the chances of a negotiated
way out of the Syrian conflict. In that context, the
joint humanitarian operation conducted by Russia
and France appears to us to be a model of cooperation
that should be welcomed and repeated. That project
enabled the supply of essential medical equipment to
500 seriously wounded and 15,000 lightly wounded
persons in eastern Ghouta. My delegation therefore
urges the members of the Council to consider all forms
of cooperation in support of the fundamental right of
the Syrian people to health, education and well-being.

Cote d'Ivoire encourages Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the political
process in Syria, to spare no effort to maintain the
momentum of consultations with a view to achieving
further progress in the implementation of the Sochi
final statement and the establishment of a Syrian-led
constitutional committee, in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015).

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the informal consultations
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General with
high-level representatives of the Islamic Republic of
Iran, the Russian Federation and Turkey at the Astana
process meeting in Sochi on 30 and 31 July. My country
remains convinced that the just and lasting peace
that our Council wishes to see in Syria must be the
outcome of a political process based on inclusive and
constructive dialogue.

