Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Security Council has just adopted resolution 1907
(2009). China abstained in the vote on that resolution.
In that regard, I wish to make three points.

First, China has always flrmly supported the
peace process in Somalia. China has maintained
friendly relations and cooperation with successive
Transitional Federal Governments in that country. We
support the international community's efforts to
promote the process of political reconciliation there
and have played an active part in supporting the
Security Council's diplomatic efforts in coordinating
with the Somali national talks launched in Djibouti.
The ultimate settlement of the issue of Somalia
3
depends not only on a substantive breakthrough in the
Somali political reconciliation process, but also on
sincere cooperation by the countries of the region. We
call on all parties concerned to genuinely respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Somalia, to
support the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia and to make a greater contribution to peace
and security in that country.

Secondly, China has always supported the African
Union as it coordinates with the broader international
community and as it plays an important constructive
role in addressing hot-spot issues in Africa. In recent
years, the African Union has vigorously engaged in
diplomatic mediation and good offices efforts, as well
as in cooperation in peacekeeping endeavours, to deal
with hot-spot issues in Africa. It strives to resolve
African issues in an African way, and it has gained
successful experience. Those African Union efforts
merit our respect and further testify to the Union's
value, as a strategic partner of the United Nations, in
maintaining regional peace and security. We look
forward to the African Union playing a larger role in
addressing conflict in the Horn of Africa by means of
political and diplomatic efforts.

Thirdly, China has always maintained that, in
imposing sanctions, the Security Council should act
with prudence. The Council's adoption today of a
resolution on sanctions against Eritrea should not
replace diplomatic efforts to resolve disputes through
dialogue and negotiation. The top priority now is for
all parties concerned to keep calm, exercise restraint
and refrain from actions that could exacerbate the
situation. Any country can choose its friends, but no
country can choose its neighbours. Harmonious
coexistence among members of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development is a blessing for countries
in the Horn of Africa. We hope that countries of the
region, including Eritrea, will bear in mind the long-
term interests of their peoples and their region and will
make concerted and more constructive efforts to create
a harmonious regional environment favourable to win-
win cooperation.

