Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (spoke in French):
In accordance with paragraph 11 (g) of resolution 1844
(2008), I have the honour to brief the Council in my
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia,
covering the period from 27 June to 25 October.

During the reporting period, the Committee
convened two consultations. On 3 October, pursuant to
paragraph 49 of resolution 2444 (2018), the Committee
heard a briefing by the Deputy Director of the
Operations and Advocacy Division of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on the fourteenth
report of the Under-Secretary- General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator concerning
the delivery of humanitarian assistance in Somalia and
any impediments thereto. That report was transmitted
to the Security Council on 7 October (see S/2019/799).

In her briefing, the Deputy Director concluded that
although Somalia was on the right track - with major
achievements on the political, economic, humanitarian
and security fronts - the country remained vulnerable
to another climate shock or escalation of conflict.
Moreover, the delivery of humanitarian assistance
continued to be compromised as a result of inconsistent
funding. In that context, she emphasized that it was
essential that humanitarian assistance be exempted from
asset freezing measures, as provided for in paragraph 48
of resolution 2444 (2018). Humanitarian organizations
had collectively and individually strengthened their
systems to identify and detect the risks of aid diversion,
evaluate the capacity of implementation partners and
assess relevant programmes through enhanced auditing
and reporting. The Deputy Director also called on
the humanitarian sector to supplement the sustained
provision of emergency assistance with longer-
term solutions.

On 15 October, the Committee heard a briefing
by the Panel of Experts on Somalia on its final report,
submitted pursuant to paragraph 54 of resolution 2444
(2018). I will not detail the contents of the report here, as
it is anticipated that it will be submitted to the Council
in the coming days. In his remarks, the Coordinator of
the Panel of Experts noted that AI-Shabaab remained
a threat to Somalia and the region and that it had
been confirmed that Al-Shabaab had been producing
home-made explosives and had further expanded
its revenue stream by levying a tax on virtually all
trade in the south of the country. The group was once
again responsible for the highest number of attacks
against civilians, in violation of humanitarian law. The
Coordinator of the Panel also noted that the current
impasse between the Federal Government of Somalia
and federal member states had had implications for
peace and security in Somalia. Acknowledging the
significant progress made by the Federal Government in
the area of public finance management, the Coordinator
of the Panel nevertheless referred to the work that
remained to be done in that area.

With regard to the arms embargo, the Coordinator
of the Panel believed that that measure had largely
prevented heavier weapons from reaching Somalia
and ultimately falling into the hands of Al-Shabaab
and other armed actors. In recognizing that the current
political and security contexts had changed since the
embargo was first imposed in 1992, the Coordinator
stated that it was clear to the Panel that the embargo
should be streamlined, simplified and updated in
order to reflect the current realities of counter-
insurgency in Somalia. That included strengthening
the monitoring of certain chemical components and
precursors, including commercial explosives, which
might be used by AI-Shabaab for the construction of
improvised explosive devices. With regard to the ban
on importing and exporting charcoal, the Coordinator
of the Panel stated that it was no longer clear whether
Al-Shabaab was deriving significant revenue from
that trade and recommended to conduct a review of
the ban, taking into account all implications for long-
term peace and stability in Somalia, which will be Vital
to achieving the effective implementation of relevant
Council resolutions.
The Coordinator of the Panel concluded his
remarks by commenting on the Committee's sanctions
list, which has been dormant for several years. He
urged Member States to use targeted sanctions to
discourage destructive behaviour in Somalia, including
that of arms dealers, charcoal traffickers, financiers of
terrorism, violators of international humanitarian law
and political spoilers.

Committee members had a fruitful exchange of
views with the Panel of Experts. They expressed their
gratitude and support for the work carried out by the
Panel in difficult circumstances and expressed the
hope that the Federal Government of Somalia would
participate constructively in that work. Of the 15
recommendations contained in the Panel's final report,
only one is addressed to the Committee. On Friday
18 October, the Committee unanimously agreed on
the action to be undertaken in response to the Panel's
recommendation. The Committee is in the process of
following up on that decision.

On 15 October, the Committee heard a briefing by
the Head of the Global Maritime Crime Programme
on the international community's efforts to disrupt
the charcoal trade to and from Somalia, and on the
complex environment allowing terrorist groups and
transnational criminal organizations to exploit porous
borders in order to finance their operations. I would like
to highlight two important points from that briefing.

First, while the production of wood charcoal is
funding Al-Shabaab, it is not a significant source of
funding. Secondly, investigations into the charcoal
trade reveal close links between Al-Shabaab and
transnational organized criminal organizations, whose
criminal activities including trafficking of persons,
drugs and their chemical precursors, weapons, sugar,
tobacco and materials used to make bombs.

I will conclude by summarizing some figures
on exceptions to the arms embargo for the current
reporting period, as well as other work carried out by
the Committee.

The Committee received five pre-delivery
notifications, pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution
2142 (2014) and paragraph 14 of resolution 2444
(2018), submitted by supplier Member States, and one
additional notification, pursuant to paragraphs 14 and
22 of resolution 2444 (2018), submitted by the Federal
Government of Somalia. The Committee also received
two post-delivery confirmations from the Federal
Government of Somalia, pursuant to paragraphs 14
and 22 of resolution 2444 (2018). The Committee
further received nine pre-delivery notifications,
pursuant to sub-item (g) of paragraph 10 of resolution
2111 (2013). In addition, the Committee received one
notification from a supplier State, pursuant to sub-item
(a) of paragraph 11 of resolution 2111 (2013) and did
not object to it. It is currently considering another such
notification. Finally, the Committee also received two
requests for clarification, one from a United Nations
entity and the other from a Member State, on the scope
and implementation of the arms embargo.

