Mr. Ray (India): Let me begin, Mr. President, by
thanking you for organizing this meeting. We thank the
Secretary-General and the Legal Counsel for the report
(S/2010/394) submitted to the Security Council
pursuant to resolution 1918 (2010).

India has committed its full support to
international anti-piracy efforts. We have a naval ship
deployed in the Gulf of Aden which has successfully
thwarted several piracy attempts and provided security
escorts to merchant marine ships in these waters. India
is also a founding member of the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia.

Several military groups and independent navies
are operating off the Horn of Africa and in the Gulf of
Aden. Despite this, the number of pirate attacks in the
region continues to be high, though success rates have
declined. With the increased presence of international
naval forces off the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of
Aden, pirates have moved to other areas and increased
pirate activity has been witnessed in the larger Indian
Ocean area outside the Internationally Recommended
Transit Corridor. India has therefore called for better
coordination of international efforts for escorting
merchant ships and patrolling in the region, preferably
under the aegis of the United Nations.

Ensuring sound and prompt prosecution of piracy
suspects and their imprisonment subsequent to trial is
critical to prevent impunity and to deter further attacks.
Naval operations against pirates cannot fully succeed if
the suspects apprehended by navies are released
without proper prosecution, because such persons tend
to return to piracy. Several approaches, including
recourse to bilateral memorandums of understanding
with countries in the region for prosecution and
incarceration, have been tried. These, however, have
not been entirely successful because of the lack of
capacity and resources to prosecute and incarcerate.
There are legal issues of jurisdiction too.

India has welcomed efforts to counter piracy
through the enhancement of regional cooperation and
capacity building of littoral States. Any effort for
prosecution and imprisonment of pirates cannot
succeed without the effective involvement of the States
in the region. The issue of imprisonment of convicted
persons can be best addressed by building prison
infrastructure in the region, ideally in Somalia. It is
also important to ensure that sustained and predictable
financing is available to the host States to handle the
financial burden of prosecuting and imprisoning
convicts over long durations.

The seven options mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report were also discussed in Working
Group 2 of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast
of Somalia, which deals with legal issues. The option
of an international judicial tribunal under Chapter VII
of the Charter did not find much support in these
discussions. In our view, the establishment of a special
chamber within the national jurisdiction of a State or
States in the region with United Nations participation,
mentioned as option 4 in the Secretary-General's
report, could be a suitable option. This option could be
dovetailed into the ongoing assistance programmes of
the United Nations extended to regional States to build
capacities for prosecution and imprisonment of pirates
mentioned under option 1. These programmes, as noted
in the Secretary-General's report, have achieved some
success. United Nations assistance could focus on the
three main components of legal reform, capacity-
building for prosecution and improvement of prison
infrastructure for the host regional States.

Besides being cost effective, this approach would
be relatively easier to implement as it would utilize an
existing jurisdiction with established crimes and
procedures. The regional proximity would be useful for
the purpose of the transfer of suspects by patrolling
naval States and the transfer of those convicted to third
States for imprisonment. While the financial assistance
provided to the regional States for capacity-building
could be drawn from the International Trust Fund, the
remaining funding needs could be met from United
Nations assessed contributions.

Universal jurisdiction over piracy has been
accepted under international law for many centuries.
All States may both arrest and punish pirates, provided,
of course, that they have been apprehended on the high
seas - including exclusive economic zones - or
within the territory of the State concerned. As
highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General, a
State can assume jurisdiction over acts of piracy
carried out in open seas and the exclusive economic
zone in cases where they have an interest, for example
where their flag vessel has been attacked or their
nationals are victims.

The General Assembly has called upon States to
take appropriate steps under their national law to
facilitate the apprehension and the prosecution of
suspected pirates. The Security Council, in resolution
1918 (2010), noted that the domestic law of a number
of States lacks provisions criminalizing piracy and/or
procedural provisions for effective criminal
prosecution of suspected pirates.

It follows that whenever there is a national law
and a State is interested in prosecuting suspected
pirates under its national law, the State must be
allowed to do so despite the establishment of a special
chamber with United Nations participation.
Accordingly, any special chamber created within the
national jurisdiction of a State or States with United
Nations participation should be complementary to the
national criminal jurisdiction. Therefore, the special
chamber that would be created under option 4 should
be complementary to national jurisdiction to try the
crime of piracy.

We have a strong interest in this subject. We have
a coastline of over 7,500 kilometres. A large part of
India's trade is transported through these waters. More
than 11 per cent of all seafarers engaged by
international shipping companies are Indian nationals,
and some of them have been taken hostage by Somali
pirates. We would therefore be happy to contribute to
any international efforts aimed at increasing effective
cooperation among States to tackle the growing threat
of piracy and armed robbery at sea.

Before I conclude, I would like to offer my
condolences on the recent attacks in Mogadishu and in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to also
salute the memories of three Indian peacekeepers who
died in hand-to-hand combat under the United Nations
flag, two weeks ago, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

