Mr. Li Kexin (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank the Secretary-General for his latest
report on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2008/458). We would
like to thank the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for his
briefing. We welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia, His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremie, to the
Council; we listened carefully to his statement. We also
listened carefully to the statement by Mr. Hyseni.

China's position on the question of Kosovo has
been consistent. We respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of every country. We have always
called for a proper resolution of the question of Kosovo
in conformity with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and on the basis of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. We have always
maintained that a lasting solution to the question of
Kosovo can be found only through negotiations
between Serbia and Kosovo aimed at achieving a
settlement that is acceptable to both parties.

Over the past five months, the security situation
in Kosovo has remained generally calm. However, it is
a fragile calm, tinged with tension. Much uncertainty
remains. China appreciates the reasonable spirit and
the restraint demonstrated by Serbia and Kosovo. We
encourage them to carry out practical dialogue in order
to solve their problems through diplomatic and
political means. They should work together to maintain
regional peace and security.

At the same time, challenges still exist in areas
such as the reconciliation and integration of different
ethnic groups and the return of internally displaced
persons, and efforts must be made to protect the legal
rights of all ethnic groups. There is no denying that
significant changes have taken place in Kosovo
compared to nine years ago. However, resolution 1244
(1999), which remains valid, continues to be the legal
basis for resolving the Kosovo question.

China has noted the assessment by the Secretary-
General and his proposals with regard to the
reconfiguration of UNMIK, and we commend him for
his efforts. We believe that since UNMIK was
established following the adoption of resolution 1244
(1999), its reconfiguration certainly should not stray
from the mandate conferred by resolution 1244 (1999).
The reconfiguration of UNMIK can only be technical
in nature. It must not involve the question of status.

Currently, the Council has not achieved
consensus on the Secretary-General's proposal. We
hope that the Secretary-General will carefully study the
different steps involved in the reconfiguration and the
post-reconfiguration mandate and evaluate the various
proposals objectively. We hope that he will continue to
have close contact with the parties concerned and
address their major concerns, so that the issues can be
resolved once and for all.

China will continue to support the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNMIK
in carrying out their mandate within the framework of
resolution 1244 (1999).

The European Union enjoys significant influence
in the Western Balkans. We would like to encourage
the European Union to continue to work for the
maintenance of regional peace and security. We hope
that the European Union, within the framework of
resolution 1244 (1999), will continue to play a
constructive role.

