Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank Special Representative Onanga-
Anyanga, Commissioner Chergui, Director General
for Africa of the European External Action Service
Vervaeke, and my colleagues Ambassador Ipo and
Ambassador Hilale. I also want to welcome the
presence here today of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Central Africans Abroad of the Central
African Republic.

The comprehensive Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
signed in Bangui on 6 February, is an opportunity that
must be seized. The report (S/2019/147) ofthe Secretary-
General reminds us of the urgent need to finally put
an end to the violence, restore the presence of the
State and create conditions for the return of displaced
persons. We commend all those who contributed to the
agreement, including the African Union, the United
Nations and regional and international partners. We
call on them to continue their support for the Central
African Republic, in particular in the framework of
the follow-up executive committee established by the
peace agreement. We also commend the courage of the
Government of President Touadera.

The agreement of 6 February will be truly historic
provided that all the parties invest sincerely, fully and
without delay in its implementation. First and foremost,
of course, the armed groups must cease hostilities
and lay down their weapons. As to the Government,
President Touadera has committed to addressing the
underlying causes of the conflict. In particular, the
country will need an inclusive Administration and
defence and security forces and must move towards
greater decentralization.

The fight against impunity is an important
dimension. We hope that the Special Criminal Court
will soon be able to begin its work. Entrenching the
culture of peace and reconciling Central Africans are
possible. Other countries have done it. It is now the
turn of the Central African Republic to put in place a
transitional justice system to advance along the path of
lasting peace.

In addition, the Security Council unanimously
decided to renew the sanctions regime on the Central
African Republic, including the arms embargo. That
is obviously an important signal for those individuals
who are responsible for significant impediments to the
peace process. Sanctions are not an end in themselves,
but a means to contribute to the goal of peace in

Central Africa.

I would like to turn now to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). In this early
phase of the implementation of the peace agreement,
MINUSCA must continue to fully implement the tasks
of its mandate, including the protection of civilians,
if necessary through vigorous action, as was the
case last month in Bambari, and ensuring favourable
conditions for the delivery of humanitarian aid. The
Central African population is in great need of it. In the
new context after 6 February, the task of supporting
the peace process takes on new meaning. In addition,
MINUSCA, supported by the European Union Training
Mission and other partners, must continue to support
security sector reform, the extension of State authority,
and the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme, which must now accelerate.

I cannot conclude without warmly thanking Special
Representative Onanga-Anyanga for the outstanding
work he has accomplished in his years with MINUSCA.

