The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

The Russian delegation voted in favour of
resolution 2488 (2019), proposed by France, adopting
the changes to the Security Council sanctions regime
in effect against the Central African Republic. We have
consistently worked towards and continue to insist on
the need to relax international arms embargo against
Bangui given the evolution of the military and political
situation on the ground. We are satisfied that our
arguments were heard and duly taken into account in
the drafting of the French text.

At the same time, we urge all to remember that the
authorities of the Central African Republic expect the
Security Council to go even further and to introduce
even deeper modifications to the arms embargo. In our
view, there is every reason to do so. We therefore intend
to return to the issue of further easing the arms embargo
during the discussion to take place in January on the
next draft resolution on sanctions relating to the Central
African Republic. We hope that by that time the views
of other Council members will have evolved towards
more substantive, practical decisions in this regard.
That would fully reflect the interests of strengthening
Government security structures, expanding State
institutions and safeguarding security, law and order
throughout the whole country. Furthermore, it would
also contribute furthering successful implementation
of the Khartoum Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic of
6 February, which we see as being in the interests of all
members of the Security Council.

We will continue to support the Central African
authorities in reforming the national security sector,
including in the area of strengthening the combat
effectiveness and capabilities ofthe armed forces. At the
request of the Government, we are providing military
and technical assistance to Bangui at no cost. Two
shipments of light arms and small weapons have already
been delivered. Russian instructors have been sent to
assist in training Central African soldiers. A number
of measures have been taken with the aim of improving
the humanitarian and social situation and creating
positive conditions to improve interconfessional and
inter-ethnic dialogue.

We intend to continue providing comprehensive
support to the Central African Republic and to take
energetic steps to achieve lasting peace in the country.
We are ready to engage in mutually respectful dialogue
with all stakeholders seeking to normalize the situation.
We believe that, given the conditions prevailing in the
situation in the Central African Republic, constructive
cooperation of all international players is extremely
important and needed.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on the representative of the Central
African Republic.

