Let me begin by thanking United Nations Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his briefing on the political situation in Syria. South Africa welcomes the relative calm across Syria and commends the parties for adhering to the 5 March ceasefire agreement between Turkey and Russia in the north-west of the country, despite some incidents of shelling across the front lines. We call on the parties to work towards a permanent ceasefire that will pave the way for the establishment of an enabling environment in which an inclusive Syrian- led dialogue aimed at achieving a lasting political solution reflective of the will of the Syrian people can take place. Special Envoy Pedersen's constant and continued engagements with the various parties puts him in a unique position and provides him with the understanding that can help him support negotiations for a nationwide ceasefire. The road map for achieving a peaceful and sustainable resolution to the Syrian conflict has already been outlined in resolution 2254 (2015), and we call for all sides to adhere to its provisions and see to its full implementation. South Africa also calls for the Security Council's - and the international community's - continued support for the Constitutional Committee and for the various political processes undertaken to bring an end to the conflict in Syria. South Africa remains fully supportive of the Constitutional Committee and appreciates the willingness and readiness of the United Nations to convene the third meeting of the Committee as soon as the global travel restrictions resulting from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic are lifted and allow for face-to-face meetings. Through our own experiences in the matter, South Africa understands that the drafting process for a Constitution can be challenging but it can also result in distinct rewards for all sectors of society. For there to be peace in Syria, it remains imperative that external interference in Syria come to an end. South Africa fully supports Syria's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. We are also concerned at the spillover effect that the conflict in Syria has had on other regions, some indirectly so. The spillover effect has been felt in North Africa, where external interference has exacerbated the conflict and contributed to further instability. South Africa reaffirms that there can be no military solution to the conflict in Syria. It is only through dialogue, negotiations, trust and confidence in and with all parties that sustained peace and prosperity can be achieved in Syria. With more than 50 confirmed cases of COVID-19 present in Syria, South Africa reiterates its support for the Special Envoy's call for a complete and immediate nationwide ceasefire throughout the country. Indeed, this will allow for the Syrian Government, the United Nations and its implementing agencies to adequately prepare for and respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. We encourage the parties to work together to create a unified response to combat the disease. Moreover, in keeping with the call of the Secretary-General and other international actors, the economic measures imposed on the Syrian Government must be eased to allow for efforts to fight the COVID-19 pandemic and to ensure that all Syrians have access to the necessary equipment and supplies to fight the virus.
