Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian): I thank you, Sir, for convening this important
meeting to assess the conduct of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We believe that it is most
timely to consider this cornerstone of the maintenance
of international peace and security in the context of
constantly evolving and changing trends.

(spoke in English)

Peacekeeping operations are now compelled to
be much more multidimensional and multifunctional,
with an unprecedented number of tasks, which means
that mandates must be strong, clearly stated and agreed
upon by all participants, with phased, sequential
benchmarks for operations to become achievable.
Peacekeeping operations today are also multinational
and multicultural, with personnel from over 100
countries.

Thus, with the new trends, the coordination,
streamlining and high standards of training for hybrid
peacekeeping operations have become key factors of
success, which will have to be reviewed by the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the United
Nations system as a whole, Member States and all other
partners. Likewise, field personnel will require greater
skill in liaising and cooperating with host nations
and internal and external parties, including regional
organiszations and non-governmental organizations,
which are often the first responders. High priority
should also be accorded to gender, humanitarian law
and strict codes of conduct.

Peacekeepers today are deployed in most hostile
situations where there is no peace to keep, in the classical
sense. War zones always face a higher incidence of
accidents and illness, but the number of malicious
acts in these hybrid peacekeeping operations lead to a
higher increase in fatalities. Thus, a systematized plan
of greater security to reduce the higher risks is crucial.

The deployment of new technologies, such as
unmanned aerial vehicles - used solely for surveillance
purposes, situational awareness and saving the lives
of United Nations personnel and local populations
alike - have shown beneficial results. At the same
time, it would be helpful to have a special task force
and platform in the Security Council to discuss future
potential advances and modernization, deployment and
the ethical dilemmas involved.

Peacekeepers come in many guises and with
varying areas of expertise, from military personnel
to economists, legal experts, electoral observers,
human rights monitors, and specialists in civil affairs,
governance and communications, to mention but a few.
Once again, thorough training and the development
of on-call lists of qualified personnel to fill numerous
positions rapidly in operations worldwide will, we
hope, meet that challenge.

The annual costs of United Nations peacekeeping
today exceed all other areas of United Nations activity
combined, which necessitates improved logistics and
administrative practices, the strengthening of human
capacity and infrastructure to make peacekeeping
operations cost-effective, and valuable investment
in saving lives. Member States are therefore urged to
contribute more, with all actors helping one another by
building partnerships.

My country, Kazakhstan, stands ready to help
United Nations peacekeeping operations to be effective
and efficient in fulfilling their tasks. We commend the
selfless service of all peacekeepers and honour those
who have lost their lives for the cause of peace.

