Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): I would like to begin by paying special tribute
to His Excellency Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
for having kept his promise to visit my country, the
Central African Republic, a few months after taking
office. It is our hope that his visit will bring about
change to the tragic situation we are experiencing in
the Central African Republic.

Like those who preceded me, I would like warmly
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November, while wishing you every success in the
accomplishment of this noble task. I am certain that
your rich diplomatic experience and great personal
qualities are an indicator of the success of your mandate.
Allow me to also express my deep admiration to your
predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Francois Delattre, for
the enormous workload to which he brought so much
energy during his mandate.

The visit of the Secretary-General recently made
to Bangui is a historic and symbolic journey of great
significance for the Central African people, who have
been cut to the quick. His four-day stay certainly
provided an opportunity for the Secretary-General and
the large delegation that accompanied him to measure
the extent of the challenges still to be met, particularly
the security and humanitarian challenges. His meetings
with all stakeholders of the Central African crisis
enabled him to take stock of what remains to be done.

His appeal to the international community to pay

closer attention to the situation in our country reinforces
our conviction that the United Nations - and especially
the Security Council - will take substantial decisions
and measures in the preparation and adoption of the
draft resolution renewing the mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).
In that regard, I would like to commend the tireless
efforts of Head of Mission Onanga-Anyanga, whose
presence in this Chamber is a source of encouragement
for us. We cannot praise him enough for his dynamism
and unwavering commitment to working with Central
African authorities in order to find ways and means to
extricate our country from this crisis.

I must also commend the outstanding collaboration
and dialogue between the Government and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in addressing
all the delicate aspects of the crisis situation in the
Central African Republic. The briefing that he has
made on the situation in the Central African Republic
was very eloquent, and therefore I will not repeat
what he said. The situation continues to be of grave
concern at all levels. I also wish to thank the Special
Representative of the African Union for his briefing,
which provided us with a greater understanding of the
situation and that it requires greater attention and many
resources to assist the African Union in carrying out
the road map.

We are turning to the members of the Security
Council, calling on them for their support in the form
of providing MINUSCA with a new mandate that is
commensurate with the challenges that the Mission's
Head has just outlined for us. Those challenges, as I
said, are numerous, and we are expecting flexibility
and understanding from Council members.

