Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): My delegation is very
grateful to the Contact Group for its initiative on this draft
resolution.

It has been nearly three years since the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina declared its independence and
joined the United Nations, in May 1992. But since then the
Bosnian Serbs' aggression has continued; in fact, it has
been increasing day by day. Undoubtedly, the Serbian
aggression and occupation of many parts of the Republic
of Bosnia and Herzegovina are considered not only an
infringement on the sovereignty of this State but also an
unprecedented breach of all the relevant Security Council
resolutions and the most basic societal norms, and this, in
turn, poses a challenge to the will of the international
community.

Once again, our Council is meeting in order to
discuss another Serbian aggression. It is not a new policy
for the Bosnian Serbs to kill civilians and to exercise the
abhorrent "ethnic cleansing" and endanger the lives of
many United Nations peace-keepers. However, the latest
attack on the safe area of Srebrenica constitutes a new
twist of events and an unprecedented incident which
violates the status of the safe areas. This latest aggression
could undoubtedly lead to a further deterioration of the
situation unless the Security Council takes certain decisive
actions to prevent it. The failure of the international
community to deal with the Serbian aggression has
resulted, and will continue to result, in further attacks by
that particular group.

Thus, we believe that the international community
should demonstrate that it will not accept these violations,
especially those that target the safe areas and their
inhabitants and the lives of the United Nations peace-
keepers. In this regard, we call on the United Nations to
take all necessary measures to restore the situation in
Srebrenica to what it was before the Serbian attacks, in a
manner that will strengthen the security of these safe
areas within the territorial integrity and sovereignty and
political independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
has a sovereign right over all its territories.

My country, Oman, considers dialogue and peaceful
negotiations to be the best means of resolving any conflict
in the world. On the basis of this conviction, we support
all efforts exerted by the Contact Group in order to bring
this conflict to a peaceful settlement. While all the parties
in Bosnia have demonstrated a commitment to favour the
peace option and declare their acceptance of the territorial
settlement in the plan of the Contact Group, we, on the
other hand, have witnessed a rejection of this peace
initiative by the Bosnian Serbs. The North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) has launched an air strike on the
positions of Bosnian Serb forces in the areas, but this
unfortunately has come too late and has not stopped that
group from continuing further with its plans to "ethnically
cleanse" the areas and deport all people who do not have
a particular ethnicity. The latest attack on the safe areas

 

of Srebrenica is another argument that supports the call,
which Oman and many other countries have supported, to
allow the Bosnian Government to have all the means to
defend itself in accordance with the right enshrined in
Article 51 of Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.

We believe that the imbalance of power in the region
has led the Bosnian Serbs to take advantage of this
situation. Because of this, we reiterate our call on the
Security Council to reconsider the unjustified arms embargo
imposed on the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
believe that the people of Bosnia have demonstrated their
commitment to peace and their desire to live in coexistence
with their neighbours.

We believe that until the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is given the full right to exercise self-defence
it is imperative for the United Nations and the Security
Council to shoulder their responsibilities and to protect the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Oman condemns this
latest offensive by the Bosnian Serbs on Srebrenica and
calls on the international community, particularly NATO, to
take all measures to secure an immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of the Serbian forces from the
safe area and the return of all its people who have fled
from there. We also call on the Security Council and the
United Nations to learn from lessons of the past and to
prepare themselves for any future incidents of this kind, and
not to take for granted the good faith of the Bosnian Serbs.
We believe this is quite essential if the United Nations is to
prevent incidents like those we have so far witnessed and
thereby spare the lives of United Nations peace-keepers and
secure the sanctity of safe areas within the mandate that it
already has. We also condemn the current actions of the
Bosnian Serbs, which have led to the further deployment of
heavy weapons and the indiscriminate shelling of Zepa and
Gorazde.

Based on our understanding that the draft resolution
before us does not change anything in the existing mandate
given to the United Nations and does not in any way
undermine the authority the Secretary-General already has
to take measures he deems appropriate with regard to the
situation there, we will support this draft resolution.

