The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Australia, Fiji, Indonesia,
Ireland, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, Singapore, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand and Timor-Leste, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm welcome
to His Excellency Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ramos-
Horta (Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council
table; the representatives of the other
aforementioned countries took the seats reserved
for them at the side ofthe Council Chamber

The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 18 February 2004 from the
Permanent Representative of Brazil, which reads as
follows:

"I have the honour to request that the
Executive Secretary of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, Ambassador Joao
Augusto de Medicis, participate, without the right
to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 39 of the
Security Council's provisional rules of procedure,
in the Council's public meeting on Timor-Leste,
to be held next Friday, 20 February 2004."

That letter has been issued as a document of the
security Council under the symbol S/2004/120.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Joao
Augusto de Medicis.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Joao Augusto de Medicis to take a
seat at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/117, which contains the special
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor.

I should also like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to document S/2004/108,
which contains a letter dated 11 February 2004 from
Portugal, and document S/2004/ll4, which contains a
letter dated 12 February 2004 from Timor-Leste.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

I now give the floor to Mr. Guehenno.


