Mr. O'Brien: It does not need me to tell each and
every one of the members of the Security Council
that the impact of five long years of conflict in Syria
defies understanding, let alone description. The human
toll and suffering are sickening and obscene in that
senseless fight Where there is nothing much left to gain.
Hundreds of thousands are dead. Millions have been
displaced. Countless families have been torn apart and
towns decimated. Basic infrastructure is destroyed.
For many who are merely surviving, life is miserable.
Deliberately deprived of food and medicine, many face
the most appalling conditions of desolation, hunger
and starvation. We all must be ashamed that this is
happening on our watch.

The recent cessation of hostilities has provided a
much-needed moment of respite for some of those who
are suffering in this terrible conflict. Yet the recent
developments on the ground show a substantial and
worrisome deterioration, not least with increase of
violence reported in Aleppo, Horns, Idlib, Latakia and
rural Damascus. Just this morning, Syrian Government
forces are reported to have restarted using aerial
bombardment in Dar'a governorate for the first time
since the start of the cessation of hostilities.

It is the duty of the Security Council to ensure that
every possible avenue to end the violence be explored.
I reiterate the call for sustained, safe, unconditional
and unimpeded access for humanitarian assistance.
The parties to the conflict, the Security Council and
the co-chairs of the International Syria Support Group
must exert every effort to revive the cessation of
hostilities. The Security Council must not squander
the opportunity presented by talks in Geneva and by
the cessation in hostilities to put an end to the massive
human suffering in Syria. The world and the people of
Syria need this. They need Council action.

It is civilians who continue to bear the brunt of
the fighting. Since just the other day, an increase in
fighting in Aleppo city since 22 April, with reported
airstrikes on eastern parts of the city and improvised
mortar rounds and artillery shells impacting in western
parts, has left dozens of civilians dead and wounded.
Civilian infrastructure, including schools and hospitals,
has also been damaged. Yesterday, air strikes in
eastern Aleppo city yesterday struck Al-Quds hospital,
killing at least 20 people, including 2 doctors. Another
hospital in western Aleppo has also reportedly been hit.
It is horrific that the presence of a hospital or health
facility is now perceived by neighbours to be a threat
to their safety. As the Chairman of the Task Force on
Humanitarian Access, Mr. Jack Egeland, said, today
this is a catastrophic deterioration

On 19 April, a marketplace in Marat Al-Numan, in
Idlib governorate, was hit by air strikes, killing more
than 40 people and injuring some 145. A further 10
people were killed in a similar strike on a market in
nearby Kafr Nubl. The killing of civilians, including
five young children, is further evidence of a grotesque
want of humanity on the part of those carrying out
the attacks.

Fighting between the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and non-State armed opposition groups
in northern Aleppo governorate continues. I am very
concerned about recent reports of ISIL advances east
of Azaz, which threaten several camps for internally
displaced persons. In that area, near the border with
Turkey, some 40,000 people have been displaced again,
with many struggling to find adequate shelter. In Atarib
town, multiple air strikes hit the compound of the White
Helmets - that is, the Syrian civil defence force. Five
brave men who dedicated their lives to saving others
were themselves and tragically killed.

Violent clashes on 6 April between ISIL and the
Al-Nusra Front in the Yarmouk Palestinian refugee
camp have prevented people from leaving and
significantly limited the community's access to much-
needed aid. While between 13 February and 7 April, the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East was able to provide people in
Yarmouk camp with food and medical aid, the Agency
has been unable to deliver additional supplies since.

Despite the enormous challenge, the sheer courage
of our United Nations people on the ground and our
humanitarian partners continues to deliver life-saving
assistance and support to millions of people across
the country. The World Food Programme (WFP), for
example, reached 3.7 million people with food aid in
March. UNICEF and the World Health Organization
(WHO) held a nation-wide polio campaign in March,
reaching over 2.1 million children. This week, UNICEF,
WHO and partners began another immunization
campaign to reach 2 million children in besieged, hard-
to-reach and underserved areas.

Moreover, humanitarian cross-border convoys this
year are reaching nearly twice as many people compared
to the same period last year. In March alone, convoys
provided food aid to over 1 million people, as well as
medical supplies, non-food items, water, sanitation and
hygiene, and educational supplies to tens of thousands.
Since cross-border convoys began in 2014, they have
provided sustained assistance to many millions.

Humanitarian relief also continues to reach civilians
through cross-line inter-agency operations. Twenty-one
convoys deployed in March, and 24 operations have
proceeded already in April. Since January, assistance
has been provided to 778,175 people in need in besieged,
hard-to-reach and other priority cross-lines locations.
This week, the United Nations reached Rastan, the
third-largest city in Horns governorate, for the first time
since April 2015 - a year ago. Some 122,500 people
received vital assistance, including nutrition, water,
sanitation and hygiene, health-care supplies, education
and other basic relief items. In a sobering reminder of
the risk our colleagues face, a mortar struck in front of
one of the vehicles in the convoy to Rastan, injuring
the driver and killing a civilian. I condemn such
attacks on humanitarian workers in the strongest, most

uncompromising terms, and call again on all parties to
allow unfettered and safe access to those in need.

Since 10 April, WFP has led and carried out 14
high-altitude airdrops to those cut off by ISIL in Deir
ez-Zor city, meeting the immediate needs of some
100,000 people. The Syrian Arab Red Crescent is now
distributing the assistance on the ground. While airdrops
are used only as a last resort, with the support of many
member States WFP is able to continue the operation to
send food, as well as other humanitarian supplies, such
as medicine, nutrition, water and sanitation supplies.

Evacuations have taken place as part of the four
towns agreement. On 20 April, the evacuation of
over 515 people from the besieged towns of Madaya,
Zabadani, Fo'ah and Kafraya, including 80 medical
cases, was successfully completed. This is the largest
medical evacuation in Syria undertaken to date. But,
sadly, it is too late for some. We should not forget
the tragic deaths of two children and a young man
in Madaya, whose requests for medical evacuation
were rejected. While I welcome the evacuation, I
underscore the call on all parties to the conflict to
ensure that medical evacuations are timely and never
tied to political agreements or issues of reciprocity.
The provision of humanitarian assistance, including
medical assistance to civilians in dire need, must not be
a political question. It must never be a bargaining chip
in the war.

International humanitarian law is very clear on
medical treatment. The sick and wounded must be given
the medical care required by their condition. Medical
personnel must be protected in all circumstances, and
attacks against medical facilities are prohibited. Despite
this, the withholding of medical treatment continues
to be used as a weapon of war in Syria. We continue
to receive reports of parties to the conflict ignoring
these basic tenets of international humanitarian law.
In March, Physicians for Human Rights reported one
attack on a medical facility in Latakia, and that four
medical personnel were killed, while the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights reported that
a medical facility in Deir al-Asafir in Damascus was
destroyed by an air strike. As I highlighted, further
attacks on medical facilities and personnel in Aleppo
in recent days have destroyed another two hospitals.

The removal of medicines and medical supplies
from aid convoys continues. Last week, surgical as
well as basic health supplies, such as antibiotics and
pain-killers, were not allowed onto the Kafr Batna
convoy. This week, on the convoy to Rastan, the Syrian
authorities removed medicines from supplies, and
scissors and anesthetic medicines from midwifery kits.
This inhumane practice directly leads to unnecessary
suffering and loss of life. We must continue to press
the Syrian Government to allow the delivery of medical
supplies. This is not idle hearsay; it can be proved,
and no one should doubt that it will be when, one day,
there is no fighting and those responsible are held to
account. And they will be; there can never be impunity
for this behaviour.

While the delivery of humanitarian aid and the
capacity of the humanitarian community to overcome
deplorable conditions and limitations are inspiring,
it is important to remember that they are also stark
reminders of the ultimate failure of parties to the
conflict to uphold their fundamental responsibility to
protect the people of Syria and respect international
humanitarian law. The continued failure to do so will
result in more death and more suffering.

I remain particularly concerned about reaching
areas where complete access has been regularly denied.
The United Nations has submitted the inter-agency
convoy request for May to reach 35 towns in critical
need, and I call for access to be granted without delay,
including to Darayya and Duma. As has been reported
many times, these areas are in desperate need of
humanitarian aid.

Following the 16 April needs-assessment visit of
the United Nations to Darayya, which managed to get
into the town for the first time since 2012, the world
has seen both that access is possible and that the need
is acute and desperate. The town has been 80 to 90 per
cent destroyed; there has been no electricity since
2012; and water, sanitation and waste management
infrastructure is beyond repair. Households are unable
to consume more than one meal per day and are giving
priority for eating to their children. In the most severe
cases, families are enduring entire days without eating,
sending children into the streets to beg and being reduced
to eating grass and wild vegetation. Following the visit
to Darayya, the United Nations submitted a specific
request to deploy aid to the city. Intensely frustratingly,
that has yet to be granted. While access continues to
be denied, the population of Darayya remains trapped,
hungry and - let us be clear - starving. That is a word
I never use unless it is true.

As I noted in my report last month, I welcomed
the simplification of procedures to request cross-line
convoys. However, the application of these simplified
procedures has not been consistent - far from it.
The Government did respond within the agreed seven
working days to our April cross-line plan, approving
7 out of 11 locations. Syrian authorities also agreed
to provide facilitation letters within three days so
that convoys could safely proceed. However, delays in
receiving the facilitation letters within the specified
three-day time frame have delayed many convoys,
depriving civilians of the assistance they desperately
need. If the new process for inter-agency convoys is to
be effective, the timely issuance of facilitation letters
must be met.

We do not need just sustained, unimpeded and
unconditional access, but real and enduring protection
for civilians and an improved humanitarian situation
for the millions in need. Access cannot be a one-off or
even an occasional event, and it cannot limit or prevent
certain types of aid. The current levels of access still
leave civilians starving and without medical care. Even
in places reached this year, the needs are complex and
require a comprehensive and consistent humanitarian
response, which is currently often denied by parties
to the conflict. Just as the humanitarian community
relentlessly and bravely presses forward in efforts to
reach more ofthe people in need in Syria, so too must the
parties to the conflict grant safe, unimpeded access and
with all ofus - especially the Security Council - work
towards a sustainable political solution that can allow
humanitarian aid to respond most effectively.

The people of Syria cannot afford to see the
situation move backwards again. If the international
conununity fails to maintain momentum, with a
sustained cessation of hostilities and full humanitarian
access, the situation can and will only spiral further out
of control. The international community simply must
not let the chance we have today slip away. Frankly, I
am not sure just how many more days, weeks or months
the long-suffering people of Syria can endure this
protracted humanitarian catastrophe.

