Ms. Lee (Singapore): At the outset, I would like
to thank you, Sir, for convening this open meeting. I
would also like to thank Mr. Jayantha Dhanapala,
Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs, for
introducing the Secretary-General's report and for his
briefing this morning. We also note the important role
that Colombia has played on this issue, and we are in
the process of studying their paper, as well.

Disarmament efforts in the past tended to focus
on weapons of mass destruction. At the very most, we
concentrated on increasing transparency on major items
of conventional military equipment such as tanks and
artillery. But in so doing, we ignored the world's real
killers. It is not tanks, fighter aircraft or high-tech
weapons that cause the most deaths and injuries.
Instead, most conflicts around the world have been
fuelled by simple pistols, rifles and machine guns.

The Secretary-General has described illicit small
arms and light weapons as weapons of mass destruction
in terms of the carnage that they have caused. The
latest statistics of the United Nations show that at least
half a million people die each year as a result of small
arms and light weapons. What is even more disturbing
is that most of those killed are civilians, the vast
majority being women and children.

According to the Secretary-General's report, there
are more than 639 million small arms floating around.
Of those, more than 40 per cent are illicit. In the hands
of non-State actors such as terrorists and criminals,
those weapons are forces of destruction to be reckoned
with.

I would like to compare the flow of small arms to
a river. If harnessed correctly it can be damned up to
provide hydroelectric power and be an important
source of water. Similarly, small arms used in a
legitimate context can be wielded to ensure law and
order. Just as water is essential for our survival,
legitimate small arms are crucial for a country's self-
defence. But, like a river that bursts its banks during a
monsoon, a flood of illicit small arms can also leave
death and destruction in its wake. Like water, too,
small arms are inexpensive and easily available. In
some places, the deadly AK-47 assault rifle will set
you back by as little as $6. That is what commuters pay
each day to drive into Manhattan. That same rifle can
be obtained for a bag of grain in other parts of the
world. These weapons are also easy to use. A child can
be taught to use one in a single lesson, and these
weapons - unlike tanks, aircraft or artillery guns -
are also easy to conceal and transport. And, as we all
know, these weapons are lethal.
Concerned countries and non-governmental
organizations have asserted that illicit small arms and
light weapons are a threat to peace and development,
democracy and human rights. Illicit arms destabilize
regions, exacerbate conflicts, obstruct relief
programmes, undermine peace initiatives and foster a
culture of violence and impunity. Given the global
emphasis on combating terrorism, I would be remiss if
I did not also mention the role of small arms in relation
to terrorism. Certainly, terrorists can and do use such
weapons to carry out heinous acts against the innocent.

In recent times, the United Nations and the
international community - clearly aware of the
dangers of having a swollen river burst its banks -
have taken reinforcement action. The adoption of the
Programme of Action at last year's United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the Council's
presidential statement reinforcing the Programme of
Action are examples of this. When the Council asked
the Secretary-General to recommend ways that it could
contribute to combating illicit small arms and light
weapons in the issues under its consideration, the
Council was also in fact commissioning architectural
plans for yet another embankment.

In our statement last year, we made two key
points about the Council's role in combating illicit
small arms. We are pleased to see that the Secretary-
General has elaborated on these in his report. We said
that the Security Council could contribute first by
giving teeth to our arms embargoes through more
stringent implementation and monitoring of such
embargoes. Secondly, we could focus on more
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Our logic was
simple: We need to slow the flood of small arms and
light weapons being channelled into conflict or post-
conflict regions. We also have to mop up the reservoir
of weapons already in those regions. However, as all of
us know, this is much more easily said than done.
Nonetheless, one year on, the Security Council appears
to be going in the right direction.

It is heartening that the Council has, through the
establishment of monitoring mechanisms and panels of
experts, taken concrete action to strengthen the
enforcement of its arms embargoes to dam up the flow
of weapons into conflict and post-conflict regions.
There is a Monitoring Mechanism on Sanctions against
UNITA; Panels of Experts on Liberia and, most
recently, Somalia; and, of course, a Monitoring Group
mandated by resolution 1390 (2002) on the sanctions
against the Taliban and Al-Qa'idah. It is laudable that
the Council has set up such monitoring mechanisms
and panels to enforce its sanctions. However, the terms
of reference for such bodies is arbitrary. For example,
there is a permanent Monitoring Mechanism on
Sanctions against UNITA, but only ad hoc Panels were
set up for Liberia and Sierra Leone. Surely, the West
African countries are just as important as countries in
southern Africa.

Many of the recommendations made by these
monitoring mechanisms or panels are also similar. For
consistency and to avoid duplication, the Council
should consider a permanent monitoring mechanism to
deal with all the arms embargoes that it has imposed.
Furthermore, as the Secretary-General has hinted in his
report, there are frequent and flagrant violations of the
Council's arms embargoes. Indeed, it is often the same
States and international non-State actors that violate
our various arms embargoes. This reinforces what we
and other Council members have pointed out in the
past - that the Council cannot enforce sanctions in a
vacuum. Just as dams and embankments are not built
by the architect and the engineer alone, stemming the
torrent of illicit small arms will need to be a
coordinated effort between the Council, regional
organizations, Member States and civil society. The
Council needs help from Member States for the
effective implementation and monitoring of these
embargoes.

We have also made some progress in soaking up
the weapons already in the hands of former
combatants. All of us know that disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration are crucial in post-
conflict societies. The Council has also emphasized
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Ex-
combatants respond well to non-monetary
incentives- such as tools, schools, construction
materials, health care services and road repairs - to
the voluntary surrender of weapons. Consequently, we
have had some success in the fields of disarmament
and demobilization.

However, our biggest challenge lies in the
reintegration of ex-combatants. As one Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has noted, the
focus of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
should be reversed to reintegration, disarmament and
demobilization. Unless ex-combatants are given the
opportunity to reintegrate into society, they will find it
difficult or have few incentives to lay down their arms
and demobilize. Our record in this area is sketchy. This

is a difficult area in which the United Nations role will
overlap with that of Governments and in which
peacekeeping and peace-building will overlap with
development.

We should discuss the ways in which the Security
Council can provide support to the relevant United
Nations agencies and work with other principal organs
of the United Nations, such as the Economic and Social
Council, to tackle this multifaceted issue. For example,
we need to consider what can be done to sharpen the
focus on retraining and finding jobs for such men,
women and children. We need to consider what can be
done to find a space for the ex-combatants and for their
communities to reabsorb them. We need to look at the
coordination between peacekeeping operations and the
efforts of other United Nations agencies and at how
they can be improved. Finally, we also need to consider
what are the benchmarks to determine when the
responsibility of the Security Council should or could
end so that the conflict will not re-emerge. These are
key questions that we should ponder as we go about
our business.

The easy availability of illicit small arms and
light weapons has already caused much death and
destruction. The Council will need to work with all
members, non-governmental organizations and civil
society to tackle this difficult problem. According to
Buddha, "there are two mistakes that we can make: not
going all the way and not starting." I am pleased to say
that we have avoided the latter. Members that have
spoken before us - and I am also sure that the
speakers to follow will do the same - have given
many useful ideas on how to bring this issue forward.
Like other colleagues, we would like to express our
willingness to seriously consider these suggestions
when we discuss the draft presidential statement that
you, Sir, have circulated.

The meeting was suspended at 12.40p.m.
