Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French): Allow me at the outset to thank the briefers for their illuminating presentations. Today, I would like to make three points. First, with regard to the political situation and the elections, Belgium welcomes the measures taken to put the country on the path to elections, obstacles notwithstanding. Despite the delays, the timetable remains under control. We call on all actors concerned to refrain from any action or statement that could undermine this democratic exercise. Only a peaceful, transparent and inclusive process can guarantee the credibility of the elections. We welcome the almost equal representation of men and women on the registered voter lists. The European Union has made available significant financial assistance to support the electoral process. But elections are only one step in the long-term goal of stabilizing the Central African Republic. The February 2019 Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic is the only way to anchor peace. Its implementation will also be the responsibility of the future Government. The people of Central Africa do not want more violence. The country's armed groups are signatories to the peace agreement and must honour their commitments. Perpetrators of violence must be brought to justice. Belgium is particularly concerned about violations involving children, and supports the work of Special Representative Gamba de Potgieter and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) in that regard. Armed groups must also cease their predatory activities. There will be consequences for serious violations of the agreement. There are some challenges to the implementation of the agreement. However, we welcome the ongoing meetings of the follow-up mechanisms forthe agreement, which are taking place via video-teleconference due to the pandemic. We also see encouraging progress in the redeployment of State authority, as well as in legislative work. Secondly, I would like to touch upon the fate of the people of the Central African Republic, who need peace and want to live in dignity and prosperity. The statistics remain alarming. More than half of the population is in need of humanitarian aid and more than | million people are displaced in the Central African Republic or in neighbouring countries. By raising the cost of living, the pandemic has exacerbated the situation. School closures are further exposing children to the risk of recruitment by armed groups. Moreover, it is unacceptable for humanitarian workers to so often be victims of violence and theft. The people of the Central African Republic also thirst for justice. In that regard, Belgium supports the work of the Special Criminal Court and is prepared to second a Belgian magistrate. We also welcome the signing of decrees to launch the establishment of the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation. Thirdly, I note that MINUSCA is also facing significant challenges. The incidents of recent months demonstrate that its mandate to protect civilians is still relevant. Belgium therefore remains in favour of a robust mandate. MINUSCA's good offices and promotion of the peace process also play a crucial role in supporting the restoration of State authority and security sector reform. In that regard, good coordination among the country's partners is a critical factor. In our view, MINUSCA can help coordinate those efforts. Nevertheless, Belgium regrets the current disinformation campaign against MINUSCA in the country. In the discussion on MINUSCA's mandate, we must defend the interests of the people of the Central African Republic. Belgium's support is also part of a broader European and United Nations effort, and Belgium will continue to actively support the people of the Central African Republic even after it no longer sits on the Security Council.
