Mr. Al-Qahtani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. Minister, I have the pleasure to welcome
5
you to New York. I am also pleased to see you
presiding over the Council. We wish your delegation
every success in its presidency of the Council for this
month. I should also like to thank you for choosing the
role of regional and subregional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security as the
theme of our open debate today. That was an especially
timely choice given that the role of regional and
subregional organizations is being marginalized and
belittled.

The diversity of the political, cultural, economic
and social characteristics of the world's regions
necessitates that we attach priority and give special
importance to the regional perspective in addressing
crises. Such a regional perspective is provided by the
numerous regional and subregional organizations that
exist throughout the world. Conscious of that fact, the
authors of the Charter of the United Nations devoted
Chapter VIII to the role of regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security. That constitutes the basis for a collective
security system. The regional perspective contributes
to a deeper sense of participation, consensus and
democratization in the role of international
organizations. Recently, however, that role has
somehow been imperilled.

Some members of the Security Council have
realized that danger and have called for the convening
of several open meetings on the role of regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Resolution 1631
(2005) and numerous presidential statements have also
been adopted to underscore the importance of
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations and of making use of them for the
purposes of preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping,
peacemaking and post-conflict peacebuilding.

Today's meeting comes at a time when there are
suspicions regarding the Security Council's desire to
promote partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security. Despite all the meetings that have been
held and the passage of 60 years since the inception of
the collective security system, we must again recall
that the Charter reserved a principal role for regional
arrangements in the maintenance of international peace
and security. The Charter also called for recourse to
regional organizations in containing disputes and
resolving conflicts under Chapter VIII. Indeed, the
Charter gives priority to regional organizations in
settling regional disputes.

In order to preserve intact the collective system
of international security, the Security Council must
cooperate with regional arrangements in a concrete
manner. At a time when the role of some regional
organizations is being marginalized or ignored
completely, the Council must avoid selectivity and
double standards in dealing with regional and
subregional issues. Yet, history and reality do not make
us optimistic that there is a genuine partnership
between the Security Council and regional
organizations in every case.

We need to preview this situation and must take a
firm stand to collectively achieve our lofty goal of
maintaining international peace and security.
Moreover, in order to re-energize the Security
Council's open debates on this matter, it is our hope
that future Council resolutions that refer to cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
will be adopted under Chapter VIII of the Charter.
Regional organizations must be given priority in
resolving regional conflicts. They must have logistical,
political and financial support as an explicit
acknowledgement of the existence of a genuine
partnership with those organizations, not merely a
partnership of ideas that are irrelevant or unrealistic.

In addition to cooperating with the United
Nations, regional and subregional organizations of
which my country is a member - including the
League of Arab States and the Gulf Cooperation
Council - are trying to prevent conflict and to settle
disputes by peaceful means. The Security Council, for
example, has not given the necessary attention to
initiatives by those regional organizations vis-a-vis the
question of Palestine and resolving the Arab-Israeli
conflict. Some members of the Council have even
belittled the importance of Arab initiatives in that
regard. That illustrates the selectivity that exists with
respect to the role of regional organizations.

Attention has recently been focused on
cooperation between regional organizations and United
Nations organs, especially the General Assembly,
which has granted observer status to a number of
regional and subregional organizations by virtue of
their role in the maintenance and promotion of
international peace and security. In that regard, I
should like to refer to draft resolution A/C.6/62/L.7,
07-58364
which is before the Assembly's Sixth Committee and
which would grant observer status to the Gulf
Cooperation Council, which cooperates with
international organizations and plays a regional role in
preventing and resolving regional and international
disputes. A very important summit to discuss vital
issues regarding international peace and security will
be held at Doha in December.

Vicious political campaigns have been waged last
year and this year against enhancing the role of
regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Those campaigns did
not spare the African Union (AU), despite the
memorandum of understanding signed at the beginning
of this year between the AU and the United Nations on
their 10-year partnership. Political reasons stood in the
way of providing logistical and financial support for
the AU missions in Darfur, Sudan, and in Somalia.
That has hampered the role of that regional
organization, and does not contribute to resolving
crises and achieving stability in those two countries.
What we have seen in Somalia is an example of the
failure of the international Organization to promote
partnership and collective security with relevant
regional organizations in order to maintain
international peace and security.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
support for the draft presidential statement put forth by
the delegation of Indonesia, which is to be adopted at
the end of this meeting once our suggestions have been
taken into consideration.

