Mr. Andrabi (Pakistan): I am privileged to
deliver this statement on behalf of my Permanent
Representative. We welcome you, Mr. President, to the
Council. We congratulate Guatemala on assuming the
presidency of the Council, and we commend Germany
for its able stewardship in September. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his report contained in document
S/2012/678.

Pakistan fully supports peace and progress in
Haiti, which is a collective objective for the Haitian
people, the Council and the international community.
The brave and resilient people of Haiti have made
important strides towards stability and development.
The devastating earthquake of 2010 reversed the
gains achieved incrementally over many years. It is
heartening that a new and promising Haiti is emerging
from that tragedy.

In that regard, the Secretary-General has also
noted important milestones reached in Haiti recently.
Those include the formation of a new Government,
the publication of constitutional amendments and the
establishment ofa Superior Council ofthe Judiciary. On
the road to political stability and economic prosperity,
such measures have far-reaching significance.

In parallel with reaching political milestones, the
Haitian Government is also taking important steps to
attract foreign investment, improve governance and
promote industrial projects. We hope that the new aid
coordination framework will strengthen the capacity of
the Haitian Government to manage external resources
with the support of the Haiti Reconstruction Fund.

We share the optimism that Haitian leaders have an
opportunity to make genuine progress in rebuilding the
nation and strengthening institutions. The initiatives
of the Haitian Government must be supplemented
by greater economic and trade cooperation from the
international community.

Besides the commitment of the Haitian Government,
progress and development in Haiti are also attributable
to the work of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH). The Mission is already
implementing a challenging mandate in the areas of
security, support for the political process, the protection
of vulnerable groups, justice and corrections, and
human rights monitoring.

The reconfiguration or drawdown of MINUSTAH
must therefore be planned carefully and be based on the
situation on the ground. It should not lead to a reversal
of gains painstakingly achieved in Haiti.

We look forward to the transition compact that
MINUSTAH will work out with its stakeholders with
a view to setting out precise benchmarks in the area
of security, the rule of law, accountability mechanisms
and legislative regulatory frameworks.

The political developments in Haiti need to be
consolidated by a strong security sector. Besides
providing safety and security to the Haitian people,
a self-sustaining national police institution is also
essential for the eventual withdrawal of MINUSTAH.

The objectives and benchmarks of the Haitian
National Police development plans, presented by
MINUSTAH and the Haitian National Police, must
be forthrightly met. Recent steps taken by the Haitian
authorities to increase the number of police recruits,
in particular females, are encouraging and we welcome
such steps. The capactity-building and training of
the Haitian National Police, together with budgetary
support for its expenses, should remain a matter of high
priority.

Today's debate should also underscore the challenge
of addressing the humanitarian situation in Haiti. The
ongoing cholera epidemic, food insecurity and the
extreme vulnerability to national disasters increase
the humanitarian challenge. We will urge greater
coordination and cohesion among different actors
engaged in humanitarian work. We will also caution
against donor fatigue, which can result from protracted
crises such as the one unfortunately faced by Haiti.

Pakistan has been a participant in United Nations
peacekeeping missions in Haiti since 1993. As part of
MINUSTAH, two formed police units from Pakistan
have deployed since the 2010 earthquake.

In 2005, the people of Pakistan suffered the worst
earthquake of their history. Five years later, when a
similar tragedy befell our brothers and sisters of Haiti,
the people of Pakistan felt their pain as our own. Our
solidarity with the Haitian people has not waned since
then. It is with that spirit that we will continue to
support the people of Haiti in their quest for stability
and progress, as well as to uphold the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of their
country.

