Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to point out that the days devoted to
Africa in the Security Council have increased in number
since 25 September 1997, when we decided to devote a day
to Africa in the Council. Other days followed in 1998, and
in 1999 several meetings were devoted to Africa -
including the meeting of 29 September, as well as another
in December. The Council has now decided to devote a
whole month to Africa. Africa thanks all those who are
devoting days, weeks and months to it.

In reality, it would take years to consider the questions
related to Africa. But what has actually taken place since
25 September 1997, when the Council devoted a day to
Africa at the level of Ministers for Foreign Affairs? The
then Chairman of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), Mr. Mugabe, participated then, and President
Compaore took part the following year. What has happened
or been decided upon this year regarding Africa in the
Council?

Questions related to Africa comprise over 60 per cent
of the work of the Council. Africa needs not only pious
hopes and eloquent speeches to solve its problems. Good
intentions are not enough. Africa needs tangible work. It
knows its maladies and their remedies. It is just that Africa
is unable to obtain those remedies, given the shortage of
resources to deal with these maladies. As I already stated
in the Council, on 27 September 1999, when it devoted a
meeting to the situation in Africa:

"an urgent international programme should be set up
under the auspices of the United Nations and the
OAU, supervised by the World Health Organization,
to deal with AIDS treatment, prevention and
awareness. This disease threatens the entire continent
and must be swiftly dealt with through an international
plan of action. It should also adopt a similar
international programme against malaria and other

endemic diseases. In addition to the United Nations,
all countries and international organizations,
governmental and non-govemmental, foundations,
companies and individuals should provide
contributions, financial and in kind, to this
humanitarian work." (S/PV.4049, resumption 2, p. 24)

That is what I said in September last year when we raised
the question of AIDS.

Today I must say very frankly, and I am speaking
here on behalf of Africa and of the African Group in the
United Nations, that the Security Council is faced with a
major challenge. The question of AIDS has been added to
its agenda, so the challenge is to adopt and implement
tangible measures. Otherwise, the Council would be
making great statements without having actually done
anything. The mountain would have given birth to a
mouse, as we say in Arabic. This would be unacceptable
for Africa, as we have already decided to devote days,
weeks and a month to the consideration of questions
relating to Africa. Africa can do without publicity. What
counts for Africa is results.

I would propose, therefore, that the resolution that
we will adopt here take into account the debate at this
meeting, including, inter alia, first, the financing of the
campaign against AIDS through determining a certain
proportion of the contributions of Member States to the
budget of the United Nations and devoting that amount to
combating AIDS.

Secondly, I propose that the Group of Seven finance
a certain amount of that campaign, which would be
commensurate with their economic level; thirdly, that
international financial organizations make a contribution
to this campaign; and fourthly, that universities, research
centres, companies, individuals and non-governmental
organizations also make proportionate contributions. Also,
the media should discharge their proper role in terms of
making the public aware of the epidemic. At least we
should adopt a resolution along those lines. If we do not,
Africa will never forgive those who have made this
merely a media issue and a forum for political one-
upmanship.

