Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today's open debate.
I also thank the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their briefings.
We sincerely thank the High Commissioner for her
extraordinary service.

We welcome the adoption of resolution 2171 (2014),
which Lithuania gladly co-sponsored.

The Council is entrusted with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. All too often, however, it has
assumed that responsibility only when a conflict was in
full swing and the loss of lives was too high to ignore.

A glaring case of the Council's failure to act was
that of the genocide in Rwanda, whose twentieth
anniversary was marked earlier this year. The Force
Commander of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Rwanda, Rome'o Dallaire, warned the United
Nations about plans to massacre Tutsis and offered to
raid arms caches in Kigali. He insisted that where there
was a will, there was a way. The will was not there, and
some 800,000 people were murdered in the subsequent
100 days. Examples abound where the action taken was
too little and too late, resulting in the loss of multiple
human lives and in the exorbitant costs of dealing with
a full-blown conflict.

On the other hand, when the United Nations has
used its powers proactively it has managed to prevent
major crises. One such example is Yemen, to which the
United Kingdom delegation has already referred. United
Nations mediation in post-election Bangladesh in 2013,
the good offices of the United Nations Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, combined
with the engagement of the European Union (EU)
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, in response to an outbreak of violence in
Kyrgyzstan in 2010, and the often-invisible work by
the Standby Team of Mediation Experts at dozens of
negotiations around the world speak to the importance
of early preventive action.

Today, as the Council grapples with an
unprecedented number of conflicts and four level 3
humanitarian emergencies in the face of an almost
chronic shortage of funds for life-saving activities, we
need a qualitative leap in conflict prevention.

As today's resolution points out, conflict prevention
is a complex undertaking consisting of various
interdependent, complementary and non-sequential
components. I would like to dwell on a few of them.

First, with respect to informed early warning,
the United Nations system, with its country teams in
136 countries, its peacekeeping presence and special
representatives and envoys, is well placed to sound early
warning and provide first-hand information from the
field. Greater synergies and interactivity between the
Organization's own early-warning capacities and those
of regional and subregional organizations are essential.
Early-warning mechanisms already exist within the EU,
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the Southern African Development
Community. We therefore welcome the call in the
resolution to examine how cooperation with regional
organizations could contribute to early-warning
mechanisms and preventive actions.

The Council must make better use of information
from the ground through interactive dialogues and
briefings, including on situations of concern that are
not formally on its agenda. My delegation sees great
potential in briefings from the Department of Political
Affairs (DPA), horizon-scanning and periodic human
rights briefings, as proposed by the High Commissioner
this morning. Making such briefings less formal,
more flexible and needs-based, with an emphasis
on interactivity, could allay some of the sensitivities
related to the Council's discussing a particular situation.
Further improvement of DPA's analytical/assessment
capacities would be useful in that respect.

Furthermore, the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Special Advisers on
Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect play a
key role in sounding an early alarm. Providing Member
States with prompt, unsanitized information about
serious human rights violations is fully in line with
the Secretary-General's Rights Up Front initiative,
which we wholeheartedly support. In that respect, we
welcome the United Nations efforts to integrate human
rights monitoring into peacekeeping operations.
The second component is early mediation. As the
Secretary-General said, early action does matter. My
delegation recognizes mediation as an important tool
for defusing emerging conflicts. The good offices of
the Secretary-General and United Nations mediators
could be engaged at the earliest possible stage, with all
the necessary discretion. To enhance the effectiveness
of that particular instrument, further support
should be provided to strengthening United Nations
mediation-support capacities, including the Mediation
Support Unit, the Standby Team and the roster of
experts.

Tht third element is ensuring accountability.
Responding to human rights violations and acting
before they reach tragic proportions is a core concern of
preventive action. As we know, violations of minority
rights, sexual and gender-based violence, intolerance
and faith or ethnicity-based persecutions are among
the root causes of conflict and humanitarian crises.
If unaddressed, legitimate grievances caused by
exclusion, marginalization, lack of accountability and
lawlessness are bound to ignite or reignite a conflict.

A crucial element of conflict prevention, in our
view, consists in putting an end to impunity and
ensuring justice for all. The Council's strong voice and
actions in support of the rule of law, accountability
and justice matter a great deal. National truth and
reconciliation commissions, commissions of inquiry
and fact-finding missions tackling past atrocities are
essential elements in preventing relapse into conflict,
and they merit the Council's full support. We must also
extend all the necessary support to States in restoring
theirjudicial systems and investigating and prosecuting
the perpetrators of criminal doings during the time of
conflict. In line with the principle of complementarity,
international judicial mechanisms and tribunals,
including the International Criminal Court, have an
important role to play in tackling impunity and ensuring
justice for the victims, thus laying the foundations for
durable peace.

