The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Azerbaijan.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Moreno-
Ocampo, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for his briefing and for presenting his
third report to the Security Council.

Azerbaijan is not a party to the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court. Nevertheless, we
proceed from the strong understanding that the
protection of civilians, respect for international human
rights and humanitarian law and the fight against
impunity for the most serious crimes are the
responsibility of the international community as a
whole. Azerbaijan supports increased attention to these
issues at the international level and underlines the
importance of steps taken to protect civilians, vindicate
rights and bring to justice those responsible for such
crimes, regardless of their official status.

It is clear that the International Criminal Court's
intervention in Libya at the height of the violence
strengthened the people's resolve to stop crimes and
ensure justice for victims. We welcome the ongoing
fruitful cooperation of the ICC with the Libyan
authorities and commend the Government's willingness
to render all the necessary assistance to the Court in
the course of its investigation.

Azerbaijan fully supports the National
Transitional Council of Libya and its efforts towards
restoring peace and stability in the country. We believe
that, despite the challenges that Libya is facing in the
complex post-conflict environment, the Government is
capable of overcoming inherited problems, promoting
national reconciliation and guaranteeing, within the
national legal and judicial system, the effective
protection and promotion of human rights and
fundamental freedoms.

We note that the Government of Libya is
investigating individuals for the same crimes, as well
as additional ones, and for the same underlying
conduct as the Office of the ICC Prosecutor. We also
note that it committed to ensuring an effective and
genuine investigation and fair trials consistent with the
highest international standards. We also welcome
complementary efforts by the Government to address
justice, including the adoption of a transitional justice
law, and steps taken to address concerns expressed by
the United Nations and both national and international
non-governmental organizations.

Needless to say, due process for those detained
must be ensured. It is therefore important that the
Government managed to make progress towards
extending its control over the known detention
facilities across the country and over a number of
detainees, and that it reiterated its commitment to close
all unofficial and unacknowledged detention centres as
quickly as possible and to take steps to curb
maltreatment.

In conclusion, we commend the Libyan
authorities for their commitment to investigate the
incidents identified by the International Commission of
Inquiry of the Human Rights Council. At the same
time, we also look forward to the assessment by the
Office of the ICC Prosecutor as to whether it should
conduct its own investigation.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Libya.

