The Secretary-General: I thank Nigeria for
convening this important debate.

The purpose of security sector reform, simply put,
is to make people's lives safer. Security institutions are
at the core of the compact between the State and its
citizens. The legitimate authority to use force comes
with a corresponding responsibility to protect and
respect human rights. A professional and accountable
security sector under the framework of the rule of
law can strengthen public confidence in the State and
provide the stability necessary for peacebuilding and
development.

However, security institutions that lack the
right training or adequate governance and oversight
mechanisms may fail to provide basic security or even
violate the rights of the very people they are entrusted
to protect. We have also seen institutions misused in
support of narrow political and sectarian interests, with
destabilizing effects.

Earlier this month, I visited the Central African
Republic and saw the terrible consequences of
disintegrating security institutions. I also observed
the pressing need to extend State authority and ensure
public safety and the rule of law. Today's discussion is
especially timely, for the future of the Central African
Republic and for many other situations.

Security sector reform is a core element of
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development. The
United Nations has strengthened the assistance we
provide to national authorities to undertake critical
and complex security sector reform processes. Our
support has included assisting in the development and
implementation of national security strategies in Cote
d'Ivoire and Mali; contributing to public financial
management of the security sectors in Liberia and
Somalia; and supporting defence sector reform in
the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. A majority of Security Council
resolutions on post-conflict contexts contain requests
to address security sector reform.

We have also enhanced our ability to deliver
support through the dedicated Security Sector Reform
Unit in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the Inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task Force,
which brings together 14 United Nations partners. The

United Nations has developed standards and guidance
to strengthen the impact of our efforts, and we have
fostered strategic partnerships, including with the
African Union and the World Bank. We stand ready
to work with other interested partners on that strategic
track.

As we make progress, we also know that much
remains to be done. In our support to national
authorities, we need to ensure that security services
have the adequate capacity to perform their duties.
Nowhere else is this as evident today as in the Central
African Republic, Mali and Somalia. It requires
improved mapping of needs and gaps and facilitating
a coordinated response from partners. Strengthening
operational effectiveness must be combined with
efforts to build a strong governance framework, robust
accountability and oversight mechanisms and a culture
of integrity and respect for human rights. National
ownership is imperative.

There is an increasing gap between the growing
expectations of what the United Nations could and
should do and our resources to meet those expectations.
Contexts and mandates are complex, requiring the
United Nations to engage in delicate political processes
such as national security dialogues, vetting, public
expenditure reviews or defence sector reform. Looking
ahead, I have identified four priorities.

First, we must recognize the links between security
sector reform and the broader reform processes,
including legal and institutional reform, national
reconciliation and political dialogue. Security sector
reform is not just a matter of technical support. I intend
to instruct my Special Representatives to leverage their
good offices functions in support of that work.

Secondly, since security sector reform takes
time, host nations must do more to meet immediate
security needs. In accordance with the United Nations
human rights due diligence policy, the Organization is
obligated to withdraw support to security actors who
commit human rights Violations or fail to address them.

Thirdly, all actors involved in that work should place
more emphasis on sector-wide approaches that address
the strategic and governance framework underpinning
all security institutions.

Fourthly, we must reflect on the institutional
capacities within our Organization, on links to other
key areas of work such as the rule of law and human
rights and on how to ensure the flexible resources
needed to meet the needs on the ground.

I am very encouraged that the Council will adopt
the first thematic draft resolution on security sector
reform. That will boost political momentum for such
efforts.

The sight of an officer in uniform should evoke
feelings of order, discipline and security. Our collective
goal is to help States build professional security
institutions solidly anchored in a culture of service
rather than an unchecked and unaccountable exercise
of power and force. Together we can make that a reality.

