Mr. Corr (Ireland): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this important
meeting here today on children and armed conflict. My
delegation would also like both to thank the Secretary-
General and to commend Special Representative
Otunnu and Executive Director Bellamy for their work
in this area and for their statements here today. We
would also like to thank Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for the
eloquent statement he made this morning about his
experiences.

Later in this debate, Belgium, which holds the
presidency of the European Union, will be making a
statement with which Ireland fully associates itself.

The Secretary-General's report on children and
armed conflict presents a compelling case for the
integration of child-related perspectives into our work.
Overall, my delegation sees our task in the Council as
twofold. We need to publicly reiterate the primary
obligations of the normative framework, including the
Geneva Conventions, the United Nations Convention
on the Rights of the Child and the Optional Protocol to
the Convention. We also need to reassert the
importance of resolutions 1261 (1999) and 1314 (2001)
in terms of the agenda of the Council.

The second aspect of our work is to now move
decisively towards what the Secretary-General and the
Special Representative have called the era of
application.

Let me make eight general points concerning
Ireland's position. First, we consider it essential for all
States to comply strictly with their obligations towards
children under international law. As Executive Director
Bellamy said in last year's meeting, all those who
violate children's rights or who collude in such
Violations - whether Governments or rebel groups,
manufacturers of or dealers in weapons of war, or
unscrupulous business people - must be made to feel
the power of the Council's word.

Secondly, my delegation considers that the
Security Council has a clear responsibility on the issue
of the child protection, including in respect of conflict
situations and peace processes. So, of course, do
others. National Governments, the rest of the United
Nations system and the wider international community
must also assume their obligations.

Ireland believes that the Council must fully
integrate concerns in respect of war-affected children
into our work. As a Council, we have to keep the issue
of children - the severe impact that armed conflict has
on them and the particular difficulties they face in post-
conflict resettlement - strongly in mind when we
approach the tasks of peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peace-building.

Thirdly, Ireland believes that we must move
systematically to underpin basic standards of
humanitarian behaviour in war by armed forces and
non-State forces alike, and confront the question of
child soldiers.

Fourthly, my delegation fully endorses the
Secretary-General's call for the prosecution of sexual
Violence against women and children as a war crime.
We urge the speedy ratification of the Rome Statute
establishing an International Criminal Court, which
recognizes sexual violence as war crimes and crimes
against humanity.

Fifthly, my delegation strongly supports the
Secretary-General's recommendation that the mandates
of peace operations explicitly include provisions for
monitoring the rights of children and the
recommendation that accurate and current information
about the protection of child rights in conflict
situations - from a variety of sources, including
United Nations peace operations, country teams,
special rapporteurs and non-governmental
organizations - be made available to the Security
Council and to Member States. My delegation attaches
particular importance to the recommendations on
integrating child protection into both United Nations
peacemaking and peacekeeping processes, including
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes.

As a sixth point, my delegation attaches great
importance to the work of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations with regard to children's
rights and protection. We commend the recent proposal
made by Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for the
establishment of an informal inter-agency working
group on the integration of child-protection concerns
into peacemaking and peacekeeping processes.

My delegation also notes with satisfaction the
cooperation between the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations in incorporating human
rights monitoring into peacekeeping operations,
including through child rights officers in the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone and the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

We believe that there is a strong argument for
including child protection officers in appropriate
peacekeeping operations to focus on children's issues
and to assist in monitoring compliance with
commitments entered into in respect of children.
Special Representative Otunnu has done excellent work
in securing 59 commitments from parties to armed
conflict. But the parties must have their actions
watched closely. They must be made to understand that
such commitments are not in their gift, but reflect the
demands of the international community.

As a seventh point of emphasis, my delegation
wholeheartedly subscribes to the Secretary-General's
assessment that the illicit exploitation of natural
resources not only prolongs conflict, but also diverts
societies' resources away from educational and social
infrastructure. Accordingly, we support the Secretary-
General's suggestion that the Council consider targeted
measures against parties to armed conflict, including
complicit neighbours, whose actions are contributing to
the illegal exploitation of natural resources and the
fuelling of violent conflict.

Finally, Ireland considers that the corporate sector
also has particular responsibilities, and my delegation
believes that active consideration should be given to
the idea - referred to earlier by the Secretary-
General - that multilateral development banks and the
international corporate sector could conduct child-
impact assessments, where feasible, with regard to
particular investments and projects that they may be
funding in or near zones of conflict.

On a national level, the issue of children in armed
conflict is of particular concern to the Irish
Government, and Ireland strongly supports
international efforts to strengthen the level of
protection available to children affected by armed
conflict. We are actively supporting the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and are pleased to be a
member of the Group of Friends of the Special
Representative. Ireland's support for the United
Nations Children's Fund is increasing rapidly and has
doubled over the past two years. Our aid programme
focuses on basic needs and the more vulnerable sectors
of the population, with particular focus on women and
children, who tend to be most at risk in conflict
situations and in areas where protracted conflict is an
ongoing obstacle to longer-term development.

The Secretary-General, in his remarks today, as
well as Special Representative Otunnu and Executive
Director Bellamy, quite rightly treated the issue of
Afghanistan at some length. Ireland has expressed its
concern in the Council about the use of very young
children on the part of all Afghan sides engaged in the
conflict. We will wish to ensure that the future
administration of Afghanistan includes a strong human
rights and justice component, and that particular
attention is paid to the position of children.

The Secretary-General's report brings together
cogently and clearly the normative framework of
international law as well as child-centred perspectives
on a number of key issues, including conflict
prevention, protection of civilians in armed conflict,
the illicit exploitation of natural resources, HIV/AIDS
and the illicit spread of small and light weapons.
Today's meeting is a good opportunity to reflect on
many common elements in these issues and the need to
work now on common and effective responses from the
Council. We strongly support the draft resolution which
is before us, and also join in thanking France for its
work in coordinating it.

