Mr. Siddig (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I Wish to congratulate you, Madam President, on your
assumption of the Presidency of the Security Council
for December. I would also like to thank Ms. Joanna
Wronecka, Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, for her
briefing on the period from 4 October to 11 December.

I stress my Government's commitment to
cooperating with all the various United Nations entities
and institutions operating in the Sudan, as well as
with the Sudan Panel of Experts and the Sanctions
Committee. That cooperation has continued over the
past 90 days, as we have just heard.

My Government is pleased with the results of
the November visit to the Sudan by the Chair of the
Sanctions Committee and we hope that it has given
her and the other members of the Committee a better
understanding of the situation on the ground, which will
enable them to make sound, evidence-based decisions
that are geared towards easing the sanctions that have
become irrelevant to the situation in Darfur.

In all of our statements and meetings with members
of the Security Council, we have tirelessly repeated
that the situation that prevailed when resolution 1591
(2005) was adopted more than 14 years ago has changed
completely. I would even venture to say that the Sudan
of 2005 was a different country from the Sudan we
know today. The sanctions were imposed in 2005,
yet all reports on the situation in my country testify
that the sanctions regime is no longer necessary. My
Government has announced a definitive ceasefire
throughout the entire country and has embarked on
peace negotiations with the various armed groups. It
is our hope that the Juba negotiations will start today
and pave the way for a comprehensive agreement that
will bring an end to all the disputes and conflicts in
the Sudan and establish the lasting peace and stability
throughout the entire country that our people deserve.

In resolution 2455 (2019), which renewed the
mandate of the Panel of Experts for a further one-year
period to February 2020, the Security Council expressed
its intention to review the measures on Darfur and, in
paragraph 4,

(spoke in English)

"Further expresses its intention to establish
clear, well identified, and measurable key
benchmarks that could serve in guiding the Security
Council to review measures on the Government of
Sudan as set out in paragraph 1".

(Spoke in Arabic)

On the basis of that resolution, we hope that the
Council will rapidly review the sanctions regime
imposed on the Sudan and put an end to it in the near
future, so as to enable the Sudanese Government to
fully shoulder its responsibility for normalizing the
situation in Darfur and contributing to conditions
that are conducive to development and reconstruction.
As members know, the sanctions regime affects the
Government's capacity to exercise security control over
the various regions of Darfur. I am sure that the Council
is also aware of the urgent need to enable the Sudanese
law enforcement agencies to address the challenges
facing the country, especially irregular migration,
human trafficking, arms smuggling and cross-border
crime that are widespread in Darfur.

The meeting rose at 3.15 pm.
