Ms. Rice (United States of America): I come to
the Council at a time when I think it will be very well
understood that the United States of America, President
Bush and myself personally have been very committed
to the Annapolis process and to finding a lasting and
permanent peace between Israelis and Palestinians, the
establishment of a Palestinian State to live side by side
in peace, security and democracy with the people of
Israel.

I come to the Council at a time when we can all
look back on just one year ago when there was no
peace process. Now there is a viable, robust peace
process. I come to the Council at a time when Israelis
and Palestinians are continuing their negotiations
towards the establishment of a two-State solution
despite complications on both sides. I note, for

instance, the meeting between President Peres and
President Abu Mazen earlier today and the meeting
earlier this week between Foreign Minister Livni and
Abu Alaa. I note also that President Bush met
yesterday with President Abbas and that I will do so
later today.

I want to note also that the Quartet will meet later
today to discuss the Annapolis process and how to
bring support to the parties as they seek a
comprehensive peace. The Quartet is the proper forum
for those discussions and I very much look forward to
that meeting later on today.

I want to note that the Annapolis process expects
not only political negotiations, but also progress on the
ground, particularly for people of the Palestinian
territories, and the fulfilment of road map obligations.
The United States' position on the fulfilment of those
obligations by both Israel and the Palestinians is very
clear. We have spoken to them.

I want to note, too, that the international
community has other obligations and we need to make
certain that we remain focused on them. First, we must
support the parties in their bilateral negotiations so that
they might come to a lasting peace. Secondly, we must
to insist that all parties live up to their road map
obligations. Thirdly, we must provide financial
assistance, particularly to the Palestinian National
Authority. Here, I would like to note that the United
States has provided historic levels of assistance to the
Authority, including through mechanisms that we have
never used before: direct budget support from the
American taxpayer to the Palestinian Authority. I
would hope that the States of the region will
completely fulfil their pledges in an expeditious
manner so that the Palestinian Authority can, under the
Government of Salam Fayyad, meet its obligations to
its people.

However, the international community has other
obligations as well. I ask that States of the region -
and our Arab colleagues in particular - consider ways
that they might reach out to Israel to demonstrate, in
word and deed, that it is understood that a
comprehensive solution requires full understanding
that Israel belongs in the Middle East and will remain
in the Middle East as a valued partner. In that regard, I
take note of the Arab peace initiative, which is an
important step in that direction, but I hope that more
can be done.
Finally, it is certainly the obligation of the
international community to speak loudly and firmly
against terrorism and extremism in all their forms. The
taking of innocent life is never acceptable, whatever its
justification.

Just as unacceptable is the kind of language that
was heard in the General Assembly yet again this
week. The President of Iran - who unfortunately
represents a great people, the Iranian people, who, as a
whole, I believe, do not hold his views - said that
another Member of the United Nations should be wiped
from the face of the map, destroyed and should not
exist. That is simply unacceptable. When the Security
Council decides what really needs to taken up as a
threat to international peace and security, I believe that
that should be at the top of the list.

The United States of America will be asking that
the Council convene again to take up the matter of one
Member of the United Nations calling for the
destruction of another Member of the United Nations
in a way that simply should not be allowed, ifI may be
pardoned for saying so in polite company.

