Mrs. Albright (United States of America): Let me
begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency for this month. We look forward to working
with you.

Let me also extend my delegation's appreciation to
Ambassador Qin Huasun and the Chinese delegation for all
their fine work last month.

In March, when Iraq last blocked access to inspectors
of the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM), the
Council was forced to act to remind Baghdad of its
obligations. My Government hoped that the message we
sent registered. At that time, we explained that Iraq would
respond only if the Council acted quickly and forcefully.
Since it failed to respond adequately then, here we go
again.

Let me be clear: this Council must not tolerate
challenges to its authority. The Iraqi regime must not be
allowed to interfere with the work of the United Nations
Special Commission. That is why it is so important that our
message be swift and strong. This resolution meets those
tests.

UNSCOM. has been empowered by this Council to
ensure the end of the Iraqi weapons-of-mass-destruction
programme and to act within that mandate to see that Iraq
never again threatens the international community. It should
be clear to all that the progress that has occurred in
dismantling Iraq's weapons-of-mass-destruction capability
is the result of UNSCOM's determination to follow the
evidence wherever it might lead and whether the Iraqi
regime likes it or not. My Government is most appreciative

 

of the work of Chairman Ekeus and the Special
Commission. They have a difficult job and they do it
admirably. They have my Government's full support.
Special Commissioner Ambassador Ekeus has
described to the Council the care UNSCOM. takes to
ensure that in carrying out its mandate, it has respected
Iraq's sovereignty and made sure that Iraq's security has
not been threatened. We can only wish that Iraq were as
diligent in meeting its commitments.

Iraq's assertion that its security is threatened by
unarmed inspections is laughable. It is not the inspectors
who threaten Iraq, but Iraq which threatens the region.
The invasion and occupation of Kuwait, the campaign
against the Kurds and Shiah and the use of terrorism by
Iraq are ample and incontrovertible proof that this regime
still poses a serious threat to the security of the region.

Blocking UNSCOM's inspectors from an entire
category of suspect sites is a new situation and a matter
of grave concern to the United States Government. If the
situation persists, as it has on occasions in the past, the
Council will have no choice but to conclude that Iraq is
in material breach of its obligations under Security
Council resolutions 687 (1991), 707 (1991) and 715
(1991).

