Mr. Aho-Glele (Benin) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to thank Mr. James Morris, Executive
Director of the World Food Programme (WFP), for his
excellent briefing on the food crisis in southern Africa.
The points he made were very telling, in that they say
much about the silent suffering of people in Africa. We
pay tribute to the Secretary-General for having taken
the wise initiative of dispatching the Executive
Director of the WFP to the region.

The guarantee of food security for people around
the world should not pose major difficulties in terms of
global food production. The challenge is one of
distribution. In that respect, famine is the scourge that
best highlights the dysfunction of the world system
today. Clearly, that system compels poor countries to
bear the brunt of the structural adjustments necessary
for it to function. Agricultural subsidy policies stifle
the rural sectors in developing countries, and the
international community should be concerned about
that. It should encourage the developed countries to
undertake the necessary reforms to give the developing
countries a chance of survival. The international
community must see to it, in particular, that food is
distributed throughout the world so as to mitigate
extreme poverty and natural disasters.

We welcome WFP activities on behalf of the
countries affected by the pandemic of famine,
especially in Africa. We welcome its emphasis on the
distress of poor countries at peace, which do not
receive the necessary support from the international
community to promote their sustainable development.

We believe that political disputes should not
affect the delivery of humanitarian assistance. We do
not understand why political considerations should
impede the delivery of assistance to a country stricken
by HIV/AIDS, given that the international community
has established a Fund to combat that disease. Food aid
should be used as a channel to revitalize societies
affected by famine and malnutrition, particularly in
countries in which extreme poverty is endemic.

The international community must fully exercise
its responsibility to protect populations under threat in
vulnerable countries. It should recognize that peace
and security are threatened by the protracted
destabilization in sub-Saharan countries as a result of
the combined effects of conflicts, climactic conditions,
and the fight for survival and control of the meager
resources available.

Many delegations have stressed the linkage
between poverty and conflict. We fully endorse that
point. The Security Council should appeal for the
establishment of a special programme to rescue
countries whose situations are particularly tragic. In
that regard, I associate my delegation with the call by
the representative of the United Kingdom for concerted
international action to prevent conflicts before they
occur. The credibility of the United Nations, and in
particular of the Security Council, which has the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, would benefit from the
enhancement of their conflict-prevention capacities.

