The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Croatia in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nobilo
(Croatia) took a place at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1009 (1995), document S/1995/730.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General of 23 August 1995
(S/1995/730) submitted pursuant to its resolution 1009
of 10 August 1995 on Croatia and in particular the
humanitarian situation and human rights violations
described therein.

"The Security Council expresses its deep concern
at the grave situation of refugees and persons
displaced during the Croatian offensive and at reports

of violations of international humanitarian law as
described in the report of the Secretary-General of 23
August 1995 (S/1995/730). The Council shares the view
of the Secretary-General that the mass exodus of the local
Serb population has created a humanitarian crisis of
significant proportions. The Council is also concerned by
reports of human rights violations including the burning
of houses, looting of property and killings and demands
that the Government of Croatia immediately investigate
all such reports and take appropriate measures to put an
end to such acts.

"The Security Council reiterates its demand that
the Government of the Republic of Croatia respect
fully the rights of the local Serb population
including their right to remain or return in safety.

"The Security Council welcomes efforts made
by the Secretary-General in coordination with
international humanitarian organizations in response
to this acute humanitarian situation. It calls upon all
Member States to provide urgent humanitarian relief
and assistance to these refugees and displaced
persons.

"The Security Council reiterates that all those
who commit violations of international humanitarian
law will be held individually responsible in respect
of such acts. The Council reiterates in this context
that all States shall cooperate fully with the
International Tribunal established pursuant to its
resolution 827 (1993) and its organs.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1995/44.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m.

