Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting. I would like to welcome Ms. Mogherini and
thank her for her detailed and comprehensive briefing
on the aspects of cooperation between the European
Union (EU) and the United Nations.

We agree with her that our cooperation together
would make us more strong and effective. I would
like to highlight her reference to the EU's attachment
to multilateralism and its commitment to providing
political, economic and financial support to the
United Nations, which is facing financial difficulties
concerning the regular and peacekeeping budgets.
We all agree that our world is facing gross and
unprecedented challenges, in addition to terrorism,
violent extremism, illegal migration, trafficking in
illicit drugs and transnational organized crime. It is
impossible to address those challenges alone. Instead,
we must pool our efforts regionally and internationally
to respond to and eliminate them.

Like China, as just noted by its representative,
Kuwait highly appreciates the role played by regional
and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security. We recognize the
central and increasing role they play in preventing,
managing and resolving conflicts at all stages. We
support every effort aimed at consolidating and
developing partnerships between the United Nations
and various regional organizations under Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations. We are well aware
that the goal of international cooperation, as stipulated
in Articles 1, 2 and 3 of the Charter, is to resolve
international problems of an economic, social, cultural
or political nature through multilateralism.

The EU has considerable international
weight as the largest contributor to peacekeeping
operations - its share amounting to about 30 per
cent of all contributions - which makes it one of the
most important international parties that contribute
effectively to finding solutions to the various
challenges facing the world today and listed on the
Security Council's agenda. We therefore appreciate the
joint efforts and cooperation by the EU and the United
Nations, in particular in Africa in the maintenance
of peacekeeping operations in Mali and the Central
African Republic and for the provision of logistical
support, training and capacity-building for the national
security forces in Mali and the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel. The tripartite cooperation among
the African Union (AU), the United Nations and the EU
to fund the AU Mission in Somalia is also welcome.

Europe and the Arab region share some
commonalities in terms of history and geography
that facilitate our cooperation and enable us to create
coordination mechanisms and partnerships, thereby
strengthening and broadening our relations and
enhancing the common interests of our States at all
levels. The first Arab-European summit, convened
two weeks ago in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, on the
theme "Investing in stability", demonstrates well
the true intentions of both regions to consolidate
their cooperation in various areas, such as terrorism,
migration, refugees and climate change. We welcome
the agreement to convene another summit in Brussels
in 2022.

Undoubtedly, like other regional organizations,
the EU faces various direct and indirect challenges,
including long-standing regional conflicts, as
mentioned today by Ms. Mogherini and several
days ago by the Chairperson of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (see S/PV.8479).
Some of those conflicts, in particular those relating to
the Middle East and North Africa, have an impact on
European countries, especially in the Mediterranean.
Long-standing conflicts require international bilateral
and multilateral cooperation among the United Nations,
the EU and the League of Arab States in addressing and
resolving conflicts in our region. Indeed, the tripartite
cooperation among the United Nations, the European
Union and the League ofArab States is an effective way
of reaching effective solutions to existing conflicts.

The State of Kuwait supports the efforts made by
the EU to find peaceful solutions to conflicts through
dialogue and negotiations. In that regard, I would like to
highlight the observation of Ms. Mogherini regarding
the efforts made by the European Union to relaunch
the Middle East peace process and promote the two-
State solution. We always welcome that position, which
reflects the general approach of the member States of
the EU that are members of the Security Council. They
consistently call for the implementation of Security
Council resolutions that reject unilateral actions such
as the construction of settlements in contravention of
Council resolutions, in particular resolution 2334 (2016).

The State of Kuwait shares with the EU common
purposes, principles and values leading to the
promotion of international peace and security based on
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular the emphasis on multilateralism
in the area of humanitarian diplomacy. That common
approach is reflected on the ground byjoint cooperation
in chairing various international and humanitarian
conferences, such as the international donors
conference to support the humanitarian situation of
the Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh, held in October
2017 with the cooperation of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Kuwait has
co-chaired several international donors conferences
in coordination with the EU and the United Nations,
such as the Brussels Conference on Supporting the
Future of Syria and the Region, held in 2017, and the
International Conference for the Reconstruction of
Iraq, held in Kuwait in February 2018.

In conclusion, we fully support bilateral and
tripartite cooperation and coordination among the
United Nations, the EU and the AU, as well as tripartite
cooperation among the United Nations, the EU and the
League of Arab States, with a view to bringing about
peace, security, stability and development for our
countries and peoples.

