Mr. Solana (spoke in French): It is a great
honour for me to be here this afternoon, and I thank
you, Mr. President, for the invitation. My greetings go
to all members of the Security Council and, in
particular, to Mr. Bernard Kouchner, whose country
currently holds the presidency of the Council of the
European Union.

Under the mandate issued by the Security
Council, the European Union-led military force in
Chad and the Central African Republic (EUFOR) has
been deployed for six months. Today there are more
than 3,300 troops on the ground. During this period,
EUFOR has deployed a powerful and mobile force in a
theatre far from Europe and difficult to reach. EUFOR
has been patrolling a particularly extensive area; it has
put in place protective measures for humanitarian
organizations, which have clearly improved
humanitarian access. EUFOR has lend its support to
the ongoing deployment of United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT),
and I can say that cooperation between EUFOR and
MINURCAT is exemplary, and we welcome that.

All of this has taken place with the full
cooperation of the authorities of Chad and the Central
African Republic, and with full transparency vis-a-vis
all countries of the region. The presence of EUFOR has
undoubtedly contributed to stabilizing eastern Chad
and the northern Central African Republic.
Humanitarian personnel attest to that, as do refugees
and internally displaced persons. Returns are under
way as well; that is certainly encouraging.

The presence of EUFOR has helped to ease
regional tensions; that is key, because what happens in
Chad and the Central African Republic is linked to
What happens in Darfur, and vice versa. Ongoing
political efforts between Chad and the Sudan are on the
08-51755
right track. Those efforts must be pursued and
consolidated.

For now, the situation is calm, but it remains
fragile. EUFOR will depart, as announced, on
15 March 2009. Our concern is to avoid a security
vacuum on that date.

For those reasons, at the time of the midterm
review which brings us together today, I believe it is of
fundamental importance to stress three points: first, the
vital need for an appropriate handover for EUFOR by
the United Nations on 15 March 2009; secondly, it is
necessary for this handover to encompass both Chad
and the Central African Republic, because the two
situations are geopolitically linked; and thirdly, a
prompt Security Council decision is needed, making
possible timely planning by the United Nations. We
will do all we can to assist the United Nations in all
areas to ensure that the transition is successful.

The handover will not mark the end of the
European Union commitment in the region. The
European Union will continue to be an active player
with respect to Darfur, which I hope will ultimately
enable refugees to return to their homes. The European
Union will contribute to the financing of the Chadian
Detachement integre de securite, whose members have
been and will continue to be trained by MINURCAT.
The Union will also contribute to the economic and
social reconstruction programme in eastern Chad,
which, along with a secure environment, will facilitate
the return of displaced persons to their homes.

