Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I would like first to join
previous speakers in expressing our shock and strong
condemnation of the bomb attack in Moscow this
morning. I express our deep condolences to the
Government and the people of the Russian Federation.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU). The acceding countries Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia, the
candidate countries Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey and
the European Free Trade Association countries Iceland,
Liechtenstein and Norway declare that they align
themselves with this statement.

As this is the first time that I have taken the floor
under your presidency of the Security Council, Sir,
please allow me to congratulate you on the assumption
of your duties. I would also like to extend my
congratulations to the previous President, Ambassador
Mufioz of Chile, for the excellent manner in which he
steered the Council's deliberations in January.

The Secretary-General's report, and Mr. Holkeri's
comprehensive and cogent presentation, clearly set out
the progress that has been achieved in Kosovo so far,
as well as the many challenges that remain to be
tackled.
I would like to underscore the European Union's
strong support for Special Representative Holkeri in
his task of implementing in full Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), and UNMIK's policy of
"standards before status". These remain the foundation
of the international community's commitment to
Kosovo. We urge all the parties, including those in the
region, to cooperate fully with the Special
Representative in a constructive and committed
manner. The European Union has a long-term
commitment to Kosovo. We look forward to close
cooperation with the United Nations with a view to
ensuring that United Nations-led "Standards for
Kosovo" process and the EU-initiated process to
prepare Kosovo for further moves towards the Union
are mutually reinforcing.

The European Union welcomes the progress
which has been achieved in such areas as the rule of
law, freedom of movement, returns and minority rights.
While this progress is encouraging, it is clear that
successful implementation of "Standards for Kosovo"
requires further effort on the part of all the parties.

In particular, it needs the political will and
genuine commitment of Kosovo's leaders. All of
Kosovo's leaders must uphold the practical application
of the values of multi-ethnicity, tolerance and equal
rights for all communities. As the Secretary-General
has noted in his report, the way forward lies in making
progress on the benchmarks set out in the "Standards
for Kosovo" document. The focus should be on
improving the daily lives of all the people of Kosovo.
Belgrade must play its part here, too.

The establishment of a mechanism to measure the
progress made in meeting the standards is a significant
development. The "Standards for Kosovo" document is
an essential first step, and the task now is to build on
this foundation. The EU Commission's annual reviews
could be useful here in determining a common
international assessment of the progress made. Other
EU instruments, such as the European Partnerships,
could also play a role by ensuring that the provisional
Government allocates financial and personnel
resources to meet the requirements in the "Standards
for Kosovo" process.

The immediate priority is the completion of the
implementation work plan, and we look forward to its
early submission. We strongly urge all parties,
including the Kosovo Serbs, to engage fully in the
process of finalizing the "standards before status"
implementation plan. We also urge the authorities in
Belgrade to encourage Kosovo Serb participation in
this process. A first opportunity for an overall review
of progress made could occur in mid-2005, or earlier if
sufficient movement has taken place.

Although the submission of the work plan will be
an important step forward, the process of implementing
the standards is not dependent on the plan's
completion. For their part, the Provisional Institutions
must meet their responsibility for making coherent and
sustainable progress on implementing the standards.
We note that the transfer of non-reserved
responsibilities under Chapter 5 of the Constitutional
Framework is largely complete. The Provisional
Institutions must now concentrate on implementing
those responsibilities fully and fairly, in accordance
with Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Constitutional Framework.

It is a matter of concern, as the Secretary-General
has pointed out, that not all ethnic communities
participate meaningfully in the Provisional Institutions:
the presidency, the Government and the Kosovo
Assembly. The Assembly must take into account
legitimate minority concerns in the legislative process,
and it should be scrupulously careful not to overstep its
competencies. Likewise, illegal parallel administrative
structures in Kosovo damage the cause of a multi-
ethnic society. Support for parallel structures should
cease, and an alternative to them must be found to
ensure that all Kosovo's citizens get the same levels of
social and administrative services.

Serbia and Montenegro plays a crucial role in
efforts to stabilize the region and with respect to the
implementation of standards and the future status of
Kosovo. It is in the interest of all parties to facilitate
their commitment and contribution.

The European Union believes that the direct
dialogue initiated on 14 October 2003 in Vienna is a
central plank of the "Standards for Kosovo" policy. All
parties concerned need to engage constructively in the
working groups as the follow-up to the Vienna
meeting. Multi-ethnic delegations to the four working
groups of the political dialogue should be established
by the Provisional Institutions as soon as possible.
Delays in starting the working groups are detrimental
to progress on the standards.

The European Union is committed to the goal of a
stable, multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo within its
place in Europe. Last November, the Council of
Ministers for Foreign Affairs reaffirmed the European
Union's readiness to assist in the achievement of that
objective, in the context of the full implementation of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and of
"Standards for Kosovo". In that spirit, ministers
mandated High Representative Solana to prepare a
report in close coordination with the Commission and
in cooperation with Special Representative Holkeri.
That report should explore ways and means to further
enhance the European Union's contribution to the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999), taking full
account of the Stabilization and Association Process
Tracking Mechanism and of the importance of effective
implementation of the standards implementation plan.
European Union foreign ministers are scheduled to
consider the report later this month.

The European Union is firmly committed to
supporting Kosovo's economic reconstruction and
development. In his report the Secretary-General sets
out the scale of the task of tackling unemployment and
infrastructural deficits and of creating a positive
climate for investment. Economic progress is essential
for the creation of a tolerant, multi-ethnic and
democratic Kosovo.

Through the EU pillar of UNMIK, Pillar IV, the
European Union is assisting in the revitalization of
economic activity in Kosovo with a View to the
creation of the conditions for a modern, open-market
economy. The aim is to establish a sustainable private
sector, one that will create employment. The long-term
perspective is to bring Kosovo's legislative and
administrative frameworks closer to European
standards.

The European Agency for Reconstruction
continues to finance and manage sustainable
reconstruction and development programmes in
Kosovo under the guidance of the European
Commission. Future progress will depend on structural
reforms in Kosovo, including legislative and
institutional efforts, as well as sound fiscal and budget
policies. The European Union is disturbed that local
members are boycotting Kosovo Trust Agency board
meetings, thus preventing the privatization of socially
owned enterprises that are ready for transfer to
successful bidders. Also, we hope that the issue of
liability of Agency officials can be resolved quickly.
Successful privatization will be a crucial factor for
economic growth and development. We urge the
Provisional Institutions to engage constructively in that
process.

Finally, as the Secretary-General notes, UNMIK's
work can continue only if the necessary funding in
crucial areas is available. For its part, the European
Union is the largest donor of financial support in
Kosovo, and we encourage others to consider as a
priority how they can deepen their assistance to
Kosovo in the various areas set out in the Secretary-
General's report.

