Mr. Avalle (spoke in Spanish): It is a privilege to
address the Security Council on behalf of the World
Bank during this open debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding. I wish to reaffirm the full support and
commitment of the World Bank to the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission, in all its aspects and at all
levels.

As members of the international community, we
cannot afford to ignore the urgent problems currently
faced by countries in crisis. It is our obligation to
speedily provide the urgent assistance necessary to
respond to the needs of those countries. In this context,
we believe that the United Nations system plays a
critical role in conflict prevention and resolution, but
we cannot forget that after the conflict is over the work
must continue, with support for reconstruction and the
economic and social recovery and development of the
countries affected. Like Ms. McAskie, we believe that
the Peacebuilding Commission is a useful and effective
instrument which makes it possible to deepen our
engagement with the United Nations system and to
continue to work together in a coordinated manner,
responding to the needs of affected countries.

It should be recalled that more than 16 per cent of
the population of the world, a billion people, live - or
rather, exist - in extreme poverty and are directly
affected by civil war or are at high risk of being so
affected in the very near future. The legacy of conflict
is well known; it is a terrible legacy, and that is why
over the last decade the World Bank has significantly
expanded its conceptual work in the area of the
reconstruction of countries affected by conflict.

Our research has confirmed that security and
development are inherently connected. But we must
also work together with all stakeholders, offering the
necessary holistic support for peacemaking processes
and drawing up genuine long-term development plans
that turn into concrete action on the ground. This is
why we believe that the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission is critical and should yield concrete
results in the real world and in the field. The work of
the Commission and all of our work will thus be
judged not only by our work here in New York, but
primarily by the concrete results achieved in the
countries concerned. The World Bank has actively
supported the work of the Peacebuilding Commission,
with the main objective of improving coordination and
cooperation of all of the actors involved. The World
Bank is committed to cooperating even more closely
with the Commission both in New York and in the
field, with all of the resources that we can provide, and
that have been requested, insofar as possible.

We welcome all of the efforts being made by the
Commission in order to create a more focused agenda
that would lead to specific results for the benefit of the
affected countries. Unfortunately, thus far, we have still
have not been able to take part directly in all of the
Commission's meetings, as originally stipulated in
resolution 1645 (2005).

I would conclude by saying that we are ready to
work jointly with all of our partners to ensure that
there is international support and the necessary
strategic cooperation among all of the parties that are
committed to promoting the peacebuilding processes
and to achieve sustainable development.

