Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): As this is the
first time I am speaking this month at an official
meeting of the Council on behalf of the Viet Nam
delegation, I would like to extend to you, Sir, and to
the delegation of Belgium our most heartfelt
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
for this month. You can rest assured of my delegation's
fullest support and cooperation in the discharge of your
noble task.

I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his detailed briefing. I also thank
Ambassador Wolff of the United States for his briefing
on behalf of the Multinational Force in Iraq. We
welcome the participation of the delegation of Iraq in
this debate and thank its Ambassador for his statement.

During the four months since the most recent
report of the Secretary-General was issued, Iraq has
continued to make commendable efforts to consolidate
and expand its political and socio-economic
achievements, as reflected in the lowest levels of
overall violence since March 2004; the promulgation
of key legislation on justice, amnesty, provincial
powers and budget execution; the enhanced capabilities
of Iraqi security forces to independently maintain
national security and the rule of law; the intensive
preparations for the provincial elections scheduled for
October 2008; the recent participation of all political
factions in the Cabinet; and the Government's
announcement of a six-point proposal entitled
"Partnership for Development". Equally noteworthy
are macroeconomic records in increased domestic
consumption, the revival of local businesses
nationwide, a gross domestic product growth projected
by the International Monetary Fund to be 8 per cent for
the next two years, the decrease in inflation, the
gradual settlement of external debt burdens, and
significant revenues from oil exports.

Against that backdrop, Iraq still faces challenges
that remind us of the magnitude of the tasks to be
completed in order to facilitate the country's smooth
transition to durable peace and sustainable
development. They include sectarian violence and
criminal acts, as manifested in the recent suicide
bombings in Baghdad and some other areas; the
delayed adoption of a package of laws on election and
hydrocarbons; the unresolved status of Kirkuk; and the
alarming rates of poverty and unemployment, as well
as the humanitarian challenges caused by the internal
and external displacement of Iraqi civilians. At the
same time, much remains to be desired for enhancing
national dialogue and reconciliation, advancing the
legislative agenda and the constitutional review,
curbing the illicit use of weapons and combating
organized crime, promoting disarmament, demobilizing
and reintegrating ex-combatants, creating an
environment conducive to foreign and domestic
investment and fostering socio-economic reform.

Given the aforementioned progress that the Iraqi
people and Government have achieved, and given the
challenges they are still facing, my delegation - while
firmly supporting the Iraqi people in their endeavour to
tap their vast natural and human resources and promote
their cause of reconciliation, stabilization and
reconstruction * recognizes the important role that
United Nations agencies, neighbouring countries and
the international community can play in this
connection. We are encouraged by a series of
international events, including the meetings of Iraq's
neighbours in Istanbul and Kuwait, the meeting of
Arab parliamentarians in Erbil and the Compact
Annual Review Conference in Stockholm, which
reflect the international community's engagement in
helping Iraq's reconstruction, development and
reintegration. Along with other encouraging
developments such as the operationalization of
regional working groups on energy, refugees and
security and the normalization of bilateral relations
between Iraq and neighbouring countries, we hope that
this emerging partnership and cooperation will be
sustained and will be translated into further concrete
action to serve mutual interests of all relevant
stakeholders, on the basis of respect for the political
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Iraq.

My delegation commends the efforts of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
to assist the Government of Iraq in addressing key
priority issues as mandated by Security Council
resolution 1770 (2007), especially in terms of
advancing national reconciliation, resolving issues of
disputed internal territories, extending constitutional
and electoral assistance, providing humanitarian relief
and promoting regional dialogue. We support the
continued presence and enhanced coordination of
UNAMI and the United Nations country team in Iraq.

We thank the United States delegation for the
draft resolution on this issue and are ready to work
constructively with other Council members towards a
consensus text for early adoption.

