Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and the
three Force Commanders for their respective briefings.

United Nations peacekeeping operations, as an
important means for maintaining international peace
and consolidating collective security, have made
important contributions to resolving conflicts and
disputes and restoring and rebuilding peace. In the
process, they have gained the trust and support of
Member States. United Nations peacekeepers carry
out their tasks in difficult, complex and dangerous
conditions, overcome various difficulties to discharge
their mandate and have brought peace and hope to the
peoples of areas in conflict. They are the embodiment
of faithfulness, dedication and sacrifice. I would like
to pay tribute to the Force Commanders here today
and, through them, to all United Nations peacekeeping
personnel.

The current international situation is undergoing
complex changes. New elements have emerged in
conflict situations. The threats and challenges to
international peace and security have become more
diverse. In order to adapt to changing needs, United
Nations peacekeeping operations have been the subject
of constant reforms and adjustments. At the same
time, against the backdrop of expanding operations
and growing complexity in mandates, the issues of
how to ensure that the mandates of peacekeeping
operations are more targeted and operational, enhance
the management of peacekeeping operations and ensure
that their mandates achieve the expected results have
become issues that we need to urgently address. In
response to the briefings we have just heard, I would
like to make the following four comments.

First, we must adhere to Dag Hammarskjold's three
principles for the smooth conduct of peacekeeping
operations. Deviation from or dilution of the basic
peacekeeping principles will jeopardize the presumed
objectivity and impartiality of peacekeeping operations
and may even create a situation where the United
Nations becomes a party to a conflict, hence hampering
international efforts to resolve it. Peacekeeping
operations, in the discharge of their mandate, should
fully respect the sovereignty of the host countries,
strengthen coordination with the parties concerned and
work to win the trust, understanding and support of
host countries.

Secondly, peacekeeping operations should create
favourable conditions for the peaceful resolution of
conflicts and work with and support the political
process. Only through political dialogue, resolving
differences through consultation and achieving
national reconciliation will it be possible to effectively
eliminate conflict. The success of peacekeeping
operations must rely on a clear political process and
a complete set of strategies on security, stability and
peacebuilding. Peacekeeping operations must strictly
abide by the Council's mandate and play the role of
agent and mediator in the political process and process
of national reconciliation in the host country.

Thirdly, adequate resources are an important
element for the effective discharge of peacekeeping
operations' mandates. The Department of Field Support
should continue to improve the level of logistics
services it provides to missions to enhance efficiency in
the disbursement and utilization of logistical resources
and to provide effective and timely support to missions.
We support the idea that countries with high technical
and equipment capacity should actively participate
in peacekeeping operations so as to make a useful
contribution to enhancing the overall capability and
equipment of United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Fourthly, enhancing the level of management and
strengthening internal coordination are effective means
to enhance the efficiency of peacekeeping operations.
We support stronger communication and coordination
between United Nations Headquarters and missions,
on the one hand, and the various departments within
a mission, on the other, so as to ensure that there is
an effective system of command and control. Missions
may carry out inter-mission cooperation based on their
mandates and make rational use ofresources and assets.

Attacks against peacekeeping operations and
personnel have caused grave loss to troop-contributing
countries and United Nations peacekeeping operations.
The United Nations should deal with this matter as
a matter of urgency and enhance measures for the
protection and security of United Nations peacekeepers.

China is a firm supporter and active participant
in United Nations peacekeeping operations. Chinese
peacekeepers have made an important contribution to
maintaining international peace and security through
their own actions, from South Sudan to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and from the Middle East to
Cyprus. More 1,600 Chinese peacekeepers are deployed
in nine mission areas in the service to peace. China
is prepared to continue to support and participate in
United Nations peacekeeping operations and, together
with the international community, to promote the cause
of peacekeeping and make a greater contribution to
maintaining international peace and security.

