Mr. Mminele (South Africa): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council this month, and for
convening this important debate. Furthermore, I would
like to extend our appreciation to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and the rest of the briefers for their
insightful information.

South Africa attaches high importance to the
protection of children in armed conflict. My delegation
recognizes that the protection of civilians, including
women and children in conflict situations is, by its
very nature, the primary responsibility of individual
Member States. My delegation reiterates our support for
resolution 1612 (2005) on children and armed conflict
on this significant tenth anniversary of the mandate.
The Secretary-General's "Children, Not Soldiers"
campaign, launched on 6 March 2014 by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and UNICEF, presented another
opportunity to pay particular attention to this challenge.

Additionally, on 7 March 2014, a historical
landmark was documented when the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2143 (2014). That
resolution expresses deep concern about the military
use of schools by armed forces and non-State armed
groups. It also condemns "all violations of applicable
international law on recruitment and use and abuse of
children by parties to armed conflict". In that regard,
my delegation condemns such attacks and recruitment
of children and calls upon all concerned parties to
protect children, as well as their schools.

South Africa believes that all children deserve
protection, not exploitation. They belong in school, not
armies and fighting groups. Children should be armed
with pens and textbooks, not guns. That campaign
complements other United Nations efforts, such as the
Global Education First Initiative, to secure children's
rights and provide dignity, opportunity and a better
life. We support the Secretary-General's call on

"all concerned Governments, regional and
non-governmental organizations to work with the
United Nations to intensify efforts to meet our goal
of zero use of children by any Government forces
by 2016".

One of the African Union's aspirations for agenda
2063 is that by 2020 all guns will be silent and Africa
will be a peaceful and secure continent with harmony
among communities of nations. As conflicts are
increasingly being experienced within States and
involve non-State groups such as terrorist or rebel
groups, such groups are less likely to be concerned
with or to abide by humanitarian laws that provide for
the protection of children. Much more must be done by
the international community with regard to addressing
violence against children.

Furthermore, mechanisms to promote and defend
children's collective security need to be highlighted.
That includes the use of child soldiers in conflict.
Despite that noble call, children continue to be
kidnapped and forcibly conscripted or recruited into
service throughout the world as sex slaves, helpers,
guards and armed fighters. In that process children's
rights are being violated with impunity. Many die.
Others are displaced from their communities and homes,
and allowed to suffer untold emotional, developmental,
physical, psychological, mental and spiritual harm, as
seen in the indoctrination of children into extremist
non-State armed groups.

In addition, armed conflict destroys State
structures that provide social services. The lack of those
services further prevents children from accessing basic
services such as education, health, water, sanitation and
nutritious food, thereby deepening poverty. These are
factors of key importance for national and international
peace and security that demand immediate as well
as long-term collective attention by the international
community.

The importance of children having access to basic
services during conflict as well as post-conflict periods
cannot be stressed enough. My delegation strongly
rejects the mass atrocities committed by extremist
groups such as Boko Haram, which also have a direct
impact on children. South Africa wishes to amplify
the international community's call with regard to the
"Bring Back Our Girls" campaign. It is disturbing to
note that, on 14 April, it will be exactly one year since
that horrendous incident occurred.

South Africa will continue to support actions aimed
at preventing child recruitment, and ensure that child
soldiers are reintegrated back into their community
during the demobilization and reintegration phases.
Moreover, South Africa supports actions aimed at child
protection in the training of peacekeepers. Protection of
civilians, in particular women and children, must also
take into account the interlinkage between security and
development.

In conclusion, I would like to highlight the
preamble of the Charter of the United Nations, which
commences by identifying the objective "to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war". That
speaks directly to our children and the next generation.
We must remember that promise of a more peaceful and
safer world to our children.

