Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to thank the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), the Permanent Representative of Spain,
for his very comprehensive briefing. We appreciate the
unfailing efforts of Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi
and his team in leading the Committee, which has
accomplished a great deal. The Committee has been
extremely active of late, which coincides with the
comprehensive review that is currently under way.

There has been an increase in terrorist activities
in the Middle East, Africa, Europe and elsewhere.
Terrorist organizations have access to complex planning
and implementation mechanisms. It is their goal to kill
as many civilians and bring about as much destruction
as possible. That is just the beginning; we expect the
worst. Such organizations have increasing military
and financial means, and they control huge territories
in some countries, which makes the danger of their
having access to weapons of mass destruction, whether
biological or nuclear, very real. Accordingly, we need
to make every possible effort to ensure that terrrorist
groups do not have access to such arms or the means to
produce them. That is an enormous responsibility for
all countries; accordingly, all countries should comply
with resolution 1540 (2004), which is the cornerstone of
the non-proliferation regime.

Jordan has made tangible progress in terms
of implementing the resolution. We have adopted
legislation and taken measures to control exports
with a view to preventing the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons and their delivery
systems. During its tenure as a member of the Security
Council, working in close cooperation with the Group
of Experts, Jordan submitted its third national report
on the implementation of the resolution. We very much
welcome the information provided by Ambassador
Oyarzun Marchesi regarding implementation.

I would also like to mention the regional workshop
that took place in Amman, which was organized by the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs and
brought together 17 countries, donor representatives
and 11 international and regional organizations. The
workshop provided an opportunity to exchange of views,
determine priorities and identify the difficulties and
solutions encountered in implementing the resolution.
The workshop was an excellent example of cooperation
among countries in terms of capacity-building and
mutual assistance, and also provided additional proof
of Jordan's commitment to the implementation of the
resolution and its support for the Committee. We hope
that the role of the Committee in assisting countries
will be strengthened over the coming years.

There is also a need to step up cooperation with
regional organizations. Such organizations need to be
encouraged to provide assistance to Member States.
Some countries do not have the means to implement
the resolution owing to security challenges or a lack
of resources. The current comprehensive review of the
status ofthe implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is
an important step, as it provides us with an opportunity
to gather a great deal of data and information that will
assist in the capacity-building of countries and the
improved implementation of the resolution. We support
that process and look forward to cooperating with the
Committee next year. We also plan to support its efforts
to include the academic community and representatives
of other bodies.

(spoke in English)

I will not say this is the last Council meeting for
Jordan, because perhaps there will be a vote. Neither
will I say that I tried to be a forceful representative
for the Arab world, because all here have heard me
clearly without my having to speak more loudly.
Unfortunately, the Arab world has been a consistent
presence within the Council for the wrong reasons.
However, we have always tried to represent our part of
the world with a great deal of passion and dedication.
I wish to thank you, Madam President, for all that you
have done and for your support. I also wish to thank
all of my colleagues, the Permanent Representatives
sitting around the table, those who are leaving as well
as those who are staying - in particular those who are
staying permanently, as we will be coming to see you
throughout the year. In the name of Jordan, I thank you
very much.

