Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation): We welcome
the participation in today's meeting of the President of
Somalia, His Excellency Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud,
and in general we share the views that he has expressed.
We would like to thank Mr. Michael Keating, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
for his comprehensive briefing on the work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia. We are grateful
to the Permanent Observer of the African Union to the
United Nations, Mr. Tete Antonio, for his explanation
of that pan-African organization's approaches to the
settlement in Somalia.

We were pleased to see that the Somali National
Forum held on 12 April confirmed the planned
parameters for the general elections scheduled for
August and September and the unacceptability of
failing to keep to the established timetable.

The security situation, however, continues to be
worrisome. We are seeing an increase in the activity of
the Al-Shabaab terrorist group and trends that suggest
changes in its tactics. According to international
experts, the extremists have become more mobile and
are focusing on carrying out their terrorist attacks
where they can have the greatest international impact,
coordinating their activities with various international
accomplices. We have been obliged to recognize the
fact that Al-Shabaab members have recently been
attacking military bases as well as the so-called soft
civilian targets.

In that regard, we believe that it is essential to
maintain military pressure on Somali extremists, and
we urge the international community to continue its
efforts to increase the capacity of the Somali army and
the African Union Mission in Somalia. The military-
political situation in the country demands that the
African Union peacekeepers and Somali security
forces step up their combat efforts against Al-Shabaab
and that the United Nations expand its logistical and
technical support in accordance with resolution 2245
(2015), which extended the mandate of the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia.

In our view, one of the Somali authorities' priorities
at this stage is the process of building the State and
federalization, and completing the formation of the
Federal states is particularly high on that agenda. We
cannot allow the remaining disagreements to have a
negative impact on the country's electoral process.

On the social and humanitarian front, the
continuing drought in Puntland and Somaliland, which
has brought hundreds of thousands to the verge of
starvation, is very worrying. We urge the international
community to provide humanitarian assistance to the
affected regions in order to supply the population with
drinking water, food and medicines. Russia has been
regularly providing humanitarian assistance to the
Federal Government of Somalia and Somali refugees in
neighbouring countries through targeted contributions
to the appropriate United Nations funds, with our total
assistance exceeding $15 million for the period from
2011 to 2015. We share the belief that currently there
is a need to not only step up international donations
to resolve specific economic and social issues, but
also to ensure comprehensive support to the Federal
Government to provide financial and humanitarian
assistance to people.

At the same time, we call forthe strict implementation
ofthe provisions of resolution 2275 (2016) on the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, including, inter
alia, the necessary holding this year of parliamentary
elections on the basis of the agreed electoral model and
the Government's implementation of the road map for
2020, as well as accelerating work on the drafting of a
new Constitution for the country. The most important
tasks for the Government now are to strengthen the
security sector, bolster the foundations of federalism
and advance sustainable national and inter-ethnic
reconciliation in Somalia.

