Mr. Burian (Slovakia): At the outset, I wish to
underline that we fully align ourselves with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Slovenia, who spoke on behalf of the European Union.
We would like to add a few additional comments on the
issue of post-conflict peacebuilding that we consider
important.

During the six decades of its existence, the
United Nations has accumulated immense experience
from its peacekeeping and peacebuilding endeavours.
However, it has not always been successful in applying
lessons learned and in avoiding mistakes in addressing
problems of post-conflict recovery in various countries.
Unprecedented growth in United Nations peacekeeping
engagements and operations will be unsustainable if
we do not find effective working solutions and exit
strategies. It can only be achieved if efficient
approaches to peacebuilding and best practices leading
to early and sustainable post-conflict recovery are
defined and put in practice.

The 2005 World Summit clearly defined the
nexus between security, development and human rights
on the global level. We must understand, however, that
the same applies to the local level. Only balanced and
coherent approaches to peacebuilding in all three areas
can secure sustainable peace and development in a
country emerging from violent conflict or civil war. We
must also understand that there are no quick fixes or
shortcuts. We have, all too often, witnessed initial
progress and success in one area being ruined because
they were not accompanied by similar progress and
consistent approaches in other areas, and the country
has subsequently slipped back into conflict and
violence.

We agree with the President's concept paper on
the fact that time is a precious commodity when
dealing with post-conflict situations. After the
conclusion of peace agreements, there is a narrow
window of opportunity, which might close if the
expectations on basic needs of people are not met. That
is why there is a need for efficient mechanisms
allowing for rapid reaction and immediate deployment,
not only for peacekeepers but also civilian experts
helping national authorities to design integrated
peacebuilding strategies aimed at strengthening
capacities in all critical areas: security; humanitarian
response; securing the basic needs of the population
while avoiding the creation of dependency on
humanitarian aid and assistance; establishing a solid
basis for sustainable development, the rule of law, and
respect for human rights; and, last but not least,
preventing impunity for gross violations of human
rights.
Those elements should be reflected in Security
Council mandates for peacekeeping missions from an
early stage of the United Nations involvement in
post-conflict peacebuilding. That urgency in
developing adequate capacities and strategies from the
very beginning of international engagement is
important so as to ensure that the peacebuilding
priorities and challenges are expeditiously and
sufficiently addressed, including by creating synergies
and complementarity between peacebuilding efforts
and reform processes and by identifying solutions that
are tailored to countries' specific needs and
circumstances. It is important to underline in this
context that national ownership is always crucial for
the sustainability of the peacebuilding process.

The entire United Nations system must work in
harmony and complementarity. There must be
synergies between the activities and agendas of the
various United Nations bodies and agencies in a
post-conflict environment. There is no place for
competition between them or unnecessary duplication.
We believe integrated missions represent a step
forward in that direction. There is, however, a need to
examine how to improve their functions and mandates
so as to achieve greater coherence and better reflect a
holistic approach to post-conflict recovery.

In that regard, we believe that the potential,
expertise and comparative advantages of United
Nations agencies such as UNDP, the United Nations
Population Fund, UNICEF and the World Food
Programme should better incorporate such an approach
and not attempt to replace or duplicate it in the
structure and functions of integrated missions. That
would, in our view, also allow, later, for an easier
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, when
the mission leaves and the agencies assume their
traditional development functions. We believe that the
United Nations is best suited to generate long-term
support, funding and assistance. It might also be
acceptable as an impartial player, to coordinate the
actions of various stakeholders of the international
community and to secure coherent and consistent
approaches.

The Peacebuilding Commission has clearly
demonstrated its added value in that respect, and we
wish to commend its work thus far. At the same time,
we believe that its capacities and tools must be further
expanded and adjusted for it to be able to respond to
the concrete and diverse needs and requests for
assistance of a larger number of Member States. In that
regard, we also believe the Security Council should
consider adding new States to the agenda of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

In conclusion, allow me to say a few words about
an issue that was discussed in the Security Council last
week (see S/PV.5889) and which has direct relevance
to the discussion today. I am referring to security sector
reform. Security sector reform is an important element
of every post-conflict stabilization process. We are
pleased with the level of understanding on the
necessity of a holistic and system-wide approach to
security sector reform that has been reached within the
United Nations over the past year. Cases such as Haiti
and Timor-Leste clearly demonstrate that, without
comprehensive security sector reform, including the
establishment of functioning and accountable security,
justice and corrections institutions, no sustainable
solutions are possible. The recommendations of the
Secretary-General in his recent report on security
sector reform (S/2008/39), including the creation of an
inter-agency coordination mechanism within the
Secretariat and a pool of external experts, are fully in
line with the thrust and logic of this debate, and we
believe they should be implemented as soon as
possible.

Finally, thematic debates, such as the current one,
involving various aspects of efficient peacebuilding
contribute to a better understanding of the problem.
Now there is a need to consolidate the mandate of the
Security Council and the various United Nations
bodies and create proper United Nations tools and
mechanisms to also reflect that understanding in
practice. In that respect, we welcome the draft
presidential statement prepared by the
United Kingdom, which summarizes the basic
principles of post-conflict peacebuilding and, among
other things, invites the Secretary-General to provide
advice within 12 months for the relevant
United Nations organs on how best to take this issue
forward within the United Nations system. We fully
support that idea, and we are ready to participate in
future discussions on the matter.

