Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Allow me, Sir, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month and to commend your
predecessor, Ambassador Negroponte of the United
States, for his stewardship of the Council last month.

My delegation wishes to thank you and Council
members for convening this urgent meeting of the
Council to consider the grave situation in Palestine. We
thank Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process for his
extremely useful briefing on the situation, given in this
Chamber last Friday.

We are equally grateful to the Secretary-General
for his important statement to the Council this
morning. We hope that his thoughtful words will not
have fallen on deaf ears.

We are dismayed that after some six weeks of
relative calm, violence has erupted again, resulting in
the taking of innocent lives. Malaysia condemns these
acts of violence and deeply regrets the loss of innocent
lives on both sides of the conflict. Such actions serve
no purpose other than inflaming an already volatile
situation. In the current situation in Palestine and the
precarious and potentially explosive situation in the
Middle East, amidst the rumbling of a possible war in
the region, every effort should be made by all the
parties concerned towards de-escalating tension and
restarting dialogue and negotiation.

My delegation strongly condemns the brutal
military assault and siege on the headquarters of
President Yasser Arafat in Ramallah. Those actions are
completely uncalled for. They have placed President
Arafat in serious danger and have further undermined
his reform efforts. It is disingenuous on the part of
Israel to blame President Arafat for the suicide
bombings and activities of Palestinian militancy when
for many months now the Israel Defence Forces have
held sway in the occupied territories, with President
Arafat a virtual prisoner and with his every act and
movement closely monitored. It is also unfair to make
Mr. Arafat accountable for every suicide bombing that
occurs, as if he controlled the bombers' every action
and intention.

While it is convenient for those who dislike Mr.
Arafat to blame him, it is obvious that he cannot be an
effective leader when his ability to exercise power and
authority is being systematically undermined, eroded
and shackled by Israeli operations and restrictions.
President Arafat himself has repeatedly condemned
attacks against Israeli civilians and has declared such
attacks as harmful to the Palestinian cause. Clearly,
those actions against President Arafat are intended to
harass and intimidate him into submission and to
destroy the symbol and hope of the Palestinian people
that he represents to his people and the entire
international community. Israel cannot hope to break
the indomitable spirit of the Palestinian people and
their leadership, as represented by President Arafat,
their democratically elected leader. If Israel sincerely
seeks peace with the Palestinians, it must abandon
those tactics of terror in favour of constructive
dialogue and engagement with them. Israel's tactics
make a mockery of Mr. Sharon's claim to be a "man of
peace".

Violence does not happen in a vacuum. It must be
seen and understood in its proper context. In the
context of Palestine, it is the continued occupation of
Palestinian land by the Israeli occupying forces, the
demolition of Palestinians' homes, the devastation of
their towns and cities, the destruction of their
livelihood and institutions, the frequent and prolonged
curfews and, worst of all, the loss of thousands of
civilian lives through the ruthless and indiscriminate
use of force by the Israeli Defence Forces (IDF). The
continued terrorizing of the Palestinian people by the
IDF - such as firing into a crowd of school children in
the Amari refugee camp last week, which resulted in
the killing of a nine-year-old boy - will only provoke
violence rather than quell it. Clearly, terror begets
terror and the spiral of violence will continue unabated
unless serious efforts are made to stop this deadly
pattern of tit-for-tat retaliation.

The recent spate of violence is a wake-up call to
the international community, particularly those
entrusted with special responsibility to restart the peace
process. Events of recent days remind us that,
notwithstanding our preoccupation with other equally
important concerns elsewhere, the long-standing and
unresolved issue of Palestine demands our immediate
and undivided attention.

My delegation believes that as long as this issue
is unresolved it will remain the root cause of much of
the violence in the Middle East. The international
community and the United Nations cannot afford to
allow this issue to remain unresolved indefinitely. As
the Secretary-General himself has pointed out, the
increase in tension in the Middle East, due to the issue
of Iraq, increases the need for and the importance of
rapid positive movement on the Israeli-Palestinian
track.

As was pointed out by Mr. Roed-Larsen in his
briefing last Friday, the six weeks prior to the most
recent suicide bombings had been notably quiet on the
Palestinian side, despite many actions taken against the
Palestinians. IDF operations continued, however,
including widespread arrests and assassinations, as
well as a tightened closure regime and curfews. Those
deliberate and provocative acts by Israel at a time of
internal debate among the Palestinians on the utility of
violence in their struggle and amid serious efforts to
implement a security agreement, reflect Israel's
complete lack of interest in and disdain for resolving
the conflict through dialogue and negotiations. It is
most regrettable that the serious efforts of the
Palestinians to restore calm and security have not
received a positive response from the Israeli side;
instead, they are being rebuffed and undermined at
every turn.

We must not to allow the issue of Iraq, which is
currently high on the Council's agenda, to be used as a
pretext or excuse by Israel to intensify its practice of
State terrorism against the Palestinian people. The
renewed violence convinces us more than ever before
that only an interposing international protection
mechanism can monitor the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, as well as
provide much-needed protection to the Palestinian
people. We fully support the Secretary-General's
recommendation for the deployment of an international
protection force, which Malaysia itself had advocated
during its membership of the Council two years ago.
Only forcible separation of the two peoples by a strong
United Nations force could provide the necessary peace
and security that would allow both parties to resume
negotiations. We remain convinced that if this had been
done, much of the current violence could have been
avoided.

We remain concerned over the dire and
deteriorating humanitarian situation on the ground. We
have been forewarned that the crisis might spiral out of
control within months, with 50 per cent of the
population dependant on food handouts and with
malnutrition and water-borne diseases spreading. The
economic situation has also worsened. Ironically,
despite its outward expression of concern at the
Palestinian plight, which is its own doing, Israel has
not seriously undertaken any effort to improve or assist
in alleviating the humanitarian crisis. My delegation
condemns the restrictive measures by Israel that have
aggravated the situation of the already overwrought
population living in the occupied Palestinian territories.
We welcome the efforts of the Quartet and other
countries, as well as international agencies, in
addressing the humanitarian situation.

We believe an independent Palestinian State is
inevitable, and we look forward to its realization within
the targeted three-year period, at the very latest. In that
regard, we welcome the Quartet's three-phase plan of
action, or road map, for achieving a two-State solution.
We also welcome its plan to establish a third-party
mechanism to monitor and assess progress on forward
movement in the implementation of the road map. We
hope that the assessment will be fair and impartial. The
onus of achieving the targets of the road map must also
be equal on both sides.

Malaysia's position on the question of Palestine
has often been repeated in the Council. We believe the
solution lies in the realization of the vision contained
in Security Council resolution 1397 (2002), in which
two States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side within
secure and recognized borders. Malaysia reiterates its
support for the Arab peace initiative and the important
efforts of the Quartet as well as other interested parties
and looks forward to the implementation of initiatives
to resume the peace process.

My delegation would once again urge the Council
to take a more active role in efforts to find a permanent
settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, based on
the relevant resolutions of the Council, in the interest
of peace and stability in the region and of enhancing its
own credibility. Much is said these days about the need
for the United Nations, in particular the Council, to
enhance its credibility by following up on its
resolutions. We fully agree with that. The onus is on
each and every member of the Council. However, in
implementing its resolutions, the Council must ensure
consistency and even-handedness in respect of all its
resolutions, including those pertaining to the question
of Palestine, which have been ignored by Israel with
impunity. A selective approach by the Council will
only undermine its credibility.

My delegation looks forward to the Council
enhancing its credibility, beginning by meeting its
responsibility with regard to the Palestinian issue. A
real beginning in that direction would be for the
Council to support the draft resolution before it. Failure
to do so would ensure not enhanced credibility, which
we all seek, but the Council's continued ineffectiveness
on this issue.

