Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation to brief
the Security Council on behalf of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). This is, indeed, an historic
moment - the final Security Council meeting on
Liberia and the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL).

The Security Council has accompanied Liberia
through the painful years of civil war, through the
challenging years of peacebuilding that followed,
through the trying times of the Ebola pandemic and
now, finally, transition. With successive mandates
to observer missions and peacekeeping operations,
sanctions regimes, panels of experts, resolutions and
statements, this organ has remained committed to a
peaceful Liberia.

On 27 May 2010, at the request of the Liberian
Government, Liberia was placed on the agenda of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Since then, the PBC has
engaged in building peace in Liberia. As Chair of the
country configuration, Ambassador Skoog visited
Liberia from 21 to 25 March. He did so in order to
engage with the new Government and a wide range of
stakeholders. His aim was to identify peacebuilding
priorities beyond the peacekeeping presence and to
discuss the future engagement of the PBC in Liberia.

The Commission played a key role in supporting
the work of the Government and UNMIL in the
development of the peacebuilding plan requested
in resolution 2333 (2016). The statement of mutual
commitments on peacebuilding in Liberia between the
Government and the Peacebuilding Commission has
been a key mechanism of the PBC's engagement with
Liberia. The peacebuilding priority areas identified in
the most recent statement of mutual commitments are
security sector development, strengthening the rule of
law, promoting national reconciliation, and peaceful and
inclusive elections in 2017. That statement, as well as
the peacebuilding plan, will now form part of the basis
for the new Government's national development plan.

Over the almost 15 years of its successful mission,
United Nations peacekeeping in Liberia through
UNMIL has been at the forefront of efforts to lay the
critical foundation for peace in Liberia. It has disarmed
more than 100,000 combatants and protected millions
of civilians, assisted in rebuilding the police, justice
and security institutions, facilitated the provision of
humanitarian aid, and supported the development of
national capacity to promote and protect human rights.
UNMIL's mission did not come without a cost. We
should never forget the 202 peacekeepers who lost their
lives in the service of peace during the nearly 15 years
that the Mission was deployed in Liberia.

UNMIL has benefited from a series of excellent
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General.
The PBC Chair would like to commend in particular
Special Representative Farid Zarif, Deputy Special
Representative for Rule of Law Waldemar Vrey and
Deputy Special Representative/Resident Coordinator
Yacoub El Hillo. Their engagement and strong
commitment has been crucial to bringing the Mission
to a successful conclusion in partnership with the
Government of Liberia.

After today, Liberia will no longer be on the
Security Council agenda and the United Nations
peacekeeping mission will have ended its operations.
However, the PBC and the United Nations are still
very much involved in supporting Liberia in this new
chapter. With regard to the transition from UNMIL
to a United Nations presence, the Commission has
consistently recommended the continuation of the good
offices role and political accompaniment of the United
Nations, as well as the provision ofthe expertise needed
for political analysis and the implementation of the
peacebuilding plan following the closure of UNMIL.
The good offices of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the mediation efforts of President
Obasanjo and other efforts by the European Union,
the African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States and the broader international
community were crucial in the recent election. It is
strongly recommended that the good offices function
be preserved during a period of heightened risk of
tension in Liberia's ongoing transition.

Delivering on the promise of sustainable
development is essential to building resilience,
successfully completing the transitions and reducing
the risk of violent conflict or a return to conflict. Allow
me to briefly outline some of the key challenges where
support from the international community will be
needed as we move forward.

We cannot ignore the fact that several of the root
causes of the conflict in Liberia remain. Addressing
decentralization and land issues, as well as ensuring
greater access to justice and increased capacity in
the security and justice sectors, will be crucial for
the continued consolidation of peace. They must
be addressed in the new Government's national
development plan. The need to strengthen the rule of
law and reconciliation is crucial. In addition, legislation
on violence against women is also still outstanding.

It remains imperative for the PBC to continue to
push for renewed and sustained political leadership
of the key structural reforms, as set out in phase I of
the peacebuilding plan. Moving forward, such reforms
will help to address some of the root causes of conflict
in Liberia. Greater integration of the United Nations
sustaining peace efforts is critical in that regard. That
includes ensuring that sustaining peace in solidly
reflected in the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework and that all parts of the United Nations
system on the ground support the national development
plan in an effective and coordinated way. The PBC has
an important role to play in encouraging such support
and in working with all parts of the United Nations
system to make sure that it happens.

It is clear that concrete progress with regard to the
reforms will also be dependent on economic growth and
financial capabilities. The difficult economic situation
has a continued negative impact on the population.
However, the Government is clear that it has the
necessary political will and energy. To illustrate that,
the President has decreased his salary by 25 per cent.

When President Weah met Ambassador Skoog,
he assured him that Liberia had an enthusiastic and
energetic new Government that was committed to
ensuring the best future for the people of Liberia.
However, the President stressed that the new Government
would need the continued support of the international
community. He stressed the importance of partnerships
in that regard. The PBC will continue to work closely
with the World Bank and other international financial
institutions in that regard. It will also encourage greater
private sector engagement. The Liberia multi-partner
trust fund, with predictable funding from international
partners, in combination with the Peacebuilding Fund's
catalytic support, has the potential to be an effective
mechanism to enable the continued implementation of
the country's peacebuilding priorities.

To conclude, the Peacebuilding Commission will
continue its political accompaniment and support
continued international attention. The Peacebuilding
Commission will work alongside the Resident
Coordinator and the United Nations country team to
support the Government's work towards sustainable
development through the development of Liberia's
national development plan. The Peacebuilding
Commission will also discuss a framework of
engagement as an option to ensure mutual accountability
between the Government, the United Nations and the
Peacebuilding Commission, including for the important
outstanding priorities of the Liberia peacebuilding plan.

