Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): On behalf of my
delegation, allow me first to congratulate you,
Mr. President, for the able manner in which you have

presided over the Security Council during the month of
August. I also wish to thank you for convening this
open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. This debate allows
countries not represented in the Council to address
critical issues affecting international peace and
security, including the question of Palestine.

My delegation associates itself with the
statements made by the representative of Cuba on
behalf of Non-Aligned Movement and by the
representative of Pakistan on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.

In June of this year, we marked 40 years of
occupation of the Palestinian territories by Israel. The
Palestinian territories have been occupied for too long.
In fact, this is the longest period in history that any
territory has been occupied. It is more than imperative
that a just solution be found to this issue. This very
Council has adopted various resolutions aimed at
addressing this issue, including resolution 242 (1967)
and resolution 338 (1973). Unfortunately, a solution is
far from sight, and even elusive. The situation on the
ground in the occupied territories has deteriorated so
much that major parts of it have literally descended
into darkness. Palestinians continue to live in hardship,
deprived of the amenities of a decent life, both
economically and socially.

In that regard, we support efforts that aim to seek
a just and comprehensive solution to the Palestinian
question, including the Arab Peace Initiative, the
Quartet process and the United States initiative to
convene an international conference on the Middle
East in Washington in November of this year. We also
encourage the promotion of inter-Palestinian national
reconciliation.

The question of Palestine remains the main factor
dividing East and West and represents the bulk of the
underlying reasons for the conflict and instability in
the Middle East, including international terrorism. As a
body that is mandated to deal with issues affecting
international peace and security, the Council is duty-
bound to take the necessary measures to prevent further
deterioration of this issue.

The Council has adopted important resolutions on
the question of Palestine, which should serve as the
logical starting point for the restoration of Palestinian
rights. It is also only right and fitting for the Council to
assume the responsibility to compel Israel to respect
international law and conventions, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention, and put an end to Israel's
occupation and illegitimate practices in the occupied
Palestinian territories. The Council must ensure that
Israel ceases its practices of expanding the illegal
settlements in the West Bank, constructing the
separation wall and maintaining its widespread
network of roadblocks and checkpoints. Israel must
also withdraw from the occupied Palestinian territories
to its pre-1967 borders.

Our hope is that a comprehensive and just
solution to the question of Palestine will be found in
the nearest future. We also hope for the realization of a
sovereign, independent and viable Palestinian State,
living side-by-side with Israel, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

