Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): The Security Council
convened at the level of Foreign Ministers on 25 September
1997 to address concerted international efforts to promote
peace and stability in Africa. On 16 April 1998, the
Secretary-General, at the request of the Security Council,
submitted his report on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa (S/ 1998/318). That, indeed, was and remains a
timely event, for Africa - today more than ever - needs
peace and development for the prosperity of all its peoples.
Neither nations nor peoples can do without cooperation for
the good of all. Humanity requires solidarity and sharing in
all the benefits derived from the common heritage of us all,
on the basis of equality, mutual respect and mutual support
for a common future. It is in this context that we view
today's meeting.

The invasion of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
by Uganda and Rwanda has plunged that country into a
devastating war that has resulted in intra-African fighting
on the battlefield: a war from which the region and Africa
at large stand to gain nothing; a war whose premises are
against the purposes and objectives enshrined in the charter
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU).

It has been said, and rightly so, that in the 1960s
independent African States inherited colonial boundaries
together with the challenge which that legacy posed to their
territorial integrity and to our attempts to achieve national
unity. It was because of that shared and collective vision
that the OAU decided in 1964 to accept the boundaries
inherited from colonial authorities. What remains, therefore,
is for Africa to forge national unity, good-neighbourliness
and cooperation. Any deviation from these principles will
have serious and unimaginable consequences for Africa.
What we are seeing in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo as a result of expansionist ambitions should be
condemned; it must not be accepted as the norm in
Africa.

The Inter-State Defense and Security Committee
meeting of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), held in Cape Town, South Africa,
in 1995, decided to take collective action in the event of
attempts to change the legitimate Governments of member
States by military means. Therefore, the Southern African
Development Community has a stated obligation to ensure
that the legitimate Government of a fellow SADC
member should not be removed by invasion. Namibia
adheres to that principle and believes in the non-
violability of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
States. These are sacred principles that compelled us,
together with Angola and Zimbabwe, to intervene in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo at the expressed
invitation of President Kabila and his legitimate
Government. The sole purpose of our requested
intervention is to prevent the collapse of the State
machinery and the Violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of a fellow SADC member State. The
Namibian involvement is for democracy, peace, human
rights and regional cooperation.

Furthermore, the SADC Summit held in Mauritius
on 13 and 14 September 1998, among other things,
expressed deep regret at the outbreak of war in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to remove the
Government of President Kabila from power.
Furthermore, the Summit welcomed the initiatives by
SADC and its member States intended to assist in the
restoration of peace, security and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that regard, the
Summit reaffirmed its call for an immediate cessation of
hostilities and commended the Governments of Angola,
Namibia and Zimbabwe for providing troops in a timely
manner to assist the Government and people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to defeat the illegal
attempt by rebels and their allies to capture the capital
city, Kinshasa, and other strategic areas. The Summit
emphasised the need for all political actors in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to commit themselves
to orderly and peaceful transition to multiparty
democracy, primarily through constructive consultations
and negotiations involving all stakeholders.

 

It is therefore important for all States Members of the
United Nations to subscribe in earnest to the principles
enshrined in the Charter and to respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. There must be a clear distinction between invited
and uninvited foreign troops in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Let me stress that as freedom fighters we never relied
on ethnicity to win victory against oppressors, for we knew
too well that apartheid colonialism was anchored in the
principle of divide and rule. As Africans, we must avoid
the politicization of ethnicity, for it can only be detrimental
to African unity. We must also guard against ongoing
attempts by external forces to exploit ethnicity for their own
purposes. Of late, we have witnessed efforts to assist Africa
in addressing its economic problems. We commend the
United States-Africa ministerial meeting that took place in
Washington a few days ago. But how can sustainable
development take root in Africa in general, or, for example,
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in particular,
when sustained efforts are being made to plunge that
country further into conflict?

The security concerns of any State are, indeed,
legitimate. However, we should refrain from defining our
security needs beyond our own borders without working
within the framework of the United Nations and of the
OAU. The unprovoked invasion of the Congo and the
Violation of its sovereignty and territorial integrity constitute
an act of interference in the internal affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Namibia advocates peace and stability as a
precondition for development and economic growth.
Consequently, we wish for the disruption of the
democratization process to cease and the reconstruction of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to resume soon.

Our deepest desire is to help create an environment
conducive to normal political life in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have suffered enough, for too many
decades. They need space and time to reconstruct their
country. As indicated in the communique of the SADC
Summit meeting on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
held on 23 August 1998, the reconstruction of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as an independent,
sovereign, united, peaceful, stable and prosperous country
is critical to the achievement of the same objectives in the
region and in the rest of the African continent.

The OAU and SADC are continuing to make efforts
to bring an end to the conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In Victoria Falls, the heads of State or
Government made a political commitment to put an end
to the fighting and to search for peace collectively. This
was followed by a meeting of Defence Ministers and
other senior military personnel in Addis Ababa to work
out modalities, a timetable, a calendar and resources, as
well as monitoring, verification and the details of the
respective troop withdrawals, in cooperation with the
OAU. Regrettably, however, this process has come to a
standstill.

On 18 January this year, at the request of President
Yoweri Museveni of Uganda, my country hosted a
summit of the countries that are involved in the fighting
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Namibia agreed
to host that summit, for we believed that the request was
made in good faith. The aim of the summit was for the
respective leaders to exchange views on how best they
could cooperate to achieve the signing of a ceasefire
agreement on the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
That meeting resolved that a ceasefire agreement should
be signed without further delay. Unfortunately, what
followed was continued attacks on Government and allied
forces. This cannot be tolerated.

In our view, the time has come for the Security
Council to become actively involved, in accordance with
its Charter obligation to maintain international peace and
security. We are therefore encouraged by the action taken
by the Security Council today. Let me therefore take this
opportunity to express to you personally, Mr. President,
and to your delegation our appreciation and thanks for the
efforts you have made to focus your presidency on
African issues. We are most grateful.

Unless all the parties involved negotiate in good
faith and honour their commitments, the war in the Congo
will continue raging. It is therefore imperative that a
ceasefire agreement which will bring an end to the
suffering of the Congolese people be signed. For our part,
we still stand by the decision of the Windhoek summit.

We are encouraged by the positive developments of
the liberalization of political parties in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo announced by President Kabila at
the end of January 1999. It is our sincere hope that
political activity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
will return to normal in the not-too-distant future.

 

Finally, I should like to say that the cold war has
indeed ended, but external intervention in Africa has not
ended - it has only diminished. But only Africa can make
the African continent peaceful and prosperous. The
international community can only assist.

