Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Japan for convening this open
debate on a topic of great relevance to the United
Nations, given that the world is at a critical crossroads
where international peace and security are under threat.

In recent years, Security Council members have
discussed the need to address the root causes and factors
that exacerbate conflicts, through a comprehensive and
wide-ranging approach. The paradigm shift we are
pursuing together at the United Nations - the focus we
are placing on prevention with sustainable peace and
development as its cornerstone - is the right path. The
three review processes carried out in 2015 - namely,
on United Nations peacekeeping operations, the
peacebuilding architecture and the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) - produced coinciding results.
We must pay attention to the root causes of conflicts;
we must prevent them from emerging or recurring;
and we must find political solutions. The three reviews
also identified the need to correct the fragmentation
in the United Nations system, as it is limiting the
Organization's ability to respond to armed conflicts in
a timely and flexible manner by making use of the tools
at its disposal.

The identical resolutions - Security Council
resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution
70/262 - defined sustaining peace as a goal and as a
process that encompasses addressing the root causes of
conflicts, focusing on containing the spread of conflict
and increasing the normative and operational coherence
within the United Nations system and among all its
bodies. We welcome the fact that the recommendations
arising from the three reviews as well as the content
of those two resolutions were taken up by Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres in his proposal for the reform
and restructuring of the peace and security pillar, as
set out in his report contained in document A/72/525,
which the General Assembly just endorsed today (see A/72/PV.74).

When it comes to maintaining peace, the primary
responsibility of the United Nations, and of the Council
in particular, is to invest in the security, peace and
prosperity of everyone in every country throughout the
world without exception. In its broadest sense, today
more than ever, the work of peacekeeping operations
should harmoniously contribute to the Organization's
other agendas aimed at fostering the nexus between
peace and security, development and human rights. The
United Nations must ensure the primacy of resolving
conflicts through political means and demonstrate
flexibility, swiftness and effectiveness in the face of
warning signs of crises or the outbreak or exacerbation
of conflicts - and in general in addressing specific
changing needs on the ground.

As Mexico has stated on previous occasions, the
Council must make sustaining peace a reality in its
area of competence; the Council should help to channel
the Organization's efforts to address the root causes of
conflicts in order to prevent them from erupting and
work with other entities, such as the Peacebuilding
Commission, the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council, to resolve conflicts in an effective
and lasting way and in a spirit of transparency and
accountability. That is the major challenge. As the
Chair of the Group of Friends of Sustaining Peace,
Mexico reiterates that the effective development and
implementation of this concept will reorient the work
of the United Nations to make it more coherent and
cross-cutting across all its organs, leading us to a more
sophisticated and holistic vision of peace by building
capacities and tools that allow us to address conflicts
in all their phases.

We must combat various phenomena in the
disturbing international context in which we live
that, far from seeking peace, serve to fuel crises and
conflicts. We must reject hate speech that stigmatizes
people on the basis of their racial, religious or national
origin, which is causing so much harm throughout the
world. We must condemn the irresponsible flows of
weapons and the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, which are tools of death and destabilization,
as well as criminals' instruments of power, and profit
only a few.

We cannot forget that the threat of the use of force
is prohibited in the foundational Charter of the United
Nations. The threat of the use of force is even more
serious when it is accompanied by the use of weapons
of mass destruction, in particular nuclear weapons.
Mexico reiterates the responsibility and obligation
we all have to forge a robust and efficient system of
global governance, based on international law and
cooperation, and not on the destabilizing threat of the
use of weapons.

It is time to renew our commitment to multilateralism
and to the United Nations. We must reaffirm our trust in
the Organization and shape it so that it is best placed to
protect the highest interests of all humankind, because
that is the reason it was created.

