Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Ms. Amos,
Mr. Simonovic' and Mr. Spoerri for their briefings.

The issue before us today remains extremely
relevant in view of the difficult situation that prevails
with respect to the protection of civilians in many of the
world's hot spots. Despite the efforts of the international
community and the presence of a significant
international legal basis for the protection of civilians,
thousands of people continue to die in conflicts. What
is particularly troubling is that the majority of them
are children, women and the elderly - in other words,
those considered to be the most vulnerable groups in
the population. We vehemently condemn deliberate
attacks on civilians and their deaths as the result of
indiscriminate or disproportionate use of force.

We believe that unswerving respect on the part
of parties to an armed conflict for their commitments
under international humanitarian law is a guarantee for
the effective protection of civilians. However, that does
not mean we have to dream up any new international
legal or political concepts to bridge the supposed gaps
in the protection regime of the Geneva conventions.
In particular, we question the wisdom of proposals to
designate new categories of persons requiring special
protection under international humanitarian law. Such
ideas can in practice only weaken protection already
afforded to civilians.

To the same degree, we are alarmed at the tendency
to subjective interpretation of the standards of
international humanitarian law regarding the protection
of civilians in armed conflict and the tendency to
equate those norms with the highly ambiguous concept
of the responsibility to protect. Practice has shown that
invoking that concept with what initially appeared to
be noble goals often leads to interference in the internal
affairs of sovereign States and to violent regime change.

In that respect, we reiterate that the priority for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict should be
the understanding that primary responsibility in that
sphere lies with the belligerents, while the international
institutions and mechanisms should perform a
subsidiary role, assisting national efforts in that area.

Today, there is no single set of criteria for assessing
the effectiveness of implementation by the belligerents
of their responsibilities to protect civilians. We think
that efforts to artificially introduce such criteria
are fraught with serious political manipulation and
strengthen elements of intrusiveness in international
relations. We believe that, when assessing efforts in
that area, we need to take into account the economic,
social, historical, religious, cultural and other specific
aspects of countries and regions, as well as the nature
of each conflict, its root causes and options for finding
a settlement.

Russia believes that the adoption by the international
community of any reactive measure to protect civilians
that involves the use of force is possible only with the
approval of the Security Council and in unswerving
respect for the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations.

We regret cases ofunsatisfactory implementation of
Council resolutions relating to the protection ofcivilians.
In particular, there remain a number of question marks
hanging over the participants in the NATO operation
in Libya regarding how the relevant Security Council
resolutions were implemented in practice. All cases of
the disproportionate and indiscriminate use of force
during conflict that claims civilian victims need to be
investigated, and the guilty brought to justice.

We call on all members of the international
community to eschew indiscriminate, unilateral
approaches to the issue of the protection of civilians. We
believe that only strict compliance with international
humanitarian law and human rights standards and
unswerving implementation of relevant decisions of
the Security Council can help us to resolve protracted
conflicts. Moreover, we believe that the Council has
sufficient capacities at its disposal and that it would be
unwise to create any new specialized Security Council
mechanisms for the protection of civilians.

