Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Thank
you, Mr. President, for having called on me to express
the position of the Republic of Yemen regarding the
invasion of Iraq.

The Republic and people of Yemen support the
Iraqi people, who daily - indeed hourly - are tallying
victims. We regret this terrible crisis that is causing
division in international relations, waged by the
coalition States without the authorization or resolutions
of the Security Council. We are deeply concerned by
the impact that this war will have: the death of
thousands of innocent civilians and destruction sown
not only in Iraq, but also in the region as a whole. This
will open the door wide to extremism, instability and
failed security in the countries of the region. We must
think very hard in order to avert the repercussions of
this illegal war.

Even before the first missile was launched against
Iraq, we saw the Security Council divided between a
majority that encouraged continued inspections of
weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, which had already
yielded positive results, and a minority that wished to
halt all efforts towards peace and push towards war.

We have witnessed the tensions that followed,
which caused a clear fissure in relations among States
and have marginalized the Security Council and
paralysed it in its role of maintaining international
peace and security. It has led to a new stage in
international relations that is characterized by the
violation of agreed principles and the adoption of the
politics of force.

The military invasion of Iraq brings tragedy for
Iraq and the region as a whole. It also places the future
of international relations at great risk. There is not
enough time to expound on this now, so I shall merely
summarize the position of the Republic of Yemen
regarding what is occurring in Iraq.

First, the Republic of Yemen considers the
military invasion of Iraq totally unjustifiable,
particularly given Iraq's dedication to the principle of
implementing international resolutions on the
disarmament of weapons of mass destruction,
particularly resolution 1441 (2002), as was confirmed
by the reports of the Executive Chairman of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the Director-General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
Using force against others for reasons other than self-
defence and without a Security Council mandate
constitutes a flagrant violation of the principles of
international law and the Charter.

Secondly, the coalition countries have said that
they are determined to disarm Iraq of its weapons of
mass destruction, under the pretext of implementing
relevant Security Council resolutions, while they have
not been authorized by the Council to do that. Their
refusal to consider Israel's nuclear, chemical and
biological arsenal reflects a policy of double standards
and shows that there are ulterior motives in dealing
with the issues of the region.

Thirdly, the invasion constitutes in form and
content unacceptable conduct that is highly risky to
international relations. The declared policy to change
the Iraqi regime is an act of aggression carried out
against a sovereign, independent State that is a Member
of the United Nations, and it constitutes interference in
its domestic affairs.

A pre-emptive war, based on mere doubts about
the intentions of others, leads to chaos that will
undermine the basis of international relations. The
Republic of Yemen supports the resolutions adopted by
the most recent Arab summit, as well as the decisions
adopted by the Council of Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of Arab States that have reaffirmed the need to respect
Iraq's sovereignty, political independence, territorial
integrity and the principle of non-interference in its
internal affairs. Similarly, the Republic of Yemen
supports the security, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the State of Kuwait.

Despite the very precarious situation, we are
nonetheless optimistic about the multifarious
international consensus against the war in Iraq. But this
must be crystallized into a policy to put an end to this
tragic war. That is, in fact, the responsibility of the
United Nations. It is the United Nations that must
determine the commitment of Member States to the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter and
must ensure respect for international legitimacy.

In conclusion, we should like once again to
express our deep concern at what the people and the
land of Iraq are being subjected to and we appeal for a
halt to the aggression, destruction and blood-letting.

