The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of the Netherlands and Sierra Leone, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Pemagbi
(Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Majoor (Netherlands) took the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
third report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone, contained in
document S/2006/922.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2006/1012, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
2

In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, Denmark, France,
Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America


The President (spoke in Arabic): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1734 (2006).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


