Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the presence of Minister Nasser Judeh, and
extend our gratitude to the Jordanian presidency of the
Security Council for April. We are grateful for the very
thorough presentation given by Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, and greatly appreciate the recent appointment
of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov as Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process. The impetus he provides
will be very important to relaunching the peace process
in the Middle East.

We find ourselves in a very disturbing time. New
conflicts are having an impact on the region, and we
find ourselves unable to resolve issues that have dragged
on for decades. With regard to the issue of Palestine
and Israel, the shared view is that the status quo is
not acceptable; as a result, we believe that we should
relaunch the peace process with defined parameters
and within a specific time frame. The Security Council
has a key role to play in this matter.

The two-State solution is still the best alternative
for the Palestinian people to be able to exercise their
right to self-determination, and for Israel to enjoy
security safeguards that would protect its existence.
Political realism has shown time and again that it is
not possible to maintain a negotiating process without
considering these legitimate demands. We also need
a commitment on the part of the parties, who must
adopt confidence-building measures, comply with
agreements and renounce extremist rhetoric. It is also
crucial to respect international law, human rights, and
international humanitarian law. A peace process is not
viable while the Israeli settlement policy continues.

Palestine must also make progress in internal
reconciliation, under the leadership of President Abbas.
We would also like to make a special appeal to not
disregard the humanitarian situation that affects the
population living in the Gaza Strip. We should also
properly address the harsh reality facing Palestinian
refugees in the Yarmouk camp in Syria, who find
themselves trapped in a conflict that is not their own.

With respect to Lebanon, we acknowledge the
efforts of Prime Minister Salam to combat terrorism
and strengthen State institutions under very difficult
circumstances marked by a presidential power vacuum
and the non-compliance of certain Lebanese actors
with the disassociation policy established in the Baabda
Declaration. This is a time to reiterate our gratitude
for the many humanitarian gestures that Lebanon and
other countries in the region, in particular Jordan, have
shown toward Syrian refugees, who require protection
as well as humanitarian assistance.

Finally, with respect to the Syrian crisis, the
Secretary-General's most recent report (S/2015/124)
confirms that the conflict has spread with new levels
of violence. We must urgently adopt measures to
protect the most vulnerable population, as evidenced
in the violence against women, boys and girls. Those
responsible must be brought to account. Humanitarian
action in itself will not be enough ifthere is no political
solution. Dialogue is the only way to act responsibly
and with a view towards the future. In that mission we
support the work of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and we eagerly await
his report to the Security Council at the end of this
week.

