Mr. Karev (Russian Federation): I should like to
express our gratitude to the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the two Tribunals for their thorough briefings to the
Security Council and for their assessments on
prospects for the implementation of the completion
strategies of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
We are pleased to note that the information
provided shows that the authorities of both Tribunals
are making every effort to complete their work within
the time frames set out under resolutions 1503 (2003)
and 1534 (2004).

I should like to note that the implementation of
the completion strategies of both Tribunals does not
mean that those who are guilty of crimes will be able to
evade justice. Completing this complex task will
require not only intensive judicial work but also the
implementation of a number of measures that relate in
particular to the transfer of lower-ranking cases to the
competent national jurisdictions, which will have to be
fully prepared for them and will have to comply with
international human rights standards and judicial
norms.

In that regard, I should like to note the efforts that
are being made by the ICTY, together with high-
ranking Government officials, to establish a War
Crimes Chamber in the framework of State organs. We
hope that the Chamber will be able to begin its work by
the start of 2005. We deem it necessary for intensive
efforts to be continued in order to accelerate this
process and undertake the transfer of relevant cases to
the authorities of Croatia, Serbia and Montenegro,
Rwanda and other countries.

We share the concern of the Presidents of the
Tribunals about ensuring that the two Tribunals have
qualified staff. We hope that, through the Secretary-
General's efforts, those temporary difficulties will be
overcome. In his statement, the President of the
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia mentioned that he
had made a proposal to the Council regarding the
completion of the judges' mandate in November 2005.
The Security Council is working on the matter of
completion dates, and we hope that in the near future
the Council will find a solution that is satisfactory to
all parties. The essential thing is not to make decisions
that violate universally accepted norms.

I will add a further question. In President
Meron's briefing, there were some important points to
be underlined. I am referring to the important question
of pardons and the casing of sentences and to the
question of mechanisms for reviewing sentences upon
completion of the ICTY's work. We believe that it is
important to provide answers to those questions, with
respect to the Rwanda Tribunal as well. I ask whether
the Presidents of the Tribunals have any comments in
that regard.

