Mr. Kolby (Norway): First, I would also like to
thank Sir Kieran for his briefing on recent
developments in the Bougainville peace process. In
spite of recent setbacks and challenges that need to be
addressed, the overall impression is that the process
continues on the right track and that it has now reached
its final stages.

We are pleased to note that the United Nations,
through the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB), is maintaining its vital role in
promoting peace and stability on the island. In addition
to overseeing implementation of the weapons disposal
plan, UNPOB and the Peace Monitoring Group are
instrumental in terms of encouraging mutual trust and
confidence between the parties.

My delegation takes the view that sustained
peace-building efforts are crucial in any comprehensive
strategy aimed at achieving durable peace. The scope
of peace-building activities currently being undertaken
by different actors in Bougainville covers a variety of
initiatives, from reconciliation of former enemies to
reintegration of ex-combatants and the promotion of
development and economic recovery. However, the
successful implementation of those initiatives depends,
to a large extent, on the agreed weapons disposal plan
being fully implemented. Moreover, only through an
appropriate arrangement as to the final fate of the
weapons will there be conditions conducive to the
effective implementation of autonomy and the
provisions for a referendum in the Agreement, and for
the autonomous Bougainville Government to be
established.

As a means of promoting those goals and
safeguarding the investments already made in
Bougainville, my delegation supports the extension of
UNPOB's mandate until the end of 2003. That will
allow the United Nations Office to oversee the
implementation of the pending components of the
Peace Agreement, and thereby to contribute to the final
sealing of the peace process.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
encourage the Government of Papua New Guinea and
its Bougainville counterparts to remain committed to
the peace process and to do their utmost to keep it on
track through its last stage. Particular emphasis should
be placed on overcoming current obstacles to effective
weapons disposal relating, inter alia, to logistics,
communications and mobilization.

Finally, all parties need to engage in long-term
planning in order to promote peaceful coexistence,
thereby making the current process more self-
sustaining.

Bougainville is not a major item on the agenda of
the Security Council. It is, nevertheless, a vivid
example of the constructive role the United Nations
can play in a comprehensive peace-building strategy,
even with relatively small resources. Allow me
therefore to end by paying tribute to UNPOB for the
very good work the Office is undertaking, and to the
members of the Peace Monitoring Group for their
valuable support for United Nations efforts in
Bougainville.

