Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin by personally
welcoming you to New York, Prime Minister Rutte, and
congratulating you on the Kingdom of the Netherlands'
excellent presidency of the Security Council for the
month of March, which is ending with this timely
initiative of convening a high-level open debate on
United Nations peacekeeping operations. I would
also like to welcome to all the ministers who have
joined us today, as well as Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, and
Ms. Fatimata Toure, Director of Groupe de recherche,
d'etude et de formation femme-action. I thank them
both for their excellent briefings.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea welcomes
today's very important open debate, which is enabling
us to analyse and address together key aspects of the
chief responsibility of the United Nations, which is the
maintenance of international peace and security. In
that regard, my Government would like to commend
the Secretary-General for the initiatives that he is
spearheading to introduce reforms in various areas
of our Organization, particularly our peacekeeping
operations, considering that they represent one of
the key platforms of the United Nations - since it is
through them that we experience events directly, and
it is there that the United Nations focuses its main
effort and joint action to fulfil its mandates. We also
commend the members of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations for their skill and ability and
for having so ably shaped the study and in-depth review
ofissues related to peacekeeping operations with a view
to achieving reform and enabling missions to carry out
their important tasks effectively and efficiently.

We would like to take this opportunity to convey
our gratitude to all the personnel of peacekeeping
operations on active service for their courage and
valour and to express our deepest condolences to the
relatives and friends of those who have paid the ultimate
sacrifice in discharging their duties.

Equatorial Guinea believes that the time is ripe to
launch reforms to bring a new dynamism to the planning
and implementation of the strategic international peace
and security architecture that the United Nations
supports, with the aim of enabling them to confront the
new challenges and trends that conflicts present today.
A careful analysis of the issues that are the focus of the
current reform efforts leads us to conclude that they
provide guidance and a more concrete, complex and
credible strategic vision capable of adapting to evolving
events and the evolving nature of conflicts.
All of the elements and points of these reforms
represent a backbone of support for peacekeeping
operations. We recognize that the chief responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
belongs to the United Nations, as set forth in the Charter
of the United Nations, and that under the leadership
of the Security Council, peacekeeping operations are
one of the fundamental instruments available to the
United Nations in fulfilling its noble mission. The
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, as the
only body of the United Nations tasked with broadly
studying all issues related to peacekeeping operations
in all their aspects, including measures aimed at
improving the Organization's ability to carry out those
operations, in accordance with resolution 2378 (2017),
has done its work, and we commend the quality of the
efforts to frame the reforms. We believe firmly that
their adoption and implementation will have a positive
effect on the implementation of future peacekeeping
operations and special political missions and will
improve their strategic structure and functions so that
they can act with greater coordination and flexibility
in varying conflict situations, however complex they
may be.

It is important that the parties involved in
peacekeeping and international security operations,
and all actors, honour their commitments and
responsibilities and faithfully interpret the rules set
out in the mandates, always paying close attention to
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
It should be noted and underscored that in resolving
African matters, it is necessary to carefully take into
account the customs and cultures of African ethnic
groups, their ancestral traditions for resolving disputes
and conflicts, starting with the advice of elders, tribal
chiefs and religious leaders, and youth community
associations. Those groups of traditional actors play a
very important role in resolving issues and are the basic
cells and links that can have a positive influence in
resolving any conflict affecting their community. That
creates greater trust and transparency and generating
very little criticism of missions as they discharge
their duties.

Africa's voice must be heard and kept in mind when
designing and structuring peacekeeping operations,
since more than half of all missions are deployed on
African soil. African nations are the principal troop-
contributing countries for those operations. We think
that improving communication and coordination with
African countries is indispensable for enhancing the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations. The African
Union, the regional and subregional organizations and
the countries of the regions affected are stakeholders
that should also be an integral part of the deployment
of any peacekeeping operation in Africa. It is important
that such operations collaborate and cooperate
with regional and subregional organizations. In
that connection, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
welcomes the excellent collaboration and coordination
that currently exist between the United Nations and the
African Union, between Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Mahamat.

Peacekeeping operations should not be considered
an end in themselves, but rather as a means to
reach a solution to a conflict so they can ensure a
transition to peacebuilding and later to development
and reconstruction. Therefore it is important that
peacekeeping operations be designed to support the
efforts of the host country, build capacity and strengthen
security, be self-sufficient and achieve sustainable
development. United Nations development agencies or
other organizations must also play the leading role in
such efforts.

I cannot conclude without expressing the concern
and condemnation of the Government of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea with regard to constant criminal
attacks on the staff of peacekeeping and international
security missions carried out by terrorists, armed
groups and enemies of peace. Such attacks must stop.
The Governments concerned must shoulder their
responsibility to protect peacekeeping missions, and
the violators must be brought to justice.

At the same time, Equatorial Guinea pays special
tribute to the more than 100,000 men and women who
serve and have served in peacekeeping operations and
commend them for their professionalism, dedication
and courage, especially those who have given their
lives to maintain peace and security. We encourage all
others in the field to continue to defend international
peace and security, because many children, women and
elderly people throughout the world are in despair, and
their only hope is in peacekeepers. We ask that they
continue their efforts. We are with tham.

To conclude, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
reiterates its commitment to continuing to support the
efforts and initiatives of the United Nations within its
architecture for international peace and security, as
it has already done in several African conflicts and
emergency situations by donating financial support
and material goods and training staff to ensure the
maintenance of international peace and security.

