Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to express our thanks to the
Government of the French Republic and to
Ambassador Jean-Marc de La Sabliere, whose vitality,
commitment and passion on this question have
enhanced its importance in the Security Council. The
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict has
worked diligently since its inception last year and has
made progress under the leadership of France.

We would also like to pay tribute to Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for her efforts during the short
period since she assumed her functions. Her Office on
Children and Armed Conflict has undertaken some
praiseworthy work. It is encouraging to see such
organizations as the European Union, the Organization
of American States, the African Union, the
Commonwealth, the G-8, the Economic Community of
West African States and others inscribing the question
of children in armed conflict on their agendas.

The question of children in armed conflict has
assumed its proper place in the discussions and
consultations of the Security Council, which has
adopted several resolutions on the subject that have
provided a proper framework that has enabled the
international community to make some progress. In
that regard, we would like to welcome the plan of
action for systematic and comprehensive monitoring,
reporting and compliance, which provides for the
gathering of objective, accurate and reliable
information.

In spite all of that concern, numerous atrocities
continue to be committed against children in many
parts of the world. Such a situation cannot be ignored.
We should accord it greater attention.

The current conditions and events impose on us a
heavy responsibility vis-a-vis children, especially those
who suffer the most. It is our belief that there is no
greater suffering than the suffering of innocent children
in the massacre that is now taking place in Lebanon.
For the past two weeks, children have been subjected
to murder and maiming. They have been denied
humanitarian relief, and their hospitals and schools
have been hit. All of that violates the rights of children
under resolution 1612 (2005), the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and numerous other international
conventions, which time limits do not permit me to
cite.

It is deplorable that children, who are not
responsible for the mistakes of adults, should suffer
destruction, devastation and displacement. It would be
wrong for us to shirk our responsibilities; there is no
justification for that. The critical situation in which
children, women and families find themselves
suffering - including displacement, upheaval and the
risks of exploitation and abuse - makes it incumbent
upon us to respond promptly to the appeals for relief
launched by Lebanon.

We recognize the importance of concrete results
in the area of vision, awareness and initiatives
regarding the question of children affected by armed
conflict. We must also think creatively to develop the
plan of action and the substantive framework regarding
children in armed conflict into concrete initiatives.

The State of Qatar proposes the following for
consideration. First, we should increase coordination
between the Working Group and the subsidiary organs
of the Council to punish the perpetrators of crimes
against children. Secondly, we must increase the
number child-protection advisers in peacekeeping
operations. Following the success of that first phase in
a limited number of regional situations, it is important
that such protection be extended to other situations.
Thirdly, there is a need to formulate a comprehensive
strategy to protect children affected by armed conflict.
In that context, it would be appropriate for the Security
Council to adopt a new approach or strategic
framework focusing on education for the protection of
children in armed conflict.

Post-conflict peacebuilding requires an integrated
framework to provide sustainable education.
Educational systems not only educate the young, but
also build nations and provide generations with a
common identity. The State of Qatar believes that it is
of the utmost importance to post-conflict peacebuilding
that an investment be made in education to lay the
foundations for lasting peace and stamp out the
recruitment and use of child soldiers. Moreover,
education is essential and should be at the heart of
rehabilitation and reintegration.

In conclusion, we ought never to forget that
children are our greatest hope and most precious

resource in rebuilding communities affected by armed
conflict and the achievement of peace, security and
sustainable development. The regrettable situation of
children in the Middle East, particularly those in
Lebanon and the occupied Palestinian territories,
represents a test for the new Working Group and its
new bureau, which possesses considerable experience.
We look forward to hearing from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict about her intended actions vis-a-
vis partners on the ground and their potential
contribution to increasing the resources currently
available.

