Mrs. Zappia (Italy): Let me first commend you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on such an
important theme. I also wish to thank the Secretary-
General and Commissioner Chergui for their briefings.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union (EU).

Africa is an active global player in the field of peace
and security and is enhancing its own instruments
to respond effectively to threats and crises affecting
the continent, to prevent them from occurring and to
achieve the objective of silencing the guns by 2020.

We commend the strengthening of the African
Peace and Security Architecture and the African
Standby Force, as well as efforts to develop frameworks
for international humanitarian law and for human
rights, conduct and discipline compliance for African
Union (AU) peace-support operations. We believe those

frameworks are an essential component of the African
Peace and Security Architecture.

We welcome also the progress made in the
operationalization of the African Union Peace Fund,
which this year reached the highest contributions
level since its establishment. We appreciate that the
Fund is also set to finance mediation and preventive
diplomacy activities. Prevention is still the best option
at our disposal and avoids the human suffering and
destruction produced by conflicts.

Despite remarkable progress over the past few years,
more remains to be done. In that regard, partnerships
are essential because no one - not even the United
Nations - can do everything on its own. Moreover, the
involvement of regional and subregional organizations
and the implementation of Chapter VIII of the Charter
ofthe United Nations are crucial to properly addressing
regional crises and finding sustainable solutions.

With the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations last
September, we committed once again to enhancing
collaboration and planning between the United Nations
and relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations and arrangements, including the African
Union and the European Union. We also committed
to supporting the African Union in strengthening and
implementing its policies, procedures and capacities.

The United Nations and the African Union have
a long and successful history of cooperation on the
ground. We commend the progress made in improving
that partnership and encourage further strengthening of
the United Nations-AU working relationship, which will
ensure effective and cost-efficient peace operations.

The European Union plays an important role in
complementing the efforts of the United Nations and
other regional organizations on the ground. The EU
has several training and capacity-building missions in
Africa and provides financial support to many African
peace-support operations through its African Peace
Facility, from the African Union Mission in Somalia
to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel), where unique trilateral cooperation among
the EU, the United Nations and the G-5 Sahel was put
in place.

Italy is ready to contribute to strengthening African
capacities in the area of peacekeeping. Thanks to our
carabinieri and our defence forces, from Somalia to
the Sahel, Italy is sparing no effort to build capacity
across the board - from border security to election
security and from justice and correction practices to
the fight against organized crime and trafficking. We
committed additional resources this year to specific
training and capacity-building programmes. On
25 October, we organized in Rome the second Italy-
Africa Ministerial Conference, which focused, among
other things, specifically on issues related to peace and
security in Africa. Through our Centre of Excellence
for Stability Police Units, located in Vicenza, we
provide high-quality training and specialized courses
for peacekeepers on the rule of law, the protection of
civilians, sexual and gender-based violence in conflict
and the broader women and peace and security agenda.

It is recognized that African Union-led peace
operations have comparative advantages in terms
of flexibility, rapid deployment in challenging
environments and the capacity to carry out robust
mandates. Their main challenge is still the lack of
sustainable and predictable funding. The Secretary-
General's report on the subject envisages different
mechanisms to finance and support African Union
peace operations that are authorized by the Security
Council. Those options should be fully considered
and implemented.

The example of the G5-Sahel Joint Force is useful
in analysing the impact the lack of funding could have.
As the Secretary-General stated in his latest report
on the G5-Sahel Force (S/2018/1006), the Force's
existing support model is not sufficient and a more
comprehensive and extensive United Nations support
package is needed. Only then could the countries
of the region fully realize the ambitious objectives
they set for themselves with that innovative and most
welcome initiative.

Italy remains in favour of using United Nations-
assessed contributions for African-led peace
operations, provided that appropriate standards in
terms of troop quality, training, equipment, financial
transparency, human rights compliance, conduct and
discipline are met. In order to achieve those goals, the
Security Council has to show readiness in embracing
the innovative spirit that the terms of the relationship
with Africa require today. Ultimately, what is at stake is
the idea itself of constructive multilateralism, which we
should uphold and advance by showing the necessary
political leadership.

