Mr. Schori (Sweden): Sweden aligns itself fully
with the statement that has just been delivered by the
Ambassador of Ireland on behalf of the European
Union and the acceding countries. However, I am
pleased to be given this opportunity to highlight some
points of special interest to Sweden.

Sweden warmly welcomes the Security Council's
active involvement in efforts to prevent and stop the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. My
country has a long tradition of strong engagement in
issues of disarmament and non-proliferation. Our late
Foreign Minister Anna Lindh initiated the work that
led to the adoption of a European Union strategy
against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction in December last year.

Addressing the threats to international peace and
security posed by weapons of mass destruction is an
urgent task that needs to be undertaken collectively by
the international community. Sweden has consistently
advocated that a strong and central role be given to the
Security Council in addressing those issues. We are
therefore pleased to support the draft resolution. In our
view, it is both timely and proper that the international
body that has been given the main responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security also
now addresses in a comprehensive way questions
related to the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction.

This important resolution will clearly affect all
Member States. That emphasizes the need for
transparency in shaping the draft resolution. Therefore,
we appreciate the opportunity that this meeting offers
for Member States to express their views. We hope that
the remaining part of the work on this resolution will
be marked by the same openness and transparency,
which will encourage broad support.

In that very spirit, Sweden would like to
emphasize two specific points where the wording of the
resolution needs to be unequivocally clear. First, an
individual who claims that his rights have been
violated as a consequence of the implementation of this
resolution should be guaranteed access to courts at the
national level, and States have a duty to ensure that this
happens. Secondly, when States and individuals take
measures to implement this resolution, all such action
should be consistent with international law and the
United Nations Charter.

Sweden is confident that the adoption of this draft
resolution can have a positive impact on Member
States' capabilities to deal with the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and related materials. It is
therefore a most welcome step in fulfilling the
responsibility of the Council for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

