Mr. Baja (Philippines): We wish to thank the
French presidency for convening this important
meeting on ways to combat subregional and cross-
border problems in West Africa. We welcome the
comprehensive briefings by the current Chair of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Foreign Minister of Ghana, and by its
Executive Secretary, Mr. Chambas, as well as by
Under-Secretary-General Egeland and the Associate
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), Mr. Diabre.

In recent weeks, West Africa has been a good
example of a multifaceted and integrated approach to
conflict situations: a successful example of what the
United Nations and civil society can accomplish in
conjunction with regional organizations, notably
ECOWAS. In the words of the Foreign Minister of
Ghana, peace and stability now engender cautious
optimism and justified concern, and the establishment
of functioning Governments is under way. These
results can be attributed to the synergy of actions
undertaken by the United Nations and regional
organizations. The timely deployment of peacekeeping
operations, both by regional groups and by the United
Nations, significantly account for the maintenance of
stability in the subregion.

The United Nations now has three large
peacekeeping operations in West Africa: the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) and the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI).
Those United Nations presences provide an opportunity
to deal in depth with regional instability factors and
cross-border issues.

In this connection, the international community
should seize the opportunity to build on the gains thus
far achieved and pursue steps that would further
enhance stability and peace in the region. Towards that
end, we welcome the recommendations of the
Secretary-General dealing with cross-border issues
confronting the countries of the region, most notably
those on proliferation of small arms and the use of
mercenaries.

We would like to focus on some points that we
believe should be given priority. As rightly pointed out
by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2004/200),
security sector reform lies at the heart of resolving
most cross-border regional problems.

On the proliferation of small arms, we
congratulate ECOWAS on its adoption of a Moratorium
on small arms and on the establishment of a Small
Arms Unit in its secretariat. We would encourage
ECOWAS to further intensify its efforts to implement
the Moratorium beyond its expiration this year, through
the adoption of a legally binding instrument, as well as
to consider a ban on mercenaries. Recommendations 19
and 20 of the Secretary-General's report - on the
enhancement of the capacity of border services such as
border guards, police, immigration and customs, and on
maintaining a central register of arms held by the
military and national security agencies - should also
be given priority attention.

Regarding disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes, a key
recommendation that merits the Council's attention
focuses on the need to closely study the lessons learned
in DDR programmes in Mali and Sierra Leone for
possible application in other areas of West Africa. Due
emphasis should be placed on programmes adopted for
ex-combatant children, in particular addressing their
reintegration and improving their capacities for
employment. The need to provide a livelihood for ex-
combatants is imperative and should be an integral part
of every DDR programme. Without this, the peace
process will remain fragile. With an alternative
livelihood, ex-combatants would have no reason to
pick up arms again.

We would also like to underscore the need for the
cooperation and involvement of international
institutions such as the World Bank in security sector
reform. It may be recalled that the successful
implementation of Sierra Leone's DDR programme
was accomplished with the support of the World Bank.
The experience of Sierra Leone showed how the World
Bank can play an important role in post-conflict
transitions, complementing political and security
efforts of client Governments and the international
community.
We need to strengthen coordination among the
various United Nations agencies on the ground, in
particular the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for West Africa, UNAMSIL,
UNMIL and UNOCI. Close cooperation among United
Nations offices will avoid duplication of efforts and
will serve as a necessary reinforcement measure to
further the work of each office. We particularly
commend the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for West Africa and support the
strengthening of his Office.

Finally, in response to today's briefings, we
support the adoption of a statement that would
establish some sort of a road map for initiatives to be
undertaken by international and regional bodies to deal
in a practical and operational way with cross-border
issues in West Africa.

