Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Sweden aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.

I would first like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2015/151) and Special Representative
Haysom for his briefing on the current situation and
for the excellent work he has done in Afghanistan. I
would also like to acknowledge Ambassador Tanin's
statement.

Sweden expresses its support for the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and for
the extension of its mandate. A continued United Nations
presence, particularly in those parts of the country that
are otherwise left unattended, remains vital. This year
will be critical for Afghanistan. The Afghan people's
expectations of the Government remain very high.
Sweden therefore welcomes the strong commitment
and willingness to reform shown by the national unity
Government. The proposed reform agenda of "Realizing
Self-reliance" shows Afghanistan's readiness to take
on current challenges, although it is critical that the
agenda be translated into concrete results. In order
for the Government to fulfil its commitments to its
citizens and to implement reforms, a full Cabinet must
be nominated and approved as soon as possible.

Sweden remains committed to supporting
Afghanistan's development towards becoming a
democratic, secure and prosperous State. We have
been assisting it for more than 30 years. Afghanistan
is in fact one of the largest recipients of Swedish
development aid. We intend to commit $1.2 billion to it
over the transformation decade. Our focus is primarily
on strengthening Afghanistan's own ability to improve
the economy, enhancing democratic governance,
promoting equality and improving the human-rights
situation, particularly for women and children. Sweden
contributes to the Resolute Support Mission with the
aim of training, advising and assisting the Afghan
National Security Forces. We also provide support to
the European Union Police Mission in Afghanistan.

The consolidation of democracy in Afghanistan
continues. The recent elections as well as a vibrant and
active civil society, often driven by the youth, are proof
of that. Yet, for democracy to fully take root, institutions
need to be functioning and adequate legal parameters
need to be in place. Sweden welcomes the commitment
by the national unity Government to implement
necessary reforms of the electoral system prior to the
Parliamentary and District Council elections. The
responsibility rests with the Afghan Government, but
we stand ready to advise, assist and support.

The human-rights situation, particularly the
situation for Afghan women and girls, remains of
serious concern to us. The principle of equality must be
promoted. That calls for a higher proportion of women
in senior government positions and conditions that
allow women to become equal members throughout all
levels of society.

An end to impunity will require serious reforms of
Afghan institutions, especially of the justice system,
and corruption is a critical obstacle to development and
must be combated at all times. The record high number
of civilian casualties reported by UNAMA in 2014 is
appalling. The dire humanitarian consequences of the
conflict underline the immediate need for finding a
peaceful solution.

We welcome the commitment of the Afghan
leadership to making progress in the peace process.
An inclusive approach is the only way forward. The
opportunity to provide women with a stronger role
in that process should be grasped. While the peace
process needs to be Afghan-led and Afghan-owned, the
international community stands ready to assist.

The challenges in Afghanistan cannot be tackled
in isolation from the regional context. Recent attempts
to increase cooperation and build further trust are
commendable and should be encouraged. A stable and
prosperous Afghanistan creates potential for the entire
region. The production and smuggling of narcotics is
an area where regional cooperation really could make a
substantial difference. In that respect it will be crucial
to maintain the momentum in regional processes such
as the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process.

In conclusion, as we know the challenges for
Afghanistan are many; tackling them will require
continued assistance from the international community.
UNAMA and other United Nations agencies have
played and will continue to play an indispensable role.
We look forward to continuing our cooperation with
the Afghan Government in making its vision for the
country come true.

