Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank the delegation of
Argentina for its successful presidency of the Security
Council last month. We are also grateful to Ambassador
Quinlan for his briefing on the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). We thank him and the entire Australian
delegation for their skilful chairmanship of that Council
body.

It is important that the Committee continue to act
in an impartial and objective manner, in the interest of a
diplomatic political settlement to the situation regarding
the Iranian nuclear programme. The Panel of Experts
provides the Committee with useful support. However,
we continue to believe that the Panel should carry out
its work under the guidance of the Committee while
fully respecting the working methods and carrying out
its investigations based solely on reliable and verifiable
information.

We welcome statements by the new President
of Iran, Mr. Hassan Rouhani, concerning Tehran's
willingness to show greater openness with regard to its
nuclear programme. We hope that those intensions will
be in evidence during the forthcoming round of regular
discussions between Iran and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), slated for 27 September. It is
necessary that a new round of dialogue under the 3+3
format of international mediation take place as soon as
possible. The groundwork has already been laid for the
first negotiations under that framework.

We would also like to point out that statements by
representatives of the new Iranian Administration are
in line with the well-known Russian view concerning a
settlement of the problem, namely, that a final decision
can be arrived at only through a recognition of the
unconditional right of Iran to develop a civilian nuclear
programme, including the right to enrich uranium.
Of course, that should precede the resolution of all
outstanding problems with regard to Iranian nuclear
activities, under reliable and comprehensive IAIA
controls, and the lifting of any sanctions against Iran.

We see no alternative to a diplomatic and political
settlement. Efforts to that end should be made in a
phased manner, based on the principle of reciprocity
and in line with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. However, we are convinced that
the collective and effective nature of steps on the part
of the international community to address and resolve
problems related to the Iranian nuclear problem are
undermined by unilateral sanctions, many of which
are extraterritorial in nature. That is categorically
unacceptable under international law.

Our country will continue to make every effort to
achieve progress in resolving the situation concerning
Iran's nuclear programme.

