Mr. Escalona Ojeda (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this important debate as an
opportunity for dialogue. We welcome the efforts that
have been made by the Argentine Republic at the helm
of the Security Council.

We, too, would like to join in the homage paid to
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello.

Similarly, we associate ourselves with the
denunciations made by the Permanent Representative
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia, especifically with
regard to the act of aggression experienced by President
Evo Morales Ayma.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reaffirms its
commitment to protecting civilians in armed conflict,
for we are convinced that it is up to States, in fully
exercising their sovereignty, to ensure the fulfillment
of their responsibilities in the promotion and respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law,
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter and the United Nations.

My delegation believes that dialogue and
cooperation in the peaceful settlement of conflicts
are appropriate ways to contribute effectively to
the protection of civilians and thereby contribute to
the achievement of peace. We value the role that the
United Nations has been playing, with the support of
Member States, in promoting peaceful solutions to
conflicts in various regions of the world, in particular
the contribution of peacekeeping operations in dealing
with such situations.

The emphasis of peacekeeping operations should
be on the use of political influence and its integral
support functions to the parties in finding a peaceful
solution to a given conflict. Peacekeeping operations
should be part of the political settlement of a conflict,
not an alternative to it.

There are today no conflicts in the Latin American
and Caribbean region between countries that could
endanger regional or global peace. To the contrary, there
has been increasing efforts at regional and subregional
integration that have served to promote dialogue and
trust among countries, as well as to prevent and avert
conflicts between States. Through novel mechanisms,
such efforsts are intended to strengthen our democratic
systems, thereby creating the conditions, both within
countries and collectively, to strengthen a culture of
peace.

In that context, Venezuela reaffirms its support for
the peace negotiations between the Government of the
Republic of Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed
Forces of Colombia. Those talks have been taking in
Havana, and Venezuela and Chile are participating as
observers at the request of the parties. The goal is to
bring an end to a conflict that has affected the political
and social life of that sister nation for several decades.

As for the current situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, Venezuela reaffirms its support for the search
for a negotiated political solution to the internal conflict
in that country, which continues to be the victim of
the interventionist policies of foreign Powers seeking
to overthrow the legitimate Government of President
Bashar Al-Assad. In that connection, we deplore the
fact that those countries continue to fuel the clashes
among various sectors of Syrian society by providing
weapons to mercenary groups operating outside the
law and perpetrating terrorist acts that cause the loss of
innocent human lives. We reiterate our full support for
the integrity, unity and political independence of Syria,
in accordance with the right to self-determination.

Moreover, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
reaffirms its call for an end to violations ofinternational
humanitarian law committed by the Israeli military and
political elite in the occupied territories and Gaza. We
demand that Israel fully abide by the provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the protection of
civilian persons in armed conflicts.

In that connection, we demand an immediate end
to the policy of building settlements in the occupied
territories and Jerusalem East, as well as an end to the
blockade against Gaza. In addition, it must comply with
United Nations resolutions with regard to its withdrawal
from the occupied Palestinian territories.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate my country's
commitment to the common cause of peace and
international security, guided by our shared values
in the building of a multipolar system that is free of
hegemony and aimed at strengthening a multicentric
and inclusive world that fully adheres to international
law.

