Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
supports the Security Council's adoption of resolution
2170 (2014), aimed at combating such terrorist groups
as the Islamic State in the Levant (ISIL) and the Nusra
Front. Recently, ISIL and the Nusra Front have been
rampantly and deliberately attacking civilians and
persecuting people of other religions and ethnicities,
resulting in large numbers of casualties among innocent
civilians and the displacement of millions of civilians.
That has become a serious threat to peace and security
in the Middle East and the world as a whole.

China calls upon the international community to
faithfully implement the resolution just adopted and to
strengthen its efforts to combat such terrorist groups
as ISIL and the Nusra Front by adopting concrete
measures to cut off the supply of arms, personnel and
financing to those terrorist groups from outside so as
to stop the spread of terrorism in countries such as Iraq
and to maintain peace and stability in the Middle East
and throughout the world.

With globalization and the development of
information and communications technology, terrorist
groups such as ISIL and the Nusra Front are increasingly
using the Internet and social media to spread terrorist
propaganda video and audio products, to recruit for,
incite, plan and execute terrorist acts and to raise
funds for their terrorist activities. China welcomes
the adoption of resolution 2170 (2014), which contains
provisions on sanctions against terrorist groups such as
ISIL and the Nusra Front in terms of their use of the
Internet and social media to recruit people and obtain
weapons and financing. We hope that the international
community will attach great importance to this
issue and will enhance their cooperation to combat
cyberterrorism together.

China is also a victim of terrorism. We strongly
oppose all forms of terrorism and will continue to
actively participate in international counter-terrorism
cooperation and to combat the threat of terrorism
together.

