Mr. Suan (Myanmar): My delegation thanks
the Italian presidency of the Council for convening
this important open debate and for its concept note
(S/2017/972, annex), which paves the way forthe effective
deliberation on the subject before us. Myanmar aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The menace of trafficking in persons, or modern-
day slavery, has become an increasingly global threat
affecting all countries around the world. We share the
deep concern of the Secretary-General on the news
reports of African migrants allegedly being sold as
slaves today. As the issue of trafficking in persons is
increasingly transnational in nature, we all must work
together bilaterally, regionally and internationally to
address this global menace.

We welcome the adoption of the political
declaration on the implementation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons (General Assembly resolution 72/ 1). Myanmar
also welcomes the United Nations Office for Drugs and
Crime's (UNODC) technical assistance programmes
for trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants to
support the Member States in the implementation of the

Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, especially Women and Children, in close
cooperation with the United Nations country offices
and other partners.

For our part, Myanmar has been stepping up its
efforts of combating issues of trafficking in persons
as a national cause over the past 20 years. We are
focusing our actions on the areas of prevention,
protection, prosecution and policy coordination. In
2005, we enacted our anti-trafficking in persons law.
The anti-trafficking law-enforcement unit has been
strengthened, and awareness-raising activities have
been conducted across the country.

Myanmar is closely cooperating with the countries
in the region through the signing ofbilateral agreements
and establishing appropriate mechanisms. In the
regional context, early this year, Myanmar ratified the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations Convention on
Trafficking in Persons. As a State party to the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and the Trafficking in Persons Protocol, we are
working closely with countries of the region and with
United Nations agencies, particularly the UNODC,
to fight against trafficking. Myanmar believes that
cooperation among countries should be strengthened
through accepted legal frameworks.

Humanitarian crises caused by natural disasters
or conflicts create situations where people living in
the affected areas become vulnerable to the threat of
trafficking. This phenomenon cannot be eliminated by
actions of the Governments alone. We need to engage
constructively with the private sector. Therefore, I
thank the Governments of Australia and Indonesia
for their initiative in organizing the Bali Process
Government and Business Forum in August 2017 to
discuss and make recommendations on supply-chain
transparency, preventing trafficking in persons and
modern-day slavery.

Preventive measures are crucial in addressing the
issue of trafficking in persons. Apart from the extreme
circumstances of conflict and natural disaster, poverty,
overpopulation and the lack of job opportunities in
many less-developed countries also constitute root
causes of trafficking. Therefore, we encourage all

stakeholders to make effective use of the relevant goals
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in the
global efforts to combat trafficking in persons.

The fight against such trafficking needs to be based
on cooperation among countries of origin, transit and
destination. Politicizing the fight against trafficking in
persons should be avoided as that would not serve as a
solution to the problem.

The 25 August terrorist attacks against 30 Myanmar
police stations and one military base and subsequent
acts of terrorism have triggered an extremely tragic
humanitarian situation in the Rakhine state of Myanmar.
We also share the concern that the people who have
fled across the border to Bangladesh may fall into the
hands of traffickers. With the aim of taking measures to
prevent such situation, Myanmar participated in the ad
hoc meeting convened by the Governments of Australia
and Indonesia last month in Jakarta.

In a good-neighbourly spirit, we are actively
working with Bangladesh on the voluntary, safe and
dignified return of the people who are taking refuge
on the Bangladesh side. The repatriation process will
start in three weeks after signing a bilateral agreement
for the arrangement of their repatriation. A joint
working group will be set up to coordinate the process
of repatriation. We strongly hope to sign the bilateral
agreement on repatriation arrangements very soon
so that the repatriation process may begin as soon
as possible.

While the humanitarian situation is in the focus
of the international community, we must not lose sight
of the other important facts about the situation in the
area, where there is credible evidence of the continuing
activities of the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army
terrorist group and its affiliates. The terrorists are now
taking refuge in hideouts in the mountains and among
the innocent people of the region. Reportedly, they have
been funded by people abroad. We must all be vigilant
to deter any traffickers or criminal networks seeking to
exploit this situation for malicious purposes.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming Myanmar's
commitment to making its utmost efforts to prevent
people from falling into the hands of traffickers.

