Mr. Bougacha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to congratulate France on its presidency
of the Security Council and on its pioneering role.

We welcome the initiative of France to hold this
open debate on combating and preventing terrorism
financing, a phenomenon that continues to threaten
international peace and security. Many terrorist
groups, including Da'esh, have adapted their methods
of carrying out terrorist operations and developed new
funding mechanisms. They are involved in an ongoing
quest for renewable financing resources for their
terrorist activities, including donations, direct extortion
and proceeds from transnational organized crime, such
as ransom, weapons, drugs and trafficking in cultural
property, as well as using modern technology and other
means to transfer funds.

We thank all briefers for their valuable contributions,
which reflect the need to continue our efforts to address
the challenges related to combating the phenomenon of
terrorism financing and drying up its sources.

The Security Council's unanimous adoption of
resolution 2462 (2019), on preventing and combating
the financing of terrorism, reflects the true
commitment of the international community to further
implement international conventions and the relevant
United Nations resolutions and best practices at the
national level in line with the recommendations of the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF). In contributing to
international efforts inthat regard, Tunisia co-sponsored
this important resolution.

At the Arria Formula meeting sponsored by France,
Peru, Australia and Indonesia on 31 January concerning
the issue at hand, Tunisia stressed the need to adequately
focus on the matter while jointly addressing terrorism
financing in an effective manner. My country's

delegation therefore welcomes the role of the relevant
United Nations agencies and their contribution to
enhancing the capacities of Member States. We take
note of the report to be issued before the end of the year
on the measures taken by Member States at the national
level, which will provide an opportunity to learn from
best practices in that regard.

I would like to stress that the promotion of national
systems to counter terrorism must not distract us
from the need to address the root causes of extremist
ideologies, while respecting international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, because failing
to pay attention to prevention and solely focusing on
security solutions will jeopardize all other efforts
and hinder development. All Member States should
therefore adopt national strategies that take into account
all security, economic, social and cultural challenges.

Tunisia has taken important legislative and
procedural measures to support its national framework
to counter the financing of terrorism. At the legislative
level, the National Counter-Terrorism Committee
oversees and assesses the implementation of the
relevant United Nations resolutions and makes decisions
with regard to freezing the assets of individuals and
organizations that have been shown to have links
with terrorist crimes. In January 2018, a Government
order was issued concerning measures to implement
the relevant United Nations resolutions to counter
the financing of terrorism. That was an important
legislative step towards the implementation of the basic
counter-terrorism law.

The Tunisian Government also adopted a plan of
action on anti-money-laundering and combating the
Financing of terrorism in line with the relevant Security
Council resolutions and international norms included in
the FAFT recommendations. A risk-based approach was
also adopted to identify charities that are at the highest
risk of being misused for financing terrorism. Charity
associations were also included in the recent law on
the national charity registry to foster the transparency
of economic and financial transactions of natural and
legal persons while ensuring that national legislation
complies with the relevant international norms.

I emphasize the importance that Tunisia attaches
to international cooperation in that regard and the
need to contribute to the relevant initiatives, such as
the Working Group on Countering the Financing of
Terrorism in connection with the global coalition
against Da'esh. We highly value the cooperation with
the relevant United Nations agencies, especially the
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, in helping our
national system freeze terrorism-related assets. Tunisia
is keen to further and expand that cooperation.

We are faced today with ever-evolving threats at
the structural level and with regard to the way in which
terrorist operations are carried out, as terrorists exploit
existing gaps to achieve their goals. The adoption of
resolution 2462 (2019) is a commendable response in
that regard. In conclusion, Tunisia renews its call on
all Member States and other stakeholders to join those
efforts and further cooperate to effectively fight this
scourge, which we believe continues to represent a
threat to international peace and security. That requires
from us an immediate response, especially with regard
to combating suspicious funding.

