Mr. Hosseini (Organization of the Islamic Conference): On behalf of Ambassador Mokhtar
Lamani, Permanent Observer of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference to the United Nations, who is
unavoidably absent from here at this time, I take the floor
to express our serious concern over the crisis in Kosovo
and the harm and suffering this has unleashed upon the
innocent people of Kosovo.

Since the arbitrary termination of the autonomy of
Kosovo by the Belgrade authorities in 1989, we, together
with the international community, have watched with
great distress the Serbian acts of atrocities against the
innocent and hard-working people of Kosovo and the
campaigns of ethnic cleansing that have been reminiscent
of the preceding sinister acts against the population of
Bosnia and Herzegovina that were also committed by the
Serbs.

Regrettably, the Bosnian experience has failed to
teach the Serbs an important lesson of history, which is
that when a nation tries to keep another in the ditch, it
does so by also staying with it in the ditch.
It is relevant to remind this Council that the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) Contact
Group on Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosova, meeting
at the level of Ministers of Foreign Affairs in Geneva last
month, regretted that the Security Council has been
unable to discharge its responsibility in Kosovo in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. It
reiterated that the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, and that in carrying out its duties in
accordance with this responsibility, the Council shall be
looked upon to act on behalf of the Members of the
United Nations.

The ministers expressed their solidarity with the
Kosovars in their present hour of need and, among other
things, undertook to contribute to the monitoring and
peacekeeping operations in Kosovo as part of the
international peacekeeping efforts.

Since the Geneva meeting, the diplomatic efforts of
the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the OIC Contact
Group, aimed at finding a viable solution to the crisis in
Kosovo, have been intense and have led to the Contact
Group's support of the resolution just adopted by the

 

Council - a resolution initiated by the Permanent
Representatives of Bahrain and Malaysia and presented to
the Council by the Permanent Representative of Gambia, all
members of the OIC.

The resolution addresses, in particular, the
humanitarian aspect of the crisis in Kosovo, which is of
crucial concern at this time. By its nature, the resolution
allows the Security Council to act in unity and without
controversy, which may otherwise have posed possible
constraints on its ability to act quickly in the matter in
fulfilment of its responsibilities at this grave moment.

The response just demonstrated by members will
hopefully be a significant factor in rescuing the people of
Kosovo from the agony and suffering they are undergoing
at this time.

