Mr. Wouters (Belgium) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for giving us the opportunity to
add our voice to this debate.

My country fully supports the important statement
made by the Finnish presidency speaking on behalf of the
European Union. We too wish to state that we are in full
agreement with the statements made yesterday and today by
the Secretary-General.
Belgium is shocked by the recent events in East
Timor. The reports that continue to reach us describe a
dramatic humanitarian and security situation that includes
Violations of the most basic human rights and a total
absence of normal living conditions following the
destruction, brutality and massacres perpetrated by the anti-
independence militias against the Timorese. This situation
is a challenge to our conscience.

Our sympathies today lie with the people of East
Timor, which has been the victim of the most horrendous
Violence and impunity at a crucial time in its history.

We would like here also to underscore the remarkable
courage of the personnel of the United Nations Mission in
East Timor in the face of constant threats and intimidation.

Belgium deeply regrets the fact that the process
initiated by the 5 May Agreements could come to a halt.
For the first time, the people of East Timor had the
opportunity to decide on their own future; they did so en
masse, and the result of the consultation was very clear.
Obviously, it is up to the parties to honour their
commitments, to create conditions to enable the process to
continue and to see to it that the result of the popular
consultation is no longer called into question.

Belgium expects the humanitarian agencies properly to
resume their work in East Timor and to be in a position
effectively to assist the many displaced persons there. The
people who have been forced to leave the territory must be
able to return.

An improvement in the humanitarian situation requires
the restoration of security in East Timor. The 5 May
Agreements stipulate clearly that the maintenance of order
and security is the responsibility of Indonesia. Like the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and many others
around this table, we note that Indonesia has failed in this
task. It has failed despite the presence of the army and
the police and despite the imposition of a state of
emergency. The Violence is continuing, and the physical
integrity of the population, and even that of the members
of UNAMET, remains under threat.

Given the fact that the basic security conditions do
not exist to enable the process in East Timor to continue,
Belgium appeals to the Government of Indonesia to
accept from the international community the assistance
that it needs in order to restore security and order to the
territory, as well as a normal life to its inhabitants.

