Mr. Naanda (Namibia): Once again, I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, on your country's assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of January 2014, and further wish to thank you for
organizing this very important debate, considering
that heinous atrocities are committed on a daily basis
throughout the world, posing a threat to the very
existence of the social democratic order that we as
the international community have developed over the
years, a debate that seeks to draw lessons from an
understanding of war in the quest to achieve lasting and
sustainable peace.
I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman for his informative
briefing on the role of the United Nations in promoting
sustainable peace, and in particular the lessons
learned and the challenges that remain in post-conflict
situations.

The Namibian nation was founded in 1990, after a
bitter liberation struggle during which our people were
subjected to numerous massacres. As such, our history
is one replete with systematic human rights abuses.
We achieved our independence with the active support
and engagement of the international community. We
are proud to be known as one of the success stories
of United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding
initiatives. Article 96 of the Namibian Constitution
commits the country and its people to the promotion
of international peace and security. For that reason,
Namibia participates in various peacekeeping missions
throughout the world as mandated by the Council.

As many delegations that have already spoken
have said, there is universal recognition that the
United Nations has a major role to play not only in
the immediate aftermath of the resolution of conflicts
but also in conceiving and conducting long-term post-
conflict initiatives. Those have included demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration, thereby strengthening
judicial systems and, as in our own case, the training
of civil servants to provide services during the
transitional period and the post-conflict era. Therefore,
beyond conflict resolution and stabilization, the path
must be charted for democracy, development and the
strengthening of the rule of law.

We are of the opinion that more attention should
be given to the United Nations role in post-conflict
reconciliation. We therefore welcome the establishment
of institutions such as the Peacebuilding Commission,
which can go a long way to addressing the challenges
that are associated with national reconciliation due to
the diversity of the actors. In that regard, we wish to
caution that there is no single model that is applicable
to reconciliation at the national level. Therefore, a
one-size-fits-all approach to national reconciliation is
counter-productive. What works in one situation may
not be applicable to another given the national and, to
a certain extent regional, the dynamics of a particular
situation. In Namibia, for example, at our independence
we adopted a policy of national reconciliation that gave
blanket amnesties to both sides. That policy has served
us well, and the country enjoys peace, stability and
democracy.

Cognizant of the contemporary rhetoric that there
can be no real peace without justice, the focus of
reconciliation shifts to victims and retributive justice.
We may also have to agree that, in the uncompromising
pursuit of higher standards of justice, a peace that is
delicate may not be sustainable. That is especially our
experience in the southern African region, but also in
many other parts of the African continent. The challenge
for us has been the reintegration of former combatants
into mainstream society while at the same time
bringing a sense ofjustice to the victims and defending
the principles of the rule of law without provoking a
destabilizing backlash, especially in situations where
political stability has been fragile. Our experience has
therefore been one where compromises have had to be
made and restorative justice balanced with retributive
justice as well as the granting of amnesties.

The role of women in conflict prevention and
post-conflict peacebuilding is of great importance.
Therefore, Namibia fully supports the inclusion of
women in security systems such as the armed forces,
the police and peacekeeping operations and special
political missions in support of various United Nations
resolutions that recognize that important role. We
remain convinced that, for the achievement of a
comprehensive and sustainable peace, all efforts should
be made to ensure the participation and contribution of
women in peace negotiations and during the execution
of post-conflict strategies and programmes.

We furthermore welcome the adoption by the
General Assembly of the Arms Trade Treaty, the first
international legal instrument that explicitly includes a
gender criterion in arms transfers ifthere is a possibility
that such transfers would be used to commit violence
against women and children.

In conclusion, I should like to recognize the
important institutional partnership between the
Council and regional and subregional organizations in
the maintenance of international peace and security. In
Africa, for example, we have adopted a zero tolerance
policy for unconstitutional changes of Government.
Coup leaders are isolated and their countries are
immediately suspended from the African Union.

In the same vein, Africa has provided a clear
definition of an unconstitutional change of Government,
which includes the manipulation of electoral laws. In
that regard, we urge the United Nations to work towards
adopting the same principle. At the subregional level
the Southern African Development Community has
scrupulously observed that principle with respect to
Madagascar.
While the policy of opposing the unconstitutional
change of Government has been upheld, a new form
of the unconstitutional change of Government has
emerged where army mutinies become part of the so-
called inclusive Government, which have proved not to
be sustainable. Namibia believes that if that situation is
allowed to continue, the African Union principle of zero
tolerance for unconstitutional changes of Government
will be undermined. That trend should be discouraged
and more sustainable initiatives should be explored.

