Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): Mr. President, my delegation would like to
start by welcoming your presence in this debate and to
congratulate your country on its initiative to allow the
Security Council to again consider the issue of the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security. Your
country's choice of this topic is most pertinent, given
the central role played by the rule of law in the
Council's work, mostly in its efforts to re-establish and
build peace in States emerging from conflict.
We also wish to convey our gratitude to Deputy
Secretary-General Asha-Rose Migiro for her enriching
contribution to our debate and we support her efforts to
strengthen the rule of law at the international level, in
particular through her coordination of the work of the
Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group. We
would also like to thank Ms. Patricia O'Brien, United
Nations Legal Counsel, for her enlightening statement.

The Mexican presidency has invited us to speak
about the three aspects of our debate: the promotion
and strengthening of the rule of law in conflict and
post-conflict situations, international justice and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, and the efficiency and
credibility of the sanctions regimes.

For my delegation, the promotion and
strengthening of the rule of law have as their corollary
good governance, democracy, respect for human rights
and the effective functioning of institutions. Indeed,
the authority of the State is fully exercised in a
political and institutional environment that guarantees
equality for all before the law, respect for human
dignity and fundamental freedoms.

We welcome the progress achieved since the
holding of the last debate on this issue, held in 2006
(See S/PV.5474). We are thinking in particular of the
creation of the Peacebuilding Commission which, since
its inception, has contributed, inter alia, to a better
taking into account of the primacy of law and
transitional justice in peacebuilding processes in post-
conflict situations, as seen in Burundi and Sierra
Leone.

We also welcome the fact that the Security
Council has for some years incorporated into
peacekeeping mandates aspects specific to the rule of
law, security sector reform, and the strengthening of
judicial and penal institutions and political institutions
in countries emerging from conflict, which greatly
contribute to creating an institutional framework based
on the rule of law, without which no lasting peace can
prevail.

Similarly, the significant number of resolutions
adopted by the Security Council in this field
contributes to strengthening the normative framework
conducive to the establishment of the rule of law and
the protection of populations made vulnerable by
conflict, especially women and children. Resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and 1894
(2009) bear witness to this fact.
The promotion of the rule of law in nations goes
hand in hand with an international justice based on law
and peaceful coexistence among States pursuant to
Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter. In that
respect, the settlement of political and jurisdictional
disputes among States strongly contributes to restoring
and building peace.

With regard to the modes of diplomatic and
political settlements, my country has always
encouraged and practiced dialogue and political
cooperation in the search for solutions to crises and
conflicts. For example, we welcome the subregional
mechanisms established in Central Africa to strengthen
confidence-building measures among our States and to
prevent conflicts, such as the Council for Peace and
Security in Central Africa and the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa. Instead of resorting to the use of force,
these tools provide real prospects for peace in keeping
with the ideals and principles enshrined in the Charter.

Turning now to jurisdictional methods, the role of
the International Court of Justice, which is the
jurisdictional body par excellence for the peaceful
settlement of disputes, is crucial. Its decisions and
opinions reaffirm international law as the basis for
relations among States rather than the use of force. If
applied well, the opinions and rulings of the Court can
contribute effectively to the settlement of disputes and
thus serve as a necessary tool for the prevention of
conflicts. Gabon supports the activities of the Court
and encourages countries that have not yet done so to
accept its binding jurisdiction.
Our task is to go further still by establishing a
genuine culture of rule of law solidly anchored in
strong tradition and legal institutions. It is here that the
effective administration of justice acquires its true
meaning. Action to end impunity must be its ultimate
goal. I underscore here the key role played by
international criminal tribunals in delivering justice to
the victims of grave crimes and violations, as well as
other contraventions. At a time when the Council is
considering the establishment of residual mechanisms,
it is important to preserve the legacy of these tribunals
in the promotion of international law and the fight
against impunity.

On the effectiveness and credibility of sanctions
regimes, my delegation welcomes the Council's
increasingly targeted and concerted sanctions, which
contribute to enhancing their legitimacy. The
appointment of an Ombudsman to ensure in an
equitable and transparent way the de-listing procedures
of entities and individuals is part and parcel of this
approach.

To conclude, my delegation wishes to voice its
full support for the adoption of the draft presidential
statement that will close our debate.

