Mr. Laro (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
thanks you, Mr. President, for organizing this wrap-
up session, which provides us with an opportunity to
assess the work of the Council in the month of January.

The open debate on inclusive development for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
held on 19 January (see S/PV.7361), presented an
opportunity for Council members and the wider United
Nations membership to share views on the link between
security and development. Nigeria commends the
Chilean delegation for convening the debate and for
its leadership role in the drafting of the presidential
statement adopted at the debate (S/PRST/2015/3). We
reiterate our firm belief that inclusiveness is vital to
peace and security. Therefore, in our view, the topic
should continue to be of interest to the Security Council.

The Security Council mission to Haiti underscores
the importance of the Council's direct engagement
with countries on its agenda. The trip allowed Council
members to see first-hand the situation on the ground
and to hear directly from the country's leaders. We are
satisfied with the outcome of the mission, the report of
which we have just heard (see S/PV.7372).

Nigeria appreciates the unity of purpose
demonstrated by the Council in the adoption, on
19 January, of the presidential statement on Boko
Haram (S/PRST/2015/4). We are cooperating with our
neighbours and coordinating our efforts in order to
effectively confront the menace of the terrorist group.
Terrorism is a global problem that requires a global
response. We shall therefore continue to count on the
support of our bilateral and multilateral partners in that
important endeavour. We thank the delegation of New
Zealand for the reaffirmation of its support.

We would like to conclude by thanking you and
your delegation, Sir, for the astute manner in which you
have presided over the Council this month. We extend
our best wishes to the delegation of China and give
assurances of our support and cooperation as it prepares
to assume the presidency of the Council in February.

