Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I shall now speak in my capacity as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). Instead of reading out the long
and detailed report being circulated in the Chamber
now, I will give a brief summary highlighting its main
ideas.

I do not need to explain to anyone the proliferation
risks we face today. Now more than ever, non-State
actors and terrorist groups are prepared to use chemical
and biological weapons and even nuclear weapons and
extreme violence. The global threat affects us all, and
all States must comply with resolution 1540 (2004). All
States are threatened.

I have not been Chair of the 1540 Committee for
very long - only since 1 January. However, I assure
the Council that my Mission's team, in cooperation
with all Security Council members, has tried to do its
best. I will highlight five relevant aspects of the 1540
Committee since the last report was presented (see S/PV.7319).

First is the system of reporting. At present, 174
States have submitted their reports. In other words,
90 per cent of Member States have submitted the basic
reports on their structures for the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. However, despite the
importance of the basic reports, it is crucial that States
also submit the so-called additional reports, which are
voluntary and make it possible for us to get a more
detailed and more realistic idea of what is happening in
the area of non-proliferation. It is also very important
that States carry out the so-called national action plans,
which are completely voluntary, but nonetheless very
useful.
Secondly, I would like to underscore the national
focal points, which resolution 1540 (2004) provides for.
They are absolutely fundamental to our work. A training
course for national focal points has been provided so
that they may better carry out their functions.

Thirdly, we are trying to improve the system of
assistance to strengthen the national capacity of States
that request assistance to raise the levels of compliance
with resolution 1540 (2004). We are working with
regional and international organizations to that end.

Fourthly, with regard to outreach, it is important
that the 1540 Committee maintain direct contact with
Member States. We are working as well to encourage
the participation of the 19 States that have not yet
presented their regular reports. We have stepped up
contacts with regional and international organizations
to that end. One good example is the recent visit I made
as Chair of the 1540 Committee to Vienna, where I
met senior officials of the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, among other agencies.

Lastly, with regard to transparency, transparency
and outreach are vital for the effective implementation
of the resolution. The Committee is therefore looking
for better ways of using social networks, social media
and other means of communication. For example,
we now issue quarterly Chair messages to the entire
network related to the 1540 Committee.

I should now like to touch upon the comprehensive
review of the status of the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). I reiterate that the full text of my statement
that has been distributed contains a much more detailed
explanation.

First, as Chair of the 1540 Committee, I have taken
good note of the interesting comments and observations
made by the delegation of Venezuela. In the opinion of
the Committee, the comprehensive review should be
retrospective. Above all, however, it also should look
towards the future. It should be based on an analysis
of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) on
the basis of the review carried out in 2009. The aim
should be to improve effectiveness and implementation
on the part of Member States. It is important to note
that, on 28 April, the Committee agreed on a modalities
document - which is available on the website - that
details the comprehensive review process. Let me
highlight a few highlights of the process.

First, the Committee will analyse the data included
in the reports presented by States and provide an
overview on the status of the implementation of the
resolution and the major implementation trends since
2009. That analysis will make it possible for us to
introduce improvements.

Secondly, the Committee will look into its role in
matchmaking and requests and offers assistance, while
considering ways to ensure that such assistance is
provided promptly.

Thirdly, as part of the comprehensive review
process, we will seekways ofimproving the Committee's
cooperation with international organizations related to
the scope ofthe 1540 Committee's work. When it comes
to regional organizations, we should identify better
ways to support them in order to set up networks of
focal points for the 1540 Committee - as I mentioned
earlier, for example, by instituting training courses.

Lastly, the review should also focus on the work
of outreach using publications and other means of
communication in a timely fashion. We are preparing
a work calendar for the review prior to December 2016,
which will of course include opportunities to hear the
views of all Member States, as well as for the holding of
consultations with international organizations and civil
society. I call on all Council Member States, as well
as non-Member States, to contribute to this important
process.

In conclusion, I wish to thank all those who provided
support to the Committee and made it possible to carry
out its programme of work, either through voluntary
and financial contributions - such as by Andorra,
Kazakhstan, Norway, the Republic of Korea and the
United States of America 4 or by organizations such
as the European Union and private foundations such as
the Carnegie Corporation of New York. I also wish to
give very special thanks to the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs for its constant support.

