Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): At the outset, I
would like to extend my delegation's congratulations to
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of January. I would also
like to pay tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador
Lavrov of the Russian Federation, for his excellent
stewardship last month.

As a new member of the Security Council, my
delegation would like to acknowledge the commendable
efforts of the Council thus far to bring about a
comprehensive settlement of the conflict in Abkhazia. I
acknowledge in particular the efforts of the countries that
comprise the Friends of Georgia. We note the valuable

 

contribution of the Russian Federation as facilitator; that
country has striven with commitment and resolve to create
an atmosphere for optimal dialogue and compromise
between the two parties concerned. My delegation also
expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
informative report on recent developments in the region.
Finally, we offer special thanks to Ambassador Brunner,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, and to Mr. Bota,
his resident Deputy and Head of Mission of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG), as well
as to the personnel under his command, for their dedication
and perseverance in carrying out, under difficult conditions,
the tasks entrusted to them by the Council.

My delegation would also like to express its full
support for the efforts of the Secretary-General to achieve
a comprehensive political settlement of the conflict,
including the question of the future status of Abkhazia.
Given the historical realities of this issue, my delegation
recognizes the need for Abkhazia to possess a certain
degree of autonomy. However, as the Security Council has
reiterated on various occasions, any settlement of the
conflict must be based upon the principle of respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia within its
internationally recognized borders.

Given our deep concern over the lack of progress in
the political discussions to date, we stand ever hopeful that
the Abkhaz side will adopt a more flexible and realistic
approach to this question so that a timely and acceptable
outcome for both sides may be reached.

As we stand on the threshold of the twenty-first
century, in which humanity is determined to create a more
peaceful and just world, I believe that the disintegrative
trend, accompanied by acts of brute violence and
destruction, as witnessed in some parts of the world, should
not find any rightful place in the new era. Despite the fact
that there have been no armed confrontations between the
two parties recently, the ongoing impasse in the political
process and the continued reports of criminal activity, such
as looting, beatings and torture, particularly in the Gali
region, have been a source of grave concern and distress.

The plight of refugees and displaced persons in the
region is particularly worrisome. Given the enormous
hardship inflicted upon them in the harsh winter season, my
delegation urges the early resolution of this dire situation as
soon as possible.

We are especially troubled by the obstruction posed by
the Abkhaz side to the expeditious return of the refugees
and displaced persons to their place of origin in Abkhazia,
and we thus strongly call upon the Abkhaz authorities to
accede to a pragmatic timetable and to expedite the
process of voluntary return, in accordance with the
procedures proposed by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) under the
Quadripartite Agreement.

Moreover, my delegation calls upon the parties to
further cooperate with UNOMIG, the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) peace-keeping force and the
UNHCR to create an environment conducive to the return
of refugees and displaced persons.

We would like to convey our deep appreciation to
UNOMIG for its contributions to containing the situation
in Abkhazia, and we also commend the close cooperation
between UNOMIG and the CIS peace-keeping force.
As pointed out in the Secretary-General's report, it
is indeed regrettable that the requisite ingredients for a
full solution are not yet at hand and that a political
settlement remains tenuous. The reality of the situation
clearly warrants a continued presence by UNOMIG in the
quest for peace in Georgia.

The Republic of Korea's participation in UNOMIG
is an expression of its strong commitment to the United
Nations effort to achieve a lasting political settlement in
Abkhazia, Georgia, and I take this opportunity to reaffirm
our commitment to this end.

In light of these considerations, my delegation is
pleased to vote in favour of the extension of the
UNOMIG mandate for an additional six months, ending
12 July 1996, under the stipulations contained in
paragraph 11 of the draft resolution.

Before concluding, I would like to stress that
throughout its membership in the Security Council, the
Republic of Korea, as demonstrated since its fairly recent
admission to the United Nations, will be staunchly
prepared to make the most meaningful and productive
contributions possible towards the realization of the goals
enshrined in the Charter, particularly in the field of
international peace and security.

