Ms. Quintero Correa (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I appreciate your initiative, Mr. President, to organize this open debate at the beginning of a new decade, in which the global challenges humankind is facing demand the collective, coordinated and effective action of the international community. Our discussion takes on even greater relevance as we celebrate the 75 years of the Charter of the United Nations and the Organization itself. I also wish to highlight the discussions that have taken place since last Thursday on international peace and security, the primacy of the Charter of the United Nations, the value of multilateralism and the importance of a world order that is based on rules and international law. Such valuable exchanges of ideas reflect, above all, our shared concern for building an increasingly safer and more peaceful world, as well as our common interest in promoting sustainable development and protecting the environment. In 1945, we declared our determination to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war; to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person and in the equal rights of men and women and of nations; to establish conditions under which justice and respect for the obligations arising from international law can be maintained; and to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom. As a founding member of the United Nations, Colombia once again reaffirms its unwavering adherence to those purposes and principles, as well as its infinite respect for international law and its steadfast belief in the value of multilateralism. It is forums such as this one, and the Organization in general, that are, without a doubt, best suited to effectively address and achieve consensus on the fundamental issues humankind is facing, which will enable us to make positive progress in meeting our collective goals. We must acknowledge that there have also been failures, which is precisely why it is important to recognize that the Charter must adapt to the changing realities of the international system so that we can move forward in the process of Security Council reform. At this crucial juncture for humankind, we must rise to the challenges confronting us. We need an Organization that is capable of taking strong, effective and timely decisions. We therefore consider it relevant to renew our commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter, to international law, to modernizing multilateral institutions, and to promoting synergies and complementary processes among global, regional and subregional organizations. That is an essential endeavour that will be possible only if we work together. Accordingly, I wish to express my country's support for the Secretary-General and his efforts to strengthen the Organization, thereby contributing to improve its response capacity and effectiveness in addressing the dynamic and evolving threats that humankind is facing.
