Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first of all, Mr. President, to thank you for
having convened this debate, which is on a matter
of great importance and significance to Colombia.
The statements by the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul Momen of Bangladesh,
clearly show the progress achieved in peacebuilding
with United Nations support at the same time as they
call attention to the tasks remaining.

Five priority areas were identified in 2009 as
requiring support: political processes, security and
protection of civilians, provision of basic services,
restoration of core governmental functions, and
economic revitalization, including job creation.
Support in those five areas is fundamental to the
success of any peacebuilding process. Because of that,
while we welcome the progress set out in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2012/746), we believe we must
strengthen the Organization's activities and fund them
at an appropriate level if we are to achieve the goals we
have set for ourselves.

The report recounts the progress made with respect
to assistance to each of the countries currently in the
process of peacebuilding, as well as with respect to
the joint, coordinated efforts of missions and country
teams, the development of integrated strategic
frameworks, and increased ties with international
financial institutions and regional organizations. While
we agree that those are all crucial elements in building
sustainable peace and development, future reports
should offer recommendations as to the impact of
United Nations actions on the ground and to developing
the policies and tools used by the United Nations to
support peacebuilding.
We reiterate that the principal responsibility for
peacebuilding initiatives falls to individual States
and that, in the framework of the principle of national
ownership, the various actors involved should stay
constantly aligned and agree on action plans that are
clear, inclusive and coherent.

Inclusive political agreements place negotiation
above violence, foster confidence and social cohesion,
promote transparency and add to the legitimacy of
political agreements. The building and strengthening
of national institutional capacities must be the pillar
for re-establishing the smooth functioning of public
administration and strengthening the role of the State
as the principal actor in the provision of high-quality
public services.

National activities aimed at establishing and
building peace in the aftermath of conflict must be
supported by effective civilian capacities in a timely
manner, making use of existing national capacities
so as to ensure a transition to stability and long-term
development and to contribute to a progressive reduction
in dependence upon the international community.

The international community and the United
Nations in particular must be prepared to provide, more
swiftly and effectively, specialized civilian capacities
and the necessary expertise, with a view to supporting
national actors working to re-establish the rule of law,
revitalize the economy, resume the provision of basic
services to the population and develop the capacities
necessary to ensure that such progress is sustained.

To that end, we must strengthen sustained
international political and financial support for
peacebuilding processes. It is important to strengthen
ties with the international financial institutions,
regional development banks and non-traditional
actors, including the private sector and philanthropic
organizations, so as to promote strategies aimed at
yielding long-term socioeconomic development.

Colombia acknowledges the role played by women
in conflict prevention and peacebuilding. The United
Nations must promote the participation of women in the
areasof conflict resolution, gender-inclusive planning,
economic recovery and the rule of law.

We reiterate the importance of starting and
undertaking peacebuilding activities at the earliest
stages of planning and carrying out peacekeeping
operations, in particular through clear mandates. We
recognize the contribution made by peacekeeping
personnel and missions to such early peacebuilding.
We wish to express special recognition for the
continuing dedicated work of the PBC, which has made
it possible to make progress on fundamental goals,
including support for the identification of priorities in
countries emerging from conflict, the strengthening of
cooperation and coordination among principal actors,
and the mobilization of international support. It is
pivotal to continue to address the problems identified
during the debate and the interactive dialogue held last
July last, and thereby to promote the coordination and
intensification of the work of the PBC and the Security
Council.

Strategies aimed at establishing a stable and lasting
peace require adaptation to the specificities of each
case. Such recognition must guide the discussions
and decisions of the Council, so as to ensure that the
measures adopted correspond to the political, economic
and cultural characteristics of each situation.

The implementation of effective peacebuilding
strategies ensures lasting peace and development.
Hence the United Nations must continue to ensure
that countries, in peacebuilding processes, are able
to overcome the causes of instability and conflict and
thereby avert any resurgence of violence and build a
lasting peace.

In July last, when Colombia had the honour of
presiding over the Council, we held an interactive
debate and dialogue (see S/PV.6805) that we believe
contributed to a deepening of the dialogue on the
United Nations architecture for supporting peace
processes, clarifying expectations relating to roles and
responsibilities, and strengthening cooperation among
the various United Nations agencies in New York and in
the field. In that dialogue, the strengthening of national
capacities and the creation of conditions conducive to
allowing countries to regain their full independence
and sovereignty and generate development and welfare
for their people must be placed centre stage.

With that aim, from the permanent forum provided
by the General Assembly, we will continue to promote
the exchange of experiences of countries that have been
in situations of conflict and post-conflict, as well as
South-South and triangular cooperation regarding
initiatives related to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration; security sector reform; the restoration
of the rule of law; and the reconstruction of national
institutions, including ensuring justice and elaboratig
strategies to revitalize the economy and reduce poverty.

As we conclude our two-year term in the Security
Council, I should like to convey to you, Mr. President,
and to all my colleagues and all delegations our sincere
gratitude for this honour and for the privilege of being
part of the noble mission of promoting international
peace and security. It has been an honour that we
value highly, and my country will remain attentive
and willing to contribute in any way necessary for the
United Nations to ensure that international peace and
security can be a reality.

