Mr. Stefanile (Italy): We would like to express our
appreciation for the convening of this meeting and take
this opportunity to wish you, Sir, and your team every
success in your presidency of the Security Council for
the current month. We listened carefully to the briefing
of Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and would like
to commend him and the entire Secretariat for their
tireless efforts in support of peacekeeping operations.

In today's quickly evolving security scenarios,
peacekeeping continues to be a powerful instrument at
our disposal to prevent, contain and resolve conflicts,
while providing a crucial contribution to our collective
and comprehensive efforts to restore and sustain
peace. As the top contributor of Blue Helmets in the
Group of Western European and other States and one
of the main financial supporters of peacekeeping,
Italy is particularly aware of the challenges that peace
operations are facing today.

Italy has endorsed from the outset the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations and currently supports the Secretariat as a
champion of multiple thematic areas of the Declaration.
The efforts of the Secretariat, together with those of
Members States, to identify gaps in peacekeeping
operations, are a positive example of the virtuous
dialogue that we need among all stakeholders, in
particular troop- and police-contributing countries
(TCCs/PCCs), to create synergies and best practices.
We would like to focus on five fundamental aspects
of performance.

First, predeployment and in-mission training are
of key importance. They provide peacekeepers with
up-to-date expertise, high professional and ethical
standards and common operating procedures. Italy
has a strong record in training military and police
personnel for peace operations and stands ready to
continue providing its contributions. In that respect, we
wish to mention the role of the Center of Excellence
for Stability Police Units in Vicenza, which is already
engaged in very productive cooperation with the
Department of Peace Operations.

Secondly, we have to work jointly to increase the
number and role of women in the field and promote
a gender perspective within the military and police
personnel through targeted training.

Thirdly, we have to ensure that we continue
providing peacekeeping operations with our best
troops, first-rate equipment and appropriate enablers.
That is the best way to enhance the performance of
peacekeeping operations, while ensuring the protection
of civilians, as well as the safety and security of our
peacekeepers and humanitarian actors. In that context,
Italy supports the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance
policy against sexual exploitation and abuse and is
proud to be the first contributor to the Trust Fund in
Support of Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.

Fourthly, we should think in terms of the legacy
of peacekeeping operations. That is something to be
considered when mandates are being drafted and that
requires cooperation among the Security Council, the
Secretariat, host States and TCCs/PCCs. In the same
vein, we have to reorient our resources in sectors
that can ensure the performance of our peacekeeping
and, at the same time, benefit the host State once the
mission is completed. That is why we have strongly
been advocating for according greater attention to the
environmental impact of United Nations peace missions.
Together with Bangladesh, Italy is honoured to co-chair
the Group of Friends for Leading on Environmental
Management in the Field, the main purpose of which
is to support the implementation of the environmental
strategy for field missions issued in 2016 by the former
Department of Field Support.

Fifthly, as Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
mentioned, partnerships with regional organization are
also essential. As a founding member of the European
Union (EU), Italy is fully committed to strengthening
United Nations-EU partnership and synergies. Italy
also welcomes the cooperation between the African
Union and United Nations, which we hope will lead to
secure and more predictable and sustainable financial
support for African peace operations.

We wish to conclude by paying our heartfelt tribute
to all the men and women who are upholding the values
of the United Nations in the field, bringing about peace
and security, and to those who, over the years, have lost
their lives in the service of that goal. In that respect, let
me express our deep condolences to the Government
and the people of Burkina Faso for the heinous terrorist
attacks yesterday.

