Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, as
well as Ambassador Apakan and Ambassador Sejdik
for their comprehensive briefings to the Security
Council on the developments in Ukraine and on the
implementation of the Minsk agreements. We would
also like to welcome Mr. Vadym Prystaiko, Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine.

Egypt has always stressed the need to intensify
international efforts to reach a lasting political
solution to the crisis in Ukraine, a solution that would
bring security and stability in Ukraine, according
to the Minsk agreements. Egypt believes that those
agreements are the best framework for reaching a
lasting and sustainable settlement to the conflict raging
in the country.

Security Council resolution 2202 (2015) calls on all
the parties to implement a package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements, especially
those related to the commitment to a ceasefire,
the withdrawal of heavy weapons, the adoption of
necessary constitutional reforms and the holding of
local elections in Donbas. The package also calls
for addressing the humanitarian implications of the
conflict, in coordination with all the relevant parties
without exception.
Egypt expresses its deep concern over the
meagre progress on those fronts. We urge all parties
to comply fully with their commitments under the
Minsk agreements. We call on all parties to engage in
the dialogue process and to work towards a peaceful
solution that meets the aspirations of the people of
the region.

As the humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate in Donbas, Egypt stresses the vital need of
ensuring humanitarian access to all affected areas to
improve the life of citizens. Egypt calls on all parties to
exercise self-restraint and to implement fully the Minks
agreements and the ceasefire for the benefit of the
peoples of the region. Egypt will continue to support
all efforts to reach a political settlement to this crisis.
We commend the ongoing efforts at dialogue under the
Normandy format and by other international partners
to that end.

