The Secretary-General: I am honoured by the
presence of His Royal Highness Crown Prince Al
Hussein bin Abdullah II of Jordan, whose delegation
has so ably led the Security Council this month. His
Royal Highness is the youngest person ever to preside
over a meeting of the Council. That is perfect for
today's discussion. He is not yet 21 years old, but he is
already a leader in the twenty-first century. I thank him
for presiding over this important meeting.

I am deeply grateful to Jordan for its many
contributions to the United Nations on peace,
development and human rights. I especially appreciate
the many Jordanians serving as my senior advisers,
including the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein; the
Executive Secretary of the Economic and Social
Commission for Western Asia, Ms. Rima Khalaf; the
Assistant Secretary-General at the United Nations
Development Programme, Ms. Sima Bahous; and my
Envoy on Youth, Mr. Ahmad Alhendawi, who is with
me here today.

The role of youth lies at the heart of international
peace and security. We have to encourage young people
to take up the causes of peace, diversity and mutual
respect. Youth represent promise, not peril. While some
young people do commit heinous acts of violence, the
overwhelming majority yearn for peace, especially in
conflict situations.

Many of those who commit violence are victimized
by depraved adults who abuse youthful innocence.
Over and over, we see young people bearing the brunt
of violent extremism. We cannot forget the girls in
Chibok, Nigeria. We remember the students killed
by Al-Shabaab in Garissa, Kenya, as well as those
massacred by the Taliban in Peshawar, Pakistan.

Violent extremists deliberately target youth for
exercising their human rights. I am distressed by the
tragedy ofyoung people who are conscripted, kidnapped
and killed. But I am also impressed by young people
who survive war and champion peace.
In Sierra Leone a few years ago, I cheered at a
football match of amputees who had lost limbs in the
conflict. They taught me the true meaning of recovery.
Earlier this year, the Security Council heard from a
young woman named Ilwad Elman (see S/PV.7374),
whose father was a peace activist in Somalia. When
he was assassinated, she had to move to Canada. She
could have enjoyed a comfortable life there - but
she went back to Somalia to lead a non-governmental
organization that helped victims of gender-based
violence.

I met a Syrian girl in a refugee camp who dreamed
of becoming a doctor so that she could help others. My
Envoy on Youth, Ahmad Alhendawi, says that young
people drive change but they are not in the driver's
seat. I agree, and I call for giving them the licence
to steer our future. They have idealism, creativity
and unprecedented powers to network. They often
understand the complexities of war and the requirements
for peace.

Here is a message recently posted on Facebook by
the Dream Achievers Youth Organization in Kenya:

"Let all youth across East Africa turn away from
joining militia groups and rather focus on solidarity,
tolerance and intercultural understanding."

There are countless youth groups that want to wage
peace, not war. They want to fight injustice, not people.
I applaud those heroes, and especially the heroines.
Gender equality is fundamental to combating violent
extremism.

Youth suffer on the front lines of war, but they are
rarely in the back rooms where peace talks are held. I
call for giving young people a seat at the negotiating
table. They pay a price for the fighting, and they deserve
to help structure the healing. That is essential to lasting
stability.

Youth organizations can help in peacebuilding if
we scale up their activities and invest in their ideas.
Education is critical. Ijoin the call of United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights Zeid Al Huessein
for deploying "weapons of mass instruction" to foster a
culture of peace. That is more than a Clever slogan, it is
an effective strategy.

Youth peace groups, especially in conflict-torn
areas, deserve our unstinting support. Even in peaceful
countries, youth policies are underfunded, and they
are not applied to security issues. Young people are
inheriting the world. With more resources, they can
be a force for peace, reconciliation and democratic
governance.

The United Nations is working to listen to youth
and to respond to their concerns. We have launched
the Guiding Principles on Young People's Participation
in Peacebuilding. I thank the Peacebuilding Support
Office, the Alliance of Civilizations and the United
Nations agencies and partners that contributed. I am
also developing a comprehensive plan of action to
prevent violent extremism that will seek to engage and
empower youth, which I will submit it to the General
Assembly later this year.

Too often, the speeches in the Security Council
focus on problems in the search for solutions. Today, let
us see young people as the solution to our most vexing
problems. They yearn for a more just and peaceful
world, and, with our help, they can create it.

