Mr. Eitel (Germany): Germany took the initiative
which led to the draft resolution on Srebrenica and Zepa
now before the Council, because we are appalled and
alarmed.

Several weeks after the fall of Srebrenica and Zepa
we still do not know about the whereabouts and the fate
of about 7,000 to 8,000 unfortunate male Bosnians who
were taken prisoners by Bosnian Serbs and led away.

Where are they? What has happened to them? Are
they alive and well? Today's news, and in particular the
photographs which we have been shown by the
Permanent Representative of the United States, increased
our concern.

According to the latest update by the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), only 164 detainees
from Srebrenica and 44 from Zepa are registered so far.
We insist that immediate access to all detainees from
Srebrenica and Zepa must be granted to international
humanitarian organizations. We demand that the safety
and well-being of the detainees be ensured and that the
civilian Bosnians taken prisoner be released immediately.

We condemn the persistent refusal by the Bosnian
Serb party to allow access to representatives of the ICRC
to the detainees in question. We cannot tolerate that the

 

Bosnian Serbs are once again playing a cynical "hide and
seek" game with international humanitarian organizations.
Their practice of refusing to indicate the locations of the
detainees, while claiming that they are willing to grant
unhindered access to places where representatives of
humanitarian organizations want to go, is totally
unacceptable. This practice constitutes in itself a serious
Violation of international humanitarian law. Those
responsible among the Bosnian Serb leadership must know
such fundamental Violations of humanitarian law will only
bring them closer to the abyss.

Germany fully supports the ongoing efforts of the
ICRC to gain access to the detainees in question. We also
urge United Nations representatives to continue their efforts
with the priority of finally getting information from Pale as
to the whereabouts of the missing men. We continue to
hope that they are alive. We will intensively follow this
question until, hopefully, these unfortunate Bosnian men are
found and released to their families.

We shall, of course, vote in favour of the draft
resolution before the Council.

