Mr. Klimkin (Ukraine): I thank the Japanese
presidency and you personally, Minister Kono, for
convening today's briefing. Of course, I also thank the
Secretary-General for his very useful update.

The ongoing development of North Korea's nuclear
and missile programme continues to undermine the
global disarmament and non-proliferation regime.
Recent developments prove that Pyongyang is
arrogantly defiant in ignoring international law and the
repeated calls to halt its illegal activity.

Unprecedented provocative actions by North Korea
in the past two years were met by the most robust
sanctions regime in history. Resolution 2375 (2017),
adopted unanimously in response to the sixth and most
powerful nuclear test conducted by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, sent a very clear signal to
Pyongyang. In particular, it urged Pyongyang not to
conduct any further missile launches or nuclear tests
and to refrain from any other provocations. At the
same time, the Security Council indicated the way out
of the crisis, including by reaffirming its commitment
to a peaceful, diplomatic and political solution to
the situation, while also confirming the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's sovereignty and stressing
the need for further work to reduce tensions in order to
advance the prospects for a comprehensive settlement.

What was the response to that resolution? Another
missile test. Despite all of the political and diplomatic
efforts to curb Pyongyang's aggressive ambitions,
North Korea moved closer to having a fully functional
nuclear arsenal. The increasing militarization has
already severely affected the livelihoods of its people,
who continue to live under constant duress as they
experience chronic shortages of even basic goods and
services. Besides diverting resources from acute human
needs to finance its missile and nuclear programme, the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea continues to
effectively evade sanctions.

Recent developments, in particular the intercontinental
ballistic missile launch last month, suggest that
Pyongyang is not interested in the resumption of
negotiations. We are of the view shared by many
around this table that only the full implementation of
the Security Council resolutions can bring us closer to
changing that trend. Before that happens, the Council
must stand ready to introduce additional measures in
case of new provocations. The long-standing crisis
on the Korean peninsula has global implications, and
therefore raises a question as to what should be done by
the international community to prevent the emergence
ofa nuclear threat in future in other parts of the globe as
well. In my View, the case of North Korea includes two
important basic lessons for the international community.

First, it demonstrates what can happen when
weapons of mass destruction are obtained by
irresponsible actors. Today Pyongyang blackmails the
entire region- in fact, the entire world -by threatening
to use its nuclear and missile capabilities, without any
thought of possible consequences and repercussions.
We therefore continue to witness emerging and further
evolving challenges to the non-proliferation regime.
Unfortunately, it is becoming harder for the Council
to respond in unity. More often, we witness a policy
of unwillingness on the part of some countries to
recognize that the North Korean regime represents a
fundamental threat. Those who are looking for excuses
for Pyongyang should realize that for people in Japan,
the Republic of Korea and other countries alerts with
regard to North Korean missiles have become a fact of
life. Just imagine how it feels to be jolted awake by the
wail of sirens piercing the early-morning calm.

Secondly, the appeasement of aggressive ambitions
never works. Furthermore, perpetrators are only
encouraged by concessions and inaction by the
international community. We saw that previously in
Europe in the 1930s, and see it today too in Europe
and elsewhere. Therefore, the international community
should demonstrate a clear and uncompromising
stance - and I would like to emphasize
"uncompromising" - in defending international law,
wherever or by whomever it is breached. That stance
should not be limited to declarations on the ultimate
necessity to defend human rights, peace and security.
We need actions and prompt and adequate responses.

In recent decades, we have witnessed the emergence
of a number of volatile hotspots in different parts of
the world. We have also seen a nuclear-weapon State
successfully testing a technology, creating long-lasting
destabilization and carrying out aggression against
its neighbours * sovereign States. Unfortunately, my
country has been affected too.

Earlier this month we marked the twenty-third
anniversary of the signing of the Budapest Memorandum
on security assurances in connection with Ukraine's
accession to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT). In return to the voluntary
renunciation by Ukraine of its nuclear arsenal, three
nuclear States committed to respect the independence
and sovereignty and the existing borders of Ukraine.
The signatories of the Memorandum furthermore
obligated themselves to refrain from the threat or use
of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of Ukraine, and that none of their
weapons would ever be used against Ukraine.

Let me remind the Council that the provision of
security guarantees to Ukraine by nuclear States was
a precondition for my country's accession to the NPT.
Let me also stress that the Memorandum is deposited
with the Secretariat, in accordance with Article 102 of
the Charter of the United Nations, and was certified by
the Secretary-General as an international agreement.
However, the obligations set forth in that document
were insidiously violated by Russia - one of the
signatories and the recipient of the nuclear weapons
based in Ukraine until 1994. As a result, my country had
its borders fundamentally violated in a blatant show of
disregard for the norms and principles of international
law, the Charter of the United Nations, the Helsinki
Final Act and a number of other agreements, including
the Budapest Memorandum.

The illegal occupation of Crimea and the ongoing
Russian aggression in the Donbas region of Ukraine
have left the low-enriched uranium research reactor
in Sevastopol, two nuclear repositories and more
than 1,200 radionuclide sources without due control
of the Ukrainian national regulator. I wish to recall
the legal framework of the International Atomic
Energy Agency safeguards application in Ukraine,
including in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and
the city of Sevastopol. And when we talk about the
importance of preserving and strengthening the nuclear
non-proliferation regime, we should also keep in mind
that the continuing occupation of the territory of
Ukraine by a nuclear-weapon State has resulted in the
de-facto expansion of the geographical area of nuclear-
weapon deployment.

Russia's military aggression against Ukraine, along
with its client North Korea's systematic provocations,
has provoked a dangerously unbalanced situation in
the international security system, undermining the
effectiveness and reliability of the non-proliferation
regime. If we are to prevent the world from sliding into
a state of lawlessness, we must stand united in order to
ensure respect for international law and accountability for
violations of that law, regardless of whether it is violated
by a recognized nuclear-weapon State or by those that,
regrettably, desperately wish to gain such status. That is
not going to happen.

