Mr. Musambachime (Zambia): At the outset, my
delegation would like to congratulate the new non-
permanent members of the Security Council. We are
confident that they will be able to make an important
contribution to the work of the Council. My delegation
wishes also to express its deep appreciation to the
outgoing non-permanent members of the Council for
the exemplary manner in which they discharged their
responsibilities.

Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January 2001, the start of the
new millennium. I would also like to put on record my
country's appreciation for the initiative to hold this
meeting today. We could not agree more that this is an
appropriate moment to review measures that could be
taken to strengthen the effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. It is also a time to take
advantage of the support and enthusiasm generated by
the report of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations.

In contributing to today's debate, I will confine
my remarks to two points: first, the need for
peacekeeping operations to have clear, credible and
achievable mandates and adequate resources, and
secondly, the need for greater cooperation and closer
and meaningful consultations between the Security
Council and the troop-contributing countries.

While encouraged with the Security Council's
resolve to give peacekeeping operations clear, credible
and achievable mandates, we have been disappointed to
note that the question of adequate resources for these
operations seems to have received very little attention.
The non-availability of adequate resources has led to
the failure of a number of peacekeeping operations in
the developing world, especially in Africa. My
delegation therefore strongly appeals to the Security
Council to seriously address this question.

Let me commend the members of the Security
Council for accepting the Brahimi Panel
recommendations on consultations with troop-
contributing countries. We are encouraged by the fact
that they underlined the importance of an improved
system of consultation among the troop-contributing
countries, the Secretary-General and the Security
Council.

Although we welcome the steps taken so far by
the Security Council, we believe that they fall far short
of what was envisaged in the Brahimi report or, indeed,
what we, the troop-contributing countries, would like
to see.

The Security Council should involve the troop-
contributing countries in the consultation process in a
manner that is institutional and meaningful. This
process should start at the earliest stage of drawing up
a peacekeeping operation and should continue until its
completion.

Paragraph 61 of the Brahimi report states that
member countries contributing formed military units to
an operation should be invited to attend Secretariat
briefings of the Security Council pertaining to crises
that affect the safety and security of the mission's
personnel or to a change or reinterpretation of a
mission's mandate with respect to the use of force. My
delegation wishes to state that whenever the use of
peacekeeping forces is contemplated, the Security
Council should adhere to the provisions of Article 43
and Article 44 of the United Nations Charter.

We welcome the efforts being made by the
Security Council on consultations. However, we feel
that a lot more should be done to make them more
meaningful. The involvement of troop-contributing
countries in the planning and implementation stages
could go a long way in improving the conduct of
peacekeeping operations.
The consultations with Security Council members
held before and after the missions to Sierra Leone and
East Timor were very useful. Unfortunately, the same
cannot be said of the traditional troop-contributors
meetings held to discuss the Secretary-General's
reports.

My delegation wishes to echo the sentiments
expressed by other delegations that, regardless of the
provisions of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, neither traditional troop-contributors
meetings nor private formal meetings should be held in
the Council Chamber. They should be in a format that
allows a free exchange of views between the Council
members and the troop-contributing countries, and they
should include the necessary substantive briefings.

