The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Canada, Nigeria, Pakistan, Sierra
Leone and Sweden, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kamara
(Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Heinbecker (Canada), Mr. Mbanefo
(Nigeria), Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan) and Mr.
Dahlgren (Sweden) took the seats reserved for
then at the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to the Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs of Sweden, His Excellency Mr. Hans
Dahlgren.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Oluyemi Adeniji,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head ofthe United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Adeniji to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the tenth
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone, document S/2001/627.

Before calling on Mr. Adeniji, let me apologize
for starting this meeting late. I was making a statement
on behalf of the Council at the fourth Summit on the
Security of International Staff. I thought it was
important that the Council's point of view be heard -
particularly in view of the fact that the first exchange
between the Council and staff members took place last
month at a meeting under the Arria formula - and for
the President of the Council to be there, along with the
President of the General Assembly and the Secretary-
General.

At this meeting the Council will hear a briefing
by Mr. Oluyemi Adeniji, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone. I give him the floor.


