Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
want to thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for
his excellent briefing.

We welcome reports that this election was free
and fair, apart from some disturbing incidents in
Srebrenica and the illegal campaign activity by the
Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ).

We are encouraged by the early results in the
Federation that show slow and steady progress for their
moderate, multi-ethnic parties, which continue to
improve their position at the expense of nationalist
parties. It appears that the influence of the hard-line
parties in the Federation has continued to decline, as
we have seen in each successive election in Bosnia and
Herzegovina since 1996.

Unfortunately, though, it appears that the results
in the Republika Srpska are more disappointing,
although that was not unexpected. The Serb
Democratic Party (SDS), which has expressed its
virulent opposition to the Dayton accords since 1995,
appears to have won the presidency of the Republika
Srpska. The situation in the Republika Srpska
Assembly, however, is more mixed and important
decisions remain to be made about governing
coalitions. We will continue to urge that obstructionists
be kept out ofthe Government.

We have reports of illegal campaign activity by
the SDS in Srebrenica. This only reinforces our belief
that the SDS continues to be controlled by those who
are committed to seeing Dayton fail. We hope that over
time the political situation in the Republika Srpska will
change. It will take time for the Republika Srpska to
recover from the scars of Milosevic's years of
propaganda and mischief-making.
The dramatic political changes in the region over
the past months bode well over the long term, but we
will have to continue to work for further progress. In
the meantime, as we try to take best advantage of the
inexorable larger trends in the region, we cannot allow
Dayton implementation to be blocked by
obstructionists and undermined by corrupt elements
working behind the scenes. It is critically important for
the High Representative and the international
community to be prepared to act forcefully to ensure
that those who are opposed to Dayton are not in a
position to block the full implementation of the peace
accords.

