We express our appreciation to the Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres, for his assessment of the progress made on the women and peace and security agenda. We also listened very attentively to the statements made by the Under-Secretary- General and Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka; UN-Women Goodwill Ambassador Danai Gurira; a woman peacekeeper in the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei, Ms. Natalia Emelianova; and civil- society representative Zarqa Yaftali. Their joint efforts contribute to the achievement of peace and security and to promoting the role of women in peacekeeping processes. This month marks 20 years since the holding of the Security Council's first open debate on women and peace and security and the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). This year also marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, which is in fact a road map for achieving gender equality and improving the status of women. Open debates on this issue have become a tradition for the Security Council and give rise to great interest among States, as they serve as a platform for discussing the progress made in the implementation of its resolutions and ways of enhancing the effectiveness of efforts made in this area at the national, regional and international levels. We regret that this year it was not possible to hold face-to-face meetings owing to pandemic-related restrictions. In the 20 years since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the Security Council has elaborated common approaches to the implementation of this and other documents on the issue of women and peace and security. They focus on four elements: prevention, protection, participation and sustaining peace in situations of armed conflict. The necessary regulatory framework has been developed, and international cooperation has been established. The involvement and direct participation of women in the prevention and settlement of armed conflicts, as we heard first-hand today, allows for more sustainable and trust-based relations with the local population, helps prevent and investigate cases of violence against women and children, and contributes to the effectiveness of follow-up measures for the rehabilitation and reintegration of victims. Russia partners with the United Nations in training foreign women peacekeepers at certified training centres, including the one in Domodedovo, which is part of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Today, the proportion of women among Russian peacekeepers in United Nations peacekeeping operations stands at about 17 per cent. As noted in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/946), the percentage of women participating in peacekeeping, including in negotiations, is steadily increasing. That dynamic is very encouraging. Important areas in which efforts must be made include ensuring women's access to resources, technology and the banking sector in the context of the sustainable post-conflict recovery of States. We believe that increased attention should be paid to issues related to the development of women, overcoming poverty, women's access to education in armed-conflict-affected countries. Family is of particular value and must be protected. To effectively promote the women and peace and security agenda, we must focus on concrete tasks and avoid any duplication of the efforts of the General Assembly, the Human Rights Council and the Peacebuilding Commission. In that context, I would like to inform the Council about Russia's intention to join in the work of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security, established in 2015. Our goal is to contribute constructively to the work of the Group on the basis of non-politicized, transparent and democratic decision-making, which is required to establish a mutually respectful inter-State dialogue on this vital topic. The Security Council must work collectively. We hope that in the year of the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) it will be able to demonstrate its unity.
