Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the introduction of the Secretary-
General's report, which makes an assessment of the
political and military situation and of its repercussions
on the scale and structure of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).

In the debate held in January, there was
contagious enthusiasm regarding the final process of
bringing East Timor to independence. However, in this
report we note concern as the independence of East
Timor approaches. Colombia reaffirms what it
expressed in the January debate: that the Security
Council must take the measures necessary to allow
UNTAET to complete its work, without time pressures
that could compromise the future of the emerging
administration of East Timor.

Holding the elections for the Constituent
Assembly on 30 August 2001 will certainly be a test
for the future Timorese nation. We have noted with
satisfaction that to date more than 40 per cent of the
population has been registered. The Constituent
Assembly bears a great responsibility. In this regard,
we support the actions taken to promote debate and to
facilitate public participation in the future of East
Timor. We believe that the voter education programmes
that UNTAET is promoting are vitally important. It
also seems appropriate to us that the decision
concerning the date of East Timor's independence be
taken in the light of the deliberations of the Constituent
Assembly.

The refugee situation continues unresolved. We
take note of the visit of the UNTAET chief of staff to
four refugee camps at the beginning of April, together
with officials of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration, with the aim of
disseminating information on the security and political
situations in East Timor. We hope that the registration
day that the Indonesian Government will hold on 6
June 2001, according to the latest information, will
make it possible to more clearly determine the number
of refugees wishing to return to East Timor, so that
they can do so before the closure of registration for the
elections.

In this regard, I would like to state that it is
necessary for the Office of the United Nations Security
Coordinator to rapidly present the results of the
mission announced in paragraph 17 of the Secretary-
General's report, to take place in May, in order to
permit, hopefully, the prompt return of United Nations
agencies to the refugee camps.

Reconciliation is one of the most important issues
for the future of Timorese society. However,
reconciliation cannot take place in an atmosphere of
impunity. Those responsible for serious crimes must be
brought to trial.

Colombia appreciates the efforts to establish
harmonious relations between Indonesia and East
Timor through confidence-building measures. We
appreciate the efforts made by Mr. Ramos-Horta in that
regard. However, equally important is the need to
continue to improve the relations between UNTAET
and the Government of Indonesia, in particularly the
West Timorese officials. In that regard, Colombia
welcomes the agreements reached at the recent meeting
in Denpasar concerning refugee registration issues and
former civil servants' pensions, as well as the
proposals for future agreements on airline and postal
services and maritime delimitation.

At the last debate, at the beginning of April, we
referred extensively to the incidents of political
Violence in East Timor and the shadows that these cast
over the democratic future of the country. In that
regard, I would like on this occasion to highlight the
content of paragraph 21 of the report, to the effect that
the population fears that the political process will not
remain peaceful. We urge that the greatest efforts be
made to prevent outbreaks of political violence, taking
into account, as Mr. Ramos-Horta said, not only
internal but also external sources of violence.

With regard to border security, we are concerned
by the claim that the pro-Indonesian militias operating
in West Timor have continued to advocate armed
struggle to retake East Timor and that their overall
capacity has not diminished. In this regard, we take
note of the recommendation in the report that, taking
into the account the uncertainty regarding how security
conditions will develop, it would be advisable to
maintain the military component as it is until the
Government of East Timor has been established.

In conclusion, I wish to talk about the post-
independence presence of the United Nations. In his
report, the Secretary-General points out that when East
Timor declares independence, it still will not have a
properly functioning public administration and that it
will take years to acquire many of the skills necessary
for the administration to be fully functional. While this
is not a surprise - and it seems to us a very realistic
statement - it contrasts, as we said at the beginning of
this statement, with the enthusiastic spirit of the debate
held in January. It is a fact that East Timor will
continue to need much assistance from the international
community to guarantee its stability. Colombia agrees
that the strength of the military component should be
maintained and that this matter should be reviewed
after the elections are held in August.

We have noted with great interest the
establishment of a working group on planning for the
phase following the withdrawal of UNTAET. We would
like to ask Mr. Annabi if he can give us additional
information on the integrated mission task force
referred to in paragraph 29, established at United
Nations Headquarters, that will assist and complement
the working group on planning and coordinate the work
of the organizations concerned.

