Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): As we
are aware of the fact, Sir, that this meeting marks the
end of your presidency of the Security Council for the
month of June and also represents the equivalent in
your duties as Permanent Representative of Turkey to
the United Nations, I would like to join the others in
expressing my gratitude for your distinguished career
in your country's diplomatic service, which today
comes to an end. I wish you every success in the
future.

I thank Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, for introducing
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/323) and
his comments on the situation on the ground. We also
welcome the presence of Ambassador Tanin and the
statement he delivered earlier today.

We are concerned to see that the security
situation on the ground has suffered serious setbacks.
The increase in the number of incidents and the level
of widespread violence, both in the capital and in
neighbouring and southern provinces, have produced a
volatile climate for everyone, combatants, civilians and
international personnel alike. Mexico believes that
guaranteeing the security of the population is one of
the main challenges that Afghanistan faces in the short
and medium term. Protecting the integrity of the most
vulnerable populations, such as women and children,
requires priority attention in accordance with the norms
and principles of international law. Likewise, the
security of humanitarian staff must also be promptly
ensured.

In the light of the increase in civilian casualties,
Mexico reiterates its condemnation of terrorism in all
of its forms and manifestations. We vigorously
condemn attacks against the civilian population and the
acts of violence that have been directed against
humanitarian staff and the United Nations on the
ground.

We note the progress that has been made in the
expansion of the Afghan National Army and the
Afghan National Police. However, we urge that efforts
be stepped up to urgently generate the capacities
necessary to guarantee minimal security conditions for
the civilian population. Similarly, we support all efforts
made by national and international security forces to
prevent collateral casualties in terms of civilian victims
in the course of their military operations.

We also welcome the announcement concerning
the increase in troops authorized by the Government of
the United States within the framework of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), with
the aim of strengthening its security capabilities and
enhancing the training of the National Army and Police
as well as improving the protection of the civilian
population. Even though the central functions in the
area of security have been assumed by ISAF, the
presence and the comprehensive approach of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) is important in order to continue to support
development and reconstruction activities in the
country. One item that we think is crucial is the
adoption, with the support of UNAMA and the
international community, of all of the necessary
measures to prevent the recruitment of children by
armed groups and to bring about conditions conducive
to their reintegration into a safe environment.

Furthermore, we praise the efforts of the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community to make progress in the clearance and
destruction of landmines and other explosive remnants
of war in the country, bearing in mind the fact that
those devices continue to represent a serious threat to
the civilian population. Hence, it is necessary to
provide additional support to mine-clearance
programmes.

Mexico welcomes the results of the International
Conference on Afghanistan, which took place on
31 March in The Hague, as a positive step to promote
the commitment of the international community in
favour of the development, strengthening of security
and institutional capacity-building of Afghanistan and
to provide attention to Afghan priorities.

Similarly, we welcome the adoption of the United
Nations development assistance framework for
Afghanistan, which was signed by the Government and
the United Nations on 28 May, in order to define
international participation and to improve coordination
among all of the bodies and programmes of the United
Nations in that country. Despite the insecurity and the
prevailing violence, we must continue fostering
national priorities through a comprehensive approach
that will strengthen institutional capacities, the
promotion of economic and social development,
respect for human rights and strengthening of the rule
of law, taking into account the regional dimension of
many of the problems that affect that country. In that
respect, international assistance must adapt to Afghan
structures and priorities.

The fight against organized crime and the illicit
production and trafficking of narcotics is a priority for
the stability of Afghanistan. We welcome the initiatives
that have been promoted in that respect by the Special
Conference on Afghanistan convened by the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia. We recognize that progress in dialogue and
bilateral cooperation between Afghanistan and Pakistan
and Iran could assist in tackling common challenges in
the area of regional stability, such as the fight against
terrorism, drug trafficking, organized crime, as well
development and trade issues.

Within that framework, we support the efforts of
the Government to reduce the production of opium in
several provinces, as well as regional cooperation to
develop a common front to tackle that phenomenon,
which has global consequences. Similarly, we note the
efforts made by the Government to fight corruption, in
particular the establishment on 1 April of a specialized
anti-corruption unit within the Office of the Attorney-
General.

My delegation is also optimistic about the
progress described in the report concerning the
preparation for the elections next August. We think
important progress has been made, not only in the
immediate electoral process, but also in promoting a
democratic culture in the country. In that connection,
special attention should be given to electoral rolls and
the final list of candidates, which have been prepared
on time and without any major security incidents.

We welcome the establishment of the Electoral
Complaints Commission and the establishment of the
Verification of Political Rights campaign set up by
UNAMA, in conjunction with the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission. We urge all
of the political actors in Afghanistan to cooperate with
UNAMA and the security forces as well as the United
Nations Development Programme's UNDP-ELECT to
make sure that the next elections will take place in a
climate of security, transparency and respect for the
human rights of the voters, in particular the full
exercise of political rights by women.

It is important to take advantage of the impetus
generated by the electoral process to carry out long-
term strategic planning with specific measures that

would strengthen the rule of law and contribute to
creating trust among the population in their
institutions, as well as in combating impunity.
Undoubtedly, the holding of elections is an opportunity
to write an entirely new chapter that will favour
national reconciliation and strengthen sovereignty and
democracy in Afghanistan.

