The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Indonesia.

My delegation wishes to thank Under-Secretaries-
General Mark Lowcock and Rosemary DiCarlo for
their briefings.

Indonesia, like others, is very concerned about
the escalation of violence in north-western Syria,
which has resulted in human casualties, particularly in
recent weeks. The deteriorating situation has affected
the ability of many Syrians to enjoy their basic rights.
Schools and health facilities have been damaged, and
around 180,000 people have been displaced in the past
10 days alone. The very grim and desperate situation
on the ground, as depicted by Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock, represents a worsening situation and a
looming humanitarian crisis. That is unacceptable.
In this context, I would like to briefly highlight
three points.

First, civilians should not and must not continue
to be the targets and victims of military operations.
Moreover, education facilities and medical
infrastructure, such as hospitals, must not be subject
to direct attacks of a military purpose. All parties
should abide by international humanitarian law and
faithfully implement resolution 2286 (2016). It is indeed
frustrating to see that the current situation in Idlib is
at a stage where a military solution is becoming more
attractive than pursuing a peaceful resolution.

Secondly, the Council needs to continue reminding
all relevant parties to recommit to the Russian-Turkish
ceasefire agreement. Indonesia also believes that it is
crucial for the Astana guarantors and other countries
with influence over the parties to the conflict to help
prevent further escalation and to engage in a genuine
dialogue that would yield concrete measures, with the
aim of stabilizing the situation in north-western Syria.
A genuine commitment of all parties to pursuing a
political solution and reconciliation is needed now
more than ever.

Thirdly, my delegation wishes to ensure that
the current escalation will not overshadow or derail
the progress of the ongoing political process that is
being facilitated by Special Envoy Pedersen, in close
consultation with all relevant parties. We would
therefore like to reiterate our strong support for his work
and his priorities in advancing a political solution in
Syria, based on the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015).

Indonesia is of the View that unless there is a durable
political solution to the conflict, the humanitarian
crisis will be increasingly difficult to resolve. In the
meantime, it is important for all parties to step up their
efforts to ensure that the humanitarian effort in Syria
goes forward without hindrance. At the moment, taking
an approach of naming and shaming is not the solution.
It is clearly not going to take us anywhere, nor will it
contribute to saving innocent Syrians on the ground.
We must work together to find solutions. Civilians and
refugees do not care about words but about deeds and
actions to save their children. We on the Council should
really be united in saving people's lives. The Syrian
people have every right to live in peace and dignity and
without fear.

In conclusion, we urge all the parties to cooperate
fully in ensuring the protection ofthe millions ofpeople
in Idlib so as to contribute to stability on the ground at
this perilous time. In this holy month of Ramadan, I
make a humble appeal. Let there be restraint. Let there
be respite so that all citizens in Idlib can break their
fast without fear and with food on the table. Let there
be peace.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

