Mr. Rai (Papua New Guinea): On behalf of my
country, Papua New Guinea, I convey our sincere
congratulations to your country, Sweden, Mr. President,
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January. We also congratulate
the new members of the Security Council, namely,
Bolivia, Ethiopia, Italy, Kazakhstan and the Netherlands.
We look forward to working with the members of the
Security Council to achieve the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.

Let me also take this opportunity to congratulate
and welcome our new Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio
Guterres, on his assumption of office, and to express
our confidence and best wishes that his strategic
leadership will further strengthen the work of the
United Nations for the mutual benefit of we the peoples
of the United Nations.

My delegation also commends Sweden for the timely
convening of this open debate on conflict prevention
and sustaining peace. The theme is highly relevant given
the unacceptable level of the increasing and continuing
violence, the destruction and humanitarian catastrophe,
at the hands of both State and non-State actors, which
regrettably have been experienced in many parts of
the world today. We are directly impacted by those
persons who have fled their homelands to either save
themselves or seek new opportunities to survive, as
highlighted by the asylum seekers processing centre in
my own country, Papua New Guinea.

Papua New Guinea welcomes the bold
pronouncement by the new Secretary-General to foster
and sustain global peace, including conflict prevention,
as a strategic priority during his tenure. We also
applaud the initiative of the President of the General
Assembly to convene the high-level dialogue on the
theme "Building Sustainable Peace for All: Synergies
between the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and Sustaining Peace".

Sustaining peace as a core agenda of the United
Nations must be fully and meaningfully supported
by Security Council members and all other Member
States in the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations.
Parochial politics, which has been a nemesis of global
peace and security, unfortunately has been a hallmark
in the Council in recent years. That has cost countless
innocent lives and livelihoods. It cannot be allowed to
continue and needs to change, and change now.

My delegation is of the view that the solid
foundations for sustaining peace, including conflict
prevention, have been laid under the Charter of the
United Nations and relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions. They include, most
recently on 27 April 2016, the simultaneous adoption
of resolution 2282 (2016) and of General Assembly
resolution 70/262, on the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture.

What is required now is the fundamental issue
of ensuring the political will and commitment for
a paradigm shift that recognizes the importance of
an integrated and comprehensive approach to peace,
including conflict prevention. Those must include
reforms of the outdated and inadequate existing
structures, practices and policies; improved coherence
and synergies among peace, human rights and
sustainable development work in the United Nations
system, such as in the Peacebuilding Commission; the
mobilization of resources at a sustained and predictable
level; and strengthening the partnership among all the
relevant stakeholders. Moreover, country ownership
and leadership in addressing the root causes of conflicts
is pivotal.

My country learned from our decade-long internal
bitter civil conflict in Bougainville, 29 years ago - a
conflict that claimed many lives and livelihoods and
whose impact is still felt today - that sustaining
peace and enjoying its dividends entails the following:
First, the imperative of investing political will and
commitment in conflict prevention actions before,
during, and after conflict; scondly, adequately
addressing the underlying root causes of tensions and
conflict; thirdly, the importance of peaceful dialogue
to resolve conflicts; and, fourthly, the relevance

and importance of proactively engaging women in
peace processes.

Sustaining peace has intrinsic links to sustainable
development. Indeed, the preamble of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development recognizes that,
"[t]here can be no sustainable development
without peace and no peace without sustainable
development". (General Assembly resolution 70/1, preamble)

The challenges that climate change poses to our
sustainable development and their implications for
international peace and security are particularly
pertinent to Papua New Guinea and to the other
Pacific island States. Just as armed conflict has led
to mass movements of people, which has global peace
and security implications, climate change is having a
similar adverse effect. The loss of territory, food and
water insecurity and the involuntary displacement
of people from their homes and their quest to seek
refuge elsewhere from the catastrophic effects of
natural disasters and rising sea levels will inevitably
lead to outbreaks in conflict over scarce resources if
left unaddressed.

My delegation fully agrees with the Pacific island
States Chair's remarks on climate change, which
I will not repeat here, except to note with regret the
insignificant concrete or coordinated action at the
international level to address the security implications
of climate change.

As the primary organ under the Charter of the
United Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security the Security Council needs to
carefully consider and act decisively with regard to the
growing concerns on the nexus between climate change
and its security implications, before it is too late.

Finally, not least, I align my statement with the
statement recently delivered by the Chair of the Pacific
island small States. The full statement will be provided
to the Secretariat.

