Mr. Gambari: I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
and the other members of the Security Council for this
opportunity to brief the Council on the situation in
Darfur.

The Council has before it the Secretary-General's
most recent report on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), which
includes a summary of developments in Darfur,
including updates on the Doha negotiations, the
Darfur-based political process, and the operations and
deployments of UNAMID.

Considerable progress has been made in the Doha
negotiations since I last briefed the Council at its
meeting in Khartoum on 21 May. As all present are
aware, the All Darfur Stakeholders Conference took
place in Doha, Qatar, from 27 to 31 May. The
Conference brought together more than 500 delegates
representing a cross-section of Darfur stakeholders,
including internally displaced persons, refugees,
representatives of civil society, the Government of the
Sudan, elected officials, tribal leaders and the Darfuri
diaspora.

UNAMID supported the event by facilitating the
selection and transportation Within Darfur of 245
representatives of civil society and by deploying
2
UNAMID personnel to Doha to serve as committee
Chairpersons, presenters and rapporteurs.

The main outcome of the Conference was the
endorsement by the stakeholders of the draft Doha
document for peace in Darfur as the basis for reaching
a permanent ceasefire and a comprehensive and
inclusive peace settlement in Darfur. On 14 July, as the
Representative of the Secretary-General, I participated,
and signed as a witness, in a ceremony in Doha at
which the Liberation and Justice Movement (LJM) and
the Government of the Sudan signed the Doha
document for peace in Darfur. The ceremony, which
was presided over by the Emir of Qatar, was witnessed
by the Presidents of Chad, Eritrea, Burkina Faso and
the Sudan, as well as by senior representatives of the
African Union, the League of Arab States and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, among other
dignitaries.

Allow me to use this occasion to express my
gratitude to the Emir, His Highness Sheikh Hamad bin
Khalifa Al-Thani, and to the State of Qatar for their
enormous generosity and steadfast commitment to the
Darfur peace process. Let me also acknowledge the
personal commitment of Minister Ahmed bin Abdullah
Al-Mahmoud of Qatar and Djibrill Bassole, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso, for their tireless
efforts to assist the parties to reach an inclusive and
comprehensive agreement for peace in Darfur.

On 6 July, I was requested by the United Nations,
in consultation with the African Union, to assume the
role of Joint Chief Mediator ad interim. In this
capacity, I Wish to inform the Council that while the
signing of the Doha document for peace in Darfur by
the two parties represents an important step forward in
the quest for sustainable peace and stability in Darfur,
it is my view that many daunting challenges remain.
Among these are: first, how to continue engagement of
the holdout armed movements the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM), SLA-Abdul Wahid and SLA-Minni
Minawi, and obtain the agreement of the Government
of the Sudan with respect to a cessation of hostilities,
followed by a commitment to discuss in good faith how
to achieve an inclusive and comprehensive peace
agreement; secondly, to ensure local ownership of the
peace process by Darfurians at the grass-roots level
through a credible, transparent and free internal
political process; and thirdly, the important need for an
enabling environment to make possible a Darfur-based
process.
11-42650
With regard to the enabling environment, I agree
with the statement made by the Council in its
presidential statement of 21 April (S/PRST/2011/8)
that the Darfur-based peace process must take place in
an environment that will guarantee its credibility and
legitimacy by ensuring that all the essential basic civil
and political freedoms of participants are guaranteed,
including, and especially, freedom of speech,
movement and assembly, as well as freedom from
harassment, arbitrary arrest, intimidation and freedom
from interference by the Government and the armed
movements. In this connection, the lifting of the
emergency laws by the Government, which it
committed publicly to doing in February, Will go a long
way towards fulfilling most of these key conditions.
This is essential if the outcomes of the Darfur-based
peace process are to be recognized and accepted by the
people of Darfur, thus putting a definitive end to the
conflict.

These are by no means simple challenges, but
work on them is already in progress. UNAMID will use
the intervening period to assist the stakeholders in the
dissemination of the Doha document for peace in
Darfur to the population of Darfur in order to broaden
popular support for it as well as to prepare them for the
Darfur-based peace process. UNAMID, in conjunction
with the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel and concerned international stakeholders, Will
also continue to engage with the Government of the
Sudan on the urgent need to establish an enabling
environment to facilitate the Darfur peace process.

Since I last briefed the Council in Khartoum in
May, the Government of the Sudan and rebel forces
fought in the areas of Kutum, Kabkabiya and Shangil
Tobaya, in Northern Darfur; El Daein, Labado, Gulobei
and F eina, in Southern Darfur; and G010, Jebel Marra
area, in Western Darfur. In Shangil Tobaya, the SLA-
Minni Minawi, supported by a breakaway faction of
the LJM, has engaged Government of the Sudan forces
in an effort to retake the area. Meanwhile, the alliance
of factions of SLA-Abdul Wahid, SLA-Minni Minawi
and JEM. maintain a presence in Labado, Muhajeria
and Shaeria. JEM. has persisted in its attempts to move
northwards towards Mellit, in Northern Darfur, from
Southern Darfur, while SLA-Abdul Wahid still
maintains a strong presence in Rockero and other areas
of Eastern-Western Darfur, in Jebel Marra.
Government of the Sudan forces continue to conduct
air surveillance missions as well as to position military
11-42650
forces and equipment throughout Northern and
Southern Darfur.

On 14 May and 26 June, the leaders of SLA-
Minni Minawi and SLA-Abdul Wahid declared joint
actions against the Government of the Sudan, thereby
posing a further challenge to the security environment
in Darfur. Our Mission will continue to monitor these
developments closely in view of their likely impact on
the civilian population, and to intensify the
implementation of its robust strategy for the protection
of civilians.

Meanwhile, tribal clashes, a contributing factor in
fatality and civilian displacement in Darfur, is now on
the decrease due mainly to UNAMID-assisted efforts
on the part of all sides to address their causes. Two
recorded cases, however, were the 5-6 June fighting
between the Zaghawa and Tunjur/Berti/Birgid in areas
near Shangil Tobaya, in North Darfur, and the 19 June
fighting between the Salamat and Habbaniyah in
Nadhif near Buram, in South Darfur. The
implementation of the June 2010 truce agreement
between the Nawaiba and Misseriya in the Zalingei
area of West Darfur is being closely monitored.

With mitigation measures and robust responses
consistently pursued by UNAMID, coupled with the
security and patrol mechanisms jointly operated by
UNAMID and the Government of the Sudan, incidents
of attacks and carjacking against United Nations and
associated personnel in Darfur have been drastically
reduced. I regret to note, however, that While in
numerical terms and frequency there has been a
considerable reduction in attacks on peacekeepers and
humanitarian actors since my last briefing to the
Council, occasional and fatal attacks still occur. For
example, on 30 June, a UNAMID minibus transporting
five peacekeepers was attacked by unknown gunmen in
El Geneina, West Darfur. One Ethiopian peacekeeper
was killed and another injured. Such acts, which
constitute war crimes, should not go unpunished. In
this regard, the Mission is working with the
Government of the Sudan to ensure a full investigation,
followed by timely prosecution of the perpetrators, and
their punishment if they are found guilty.

After continued engagement with the
Government of the Sudan, progress was made
regarding the two UNAMID national staff members
arrested and detained by Government authorities,
despite the provisions of the status-of-forces
3
agreement. The first national staff member, Ms. Hawa
Abdulla Saleh, was released on 12 July after 68 days of
detention; the second, Mr. Idriss Abdelrahman Yusuf,
arrested on 27 April, was released two days ago, on
20 July, after 85 days in custody.

Meanwhile, impunity continues to be a factor of
criminality directed against international personnel in
Darfur. However, positive achievements on this issue
include the 5 May Special Court sentencing of two
individuals to 10 years imprisonment for their
involvement in the 2010 kidnapping of foreign aid
workers and the carjacking of two vehicles belonging
to international non-governmental organizations in
South Darfur. We would like to see more such arrests,
prosecutions and punishment, as appropriate.

UNAMID carried out 23,999 patrols between
lApril and 30 June, during which the Mission's
movements by land were restricted on 68 occasions.
Most of the restricted patrols were either in or seeking
to enter areas believed by the Government to harbour
forces of the armed movements. UNAMID military and
police have increased the number of patrols per day
from an average of 130 to 160. My target, and my
instructions to the military and police, is to increase
that number to about 200 patrols a day. Additionally, a
number of long- and medium-range patrols are being
conducted to new locations, including Jebel Marra, the
border between South Darfur and the Republic of
South Sudan, and the northern parts of West Darfur. We
will continue to address the issue of access with
Sudanese authorities and other interlocutors, and to
refuse to take "no" for answer when we are stopped.

As noted in the Secretary-General's report,
ongoing intermittent clashes between Government and
movement forces continue to adversely affect the
humanitarian situation, with displacements of civilians
reaching an estimate of between 60,000 and 70,000
since the beginning of the year. Despite this, UNAMID
has made good progress in improving the humanitarian
situation and facilitating humanitarian access in Darfur.
Restrictions of movement in Sector South, imposed by
the Government of the Sudan due to the alleged
presence of armed movements, were officially lifted on
11 June, and the work of the humanitarian agencies has
resumed. Similarly, access for staff and humanitarian
relief to the Kalma camp for internally displaced
persons (IDPs) resumed without further restrictions.
As I briefed the Council in May, UNAMID's
Operation Spring Basket continues, in collaboration
with humanitarian agencies, to expand access and help
humanitarian agencies to deliver aid to parts of Darfur
that have long been inaccessible. Launched on 1 May,
the initiative involves aid workers conducting needs
assessments and delivering aid.

Operation Spring Basket is now operating in
North, South and West Darfur. Nine communities have
been visited; many of them are in the Jebel Marra area.
The third phase of this operation, taking place in July
and August, continues with assessments, but with a
focus on revisiting previously visited communities to
deliver much-needed humanitarian relief. The impact
of Operation Spring Basket is best visible through the
opening of humanitarian space, the implementation of
humanitarian and protection assessments, enhanced
coordination, communication and collaboration among
the various stakeholders, relationship-building with the
Government of the Sudan and the armed movements,
and improved communication with areas previously
affected by restricted access.

Voluntary returns to areas where conditions are
favourable have been observed over the past few
months. In fact, UNAMID, in cooperation with local
authorities, the Sudan's Humanitarian Aid Commission
and United Nations agencies, is facilitating the return
of 1,150 IDPS from the Kabkabiya area to Saihjanna,
14 kilometres north-west of Kutum. A United Nations
Mine Action team completed clearance, and
unexploded ordinance disposal activities in the area
and return commenced on 10 July. UNAMID is
assisting in transporting the most vulnerable members
of the community and providing security and water to
the returnees.

I think the members of the Council, having heard
me speak many times, have noted my absolute
dedication and commitment to facilitating the
voluntary return of IDPS to their homes. As members
know, we have 1.8 million people, out of a total
population of 7 million in Darfur, who are in IDP
camps. In my view, this is an unnatural and abnormal
situation, and we must never agree to normalize it.

On 27 and 28 June, the Darfur International
Conference on Water for Sustainable Peace was
co-chaired by the Government of the Sudan, UNAMID
and the United Nations country team. Government
figures and representatives of the United Nations and
other international organizations and donors attended
the event. Donors pledged a total of $500 million in
support of 65 approved projects to develop a stable and
equitable water service system for Darfur. It should be
noted that the Government of the Sudan pledged $210
million in support of this initiative. Once again, we of
UNAMID, working with the United Nations country
team, believe that water is one of the root causes of the
conflict in Darfur, and addressing it could very well
contribute to sustainable peace in that region.

UNAMID and the Government of the Sudan
continue to consult closely on all issues of concern to
peace and stability in Darfur. In this regard, I am happy
to report progress on the bridging solution that has
been found for the issue of UNAMID radio. On,
26 June UNAMID finalized the radio bridging solution
with the National Public Radio Corporation for the
broadcast of UNAMID radio programmes on
Al Salaam radio and Darfur state radio stations. This
agreement is an interim arrangement until the
Government acts on our application for a radio
broadcasting license. UNAMID radio is broadcasting
two hours daily on Al Salaam radio, with repeat
broadcasts at appropriate times on Darfur state radio
stations. Broadcasting began on 3 July.

Let me conclude by reassuring the Council that
UNAMID will continue to do everything within its
mandate to facilitate the return of peace and stability to
Darfur. Robust and increased patrols will remain the
rule of the Mission, as will continued collaboration
with the United Nations country team and humanitarian
actors, to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, especially to vulnerable communities.
11-42650

With regards to the peace process itself, the
challenge for the international community, led
essentially by this body and the African Union Peace
and Security Council, is to determine how best to
impress on all sides involved in the conflict that a
military solution is not the way to go, because if the
military path were the way to a solution, we would
have found one a long time ago, and we have not. As
the Council stressed in its statement of 23 June
(SC/10291), every effort should be made to reach a
permanent ceasefire and a comprehensive peace
agreement as soon as possible on the basis of the Doha
document for peace in Darfur.

Finally, that is where we are at the moment from
the perspective of UNAMID. It is my sincere hope
that, after its deliberations, the Council will provide
strong support and guidance to UNAMID during this
critical phase of the implementation of its mandate, so
that the Mission can consolidate the recent gains made,
particularly on the protection of Civilians and access
and delivery of humanitarian assistance. We also hope
that the Council will be able to endorse the Doha
document for peace in Darfur. It is not perfect, but at
least provides a framework for bringing about a
comprehensive and inclusive peace. The imperative of
peace is now, as the people of Darfur have suffered for
far too long and far too deeply.

