Mr. Fall (Spoke in French): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Madam President, on the
United States presidency for December. I wish you
great success. I thank you for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the situation in Central
Africa and the activities of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) since the
publication of the report (S/2019/913) submitted for the
Council's consideration.

Overall,the political and security situationin Central
Africa remains worrisome. The subregion continues to
face security, humanitarian, socioeconomic and human
rights challenges. In addition, the security concerns
related to climate change have deepened. However, we
welcome the key progress made over the past 11 months
on structural reforms, peacebuilding and peacekeeping,
including the finalization of all the major reform
documents of the Economic Community of Central
African States, the adoption of the regional action plan
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on

women and peace and security, and the establishment
of a regional civil society network, namely, the Civil
Society Coalition for Conflict Prevention, Peace and
Security in Central Africa.

Most of the States of the subregion will hold new
elections between 2020 and the end of UNOCA's
current mandate, in August 2021. In that connection,
efforts continue to promote national dialogue and
the participation of women and youth in governance
and peacebuilding.

Terrorism continues to pose a threat to the
stability of the African subregion, in particular in the
Lake Chad basin where Boko Haram remains active.
My colleague Mohamed Ibn Chambas and I were in
Nigeria in November to complete our tour of the four
States of the Lake Chad basin, undertaken jointly with
Mr. Angel Losada Fernandez, European Union Special
Representative for the Sahel. Ms. Michele Coninsx,
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, joined us in Chad. We came to
the conclusion that support for the implementation of
the regional strategy for the stabilization, recovery and
resilience of the Boko Haram-affected areas of the Lake
Chad basin region should be one of our priorities.

Climate change continues to have an impact
on the lives of women and men in Central Africa,
often with direct implications for peace and security.
On 20 November, the Government of the Republic
of the Congo declared a state of natural disaster
and humanitarian emergency in three northern
departments, due to serious flooding affecting
approximately 50,000 people. It should be noted that
several other Central African countries are also facing
severe natural disasters related to climate change. I
call on international partners to provide humanitarian
assistance to the Governments concerned.

I went to Luanda from 25 to 29 November to
participate in the forty-ninth meeting of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa. The Committee discussed
the geopolitical and security situation in Central Africa
and held a debate on climate change and its impact on
peace and security. At the end of its ministerial meeting,
the Committee adopted the Luanda declaration on the
impact of climate change on peace and security in
Central Africa.

The Central African subregion continues to face
maritime security challenges, in particular in the Gulf
of Guinea. On 7 November, an attack on an oil tanker
was reported north-west of S510 Tome. On 20 November,
the Interregional Coordination Centre for Maritime
Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea, located in
Yaounde, reported another attack near Malabo, which
led the Government of Equatorial Guinea to place its
security forces on high alert throughout the country.
Special Representative Ibn Chambas and I are planning
to conduct a joint visit to the Centre in early 2020 to
assess the maritime situation in the Gulf of Guinea
and to determine the specific areas where the United
Nations could lend integrated interregional assistance.

I am encouraged by the efforts made by the
countries of Central Africa to build their capacity for
subregional cooperation by strengthening ECCAS.
That subregional organization is in the process
of accelerating its preparations for the holding in
Libreville of the ninth extraordinary summit of Heads
of State and Government on 18 December, which will
be devoted to reforming the Community. During the
summit, the leaders of Central Africa are slated to
approve ECCAS's institutional reform programme,
and the conclusions of the summit will constitute an
important step in that reform process. Here I would
reaffirm the full commitment of the United Nations to
work hand in hand with ECCAS and its member States
as well as their partners to implement the reform and to
contribute to building ECCAS's capacities.

As the Council is aware, the Government
of Cameroon held a national dialogue from
30 September to 4 October that produced a series of
key recommendations aimed at addressing the crisis in
the North-West and South-West Regions of the country.
However, I remain concerned by the level of violence
that continues to threaten the lives of the people of
Cameroon, as there are reports of ongoing human rights
violations and abuses by all parties.

Humanitarian personnel have also been attacked,
which highlights the scale of the insecurity. More than
700,000 people may now be displaced because of the
conflict in the two regions. Other reports also indicate
that thousands of people have died or been injured. I
call on international partners to support the national
efforts that are under way to address the humanitarian
needs of the population.

Following the national dialogue, a number of
measures were taken, including the release of certain
prisoners, which is a welcome development. The swift
implementation of the recommendations from the
dialogue will be yet another step towards a lasting
solution to the crisis. From 19 to 24 November, the
Government of Cameroon dispatched delegations to the
North-West and South-West Regions to raise awareness
on the conclusions of the national dialogue.

The President of the African Union Commission,
Moussa Faki Mahamat; the Secretary General of
the International Organization of la Francophonie,
Louise Mushikiwabo; and the Secretary-General of the
Commonwealth, Patricia Janet Scotland, recently paid
a visit to Cameroon to meet with national stakeholders,
including President Paul Biya, on the situation in the
country. In their final joint statement, the three officials
encouraged all stakeholders to continue on this path of
wisdom and responsibility, especially with respect to
the Government's implementation of the conclusions of
the national dialogue.

Following the announcement made by President
Paul Biya on the holding of the legislative and
municipal elections in Cameroon on 9 February 2020,
the head of the opposition party, the Mouvement pour
la renaissance du Cameroun, Maurice Kamto, reported
on 25 November that his party would not be taking
part in the elections, stating that the conditions would
not be met for the voting to take place in the North-
West and South-West Regions. He also called for a
review of the electoral code. Other political parties also
expressed some reservations as to their participation in
the elections.

In response, during a press conference held on
2 December, the Minister of Territorial Administration
and the Minister of Communication assured everyone
that the conditions were in place for peaceful elections.
As the Secretary-General underscored in his report
(S/2019/913), it is important to pursue dialogue with
all stakeholders so as to quell the underlying tensions
among those who feel marginalized. It is vital that we
build on the momentum created by the national dialogue
by ensuring inclusiveness in the implementation of
the recommendations of the dialogue, including on
greater decentralization, development assistance and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. The
holding of peaceful, inclusive and credible elections in
2020 will to a large extent depend on such efforts and
will be a crucial test for democracy in the country. It
will also make clear the level of determination on the
part of national stakeholders to move towards genuine
stability and socioeconomic development and lasting
peace for all the people of Cameroon.

The United Nations remains committed to working
in close cooperation with the national authorities and
other stakeholders and to support local initiatives
geared towards promoting the participation of women,
young people and other marginalized groups. In
parallel, it is crucial that all actors on the ground step
up their efforts to protect and promote human rights
and fight impunity.

In Chad, the security situation in the three
provinces that share a common border with Libya and
the Sudan and are in a state of emergency continue to
pose a threat to the building of a lasting peace. That
will require an ongoing multidimensional commitment,
especially at a time when Chad is preparing for the
legislative elections, which have long been delayed and
which are now slated for the first quarter of 2020, and
the holding of presidential elections in 2021.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, efforts
must continue in order to create a political environment
conducive to the holding of presidential elections
in 2021. The Permanent Secretary of the National
Dialogue Council is continuing his consultations with a
wide range of national stakeholders, including political
parties and civil society, with the support of the United
Nations through the Peacebuilding Fund, in order to
prepare for an inclusive national dialogue for 2020.

I call on the national authorities and all stakeholders
to continue to work jointly to contribute to the holding of
a genuinely inclusive and constructive dialogue that will
create conditions conducive to peacebuilding and to the
holding of peaceful, inclusive and credible presidential
elections. Unwavering international assistance to
stabilize the Pool Region is also necessary, as well
as financial contributions, which are essential for the
Government to effectively implement the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme.

(spoke in English)

I would like to reiterate my appreciation to
the Security Council for its continued support for
UNOCA and myself to facilitate the implementation
of our mandate. The Council's support was once
again evidenced through its presidential statement
of 12 September (S/PRST/2019/10) welcoming the
completion of UNOCA's strategic review.

The Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs and UNOCA are working together in
cooperation with the relevant United Nations entities to
ensure the full implementation of the strategic review
recommendations. We will continue to update the
Council as appropriate.

