Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): Oman reiterates its
commitment to the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of all States in the region under
consideration, including the Republic of Croatia.
Stemming from this commitment, we have supported all
efforts aimed at ensuring the rights of all the citizens of
Croatia, including the Serb population living in the
Krajina region, within the territorial integrity of the
Republic of Croatia.

On the other hand, we understand the frustration of
the Croatian authorities when it comes to the question of
the Krajina Serbs, who have been testing the patience of
the international community for the past four years. Their
engagement in the fighting inside the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, their cross-border violations of the
international borders and the attacks they have mounted
on the safe area of Bihac have all resulted in the latest
events.

While calling on all the sides to refrain from fighting
and to exercise maximum restraint in order not to escalate
the war, we also stress the need for the Government of
Croatia to adhere strictly to the provisions of the
agreement it signed with the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR) on 6 August 1995 with regard to the
humanitarian situation in areas of its country, to allow
access to these areas by all humanitarian organizations
and to create conditions conducive to the voluntary return
of those persons who have left their homes. Any acts
against civilians and the United Nations personnel will
not be accepted. Here, my delegation would like to join
other speakers in conveying heartfelt condolences to the
Government of the Czech Republic and the Danish
authorities on the loss of life of their brave soldiers.

There could never be a peaceful solution through the
use of force. My delegation supports all efforts to bring
about a long and lasting peace in that region. We believe
that the Security Council and the international community

 

will do a great service to that war-torn region if and when
we succeed in making all those countries in the region
recognize each other.

Finally, in support of the desire of the overwhelming
majority in the Security Council for the early adoption of
the draft resolution before us, my delegation will vote in
favour of it.

