Ms. Lee (Singapore): Let me begin, Sir, by
congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency in what promises to be an eventful month.
You have my delegation's full support. I also join
others in thanking Ambassador Tafrov and his
delegation for their achievements last month. And
finally, we also thank the Secretary-General for joining
us earlier and for his insightful statement.

At the outset, I would like to say that my
delegation associates itself fully with the statement to
be made later by the Ambassador of the Republic of
Cambodia on behalf of the Association of South-East
Asian Nations (ASEAN).

With the passing of the one-year anniversary of
the 11 September attacks, it is timely for the Security
Council and the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
to switch on their critical thinking mode today to
reflect on what we have accomplished and to look
ahead to what we need to do in the war against
terrorism. When the CTC was first set up exactly one
year ago, the challenge given to it to spearhead the
global campaign against terrorism looked
insurmountable. Hence, by all measures, the
Committee has done extremely well over the past year,
given the resource and time constraints it faces. This
remarkable feat could not have been accomplished
without the brilliant leadership and passion of
Ambassador Greenstock as Chairman. We would also
like to thank the three Vice-Chairmen - Ambassadors
Valdivieso, Koonjul and Lavrov - for their excellent
chairmanship of the subcommittees.

One year ago, they and the Chairman took up
their appointments, probably appreciating the
enormous burden but without knowing the extent of
work involved. Thus, we find it truly admirable that at
this time the Chairman and the three Vice-Chairmen
have knowingly agreed to continue their terms for
another six months. In case we do not have the
opportunity of another public meeting on this matter
before we leave the Council at the end of this year, we
would like to pay special tribute to Ambassadors
Valdivieso and Koonjul, who will also be leaving the
Council at the end of this year.

We are also enormously grateful to the Counter-
Terrorism Committee experts for their
accomplishments in the onerous task of reviewing the
voluminous tons of country reports. Some members of
the original group of experts will be leaving the
Committee soon, and we wish them all the best in their
future endeavours. Next, the translators must also be
commended. They have worked feverishly behind the
scenes, and under great pressure, to translate 265
reports and countless attachments. The other members
of the CTC should also be commended for their
proactive participation in the work of the Committee.

Last, but not least, we also commend the CTC
secretariat, an integral part of the Committee, whose
members have borne their administrative duties
admirably.

While the CTC has made an immense
contribution in its one-year of existence - and
Ambassador Greenstock has already given us the
details of their work - the war against terrorism is far
from over. Terrorism still pervades every corner of the
globe, and the battle against terrorism is a continuous
and formidable task.

Underscoring the grim reminder that the threat to
global security remains unabated, the United States
marked the first anniversary of the 11 September
attacks by being on the second highest "orange" alert,
deploying anti-aircraft missiles around Washington and
closing embassies across Asia. Americans kept on
guard at home and abroad. Many other countries also
adopted similar heightened security measures. Hence,
we would like to pose three future challenges for the
CTC to consider.

First is the need to deepen cooperation and
collaboration. Terrorism is like a raging fire. One
cannot just stand by and watch while the fire consumes
your neighbour's lands. If the fire is left uncontrolled,
there is a strong chance that it may spread and engulf
the surrounding areas, including your own land.
Ambassador Greenstock has also underlined the
importance of close collaboration by noting in his
statement that the success of the global campaign
against terrorism, spearheaded by the CTC, hinges
critically on the cohesiveness of all Member States to
demonstrate their collective will to implement sound
measures to eradicate the scourges of international
terrorism.

In this context, our Foreign Minister Jayakumar
underscored, in his address to the General Assembly at
its fifty-seventh session on 13 September 2002, that it
is imperative to consider new ways to synergize the
coordination between the United Nations, other
regional and international organizations and Member
States. Here we agree with our colleague from
Colombia that there needs to be more collaboration
between the CTC and the 1267 Sanctions Committee in
order to address the gaps mentioned by him.

Secondly, there is the need to let go of
conventional paradigms. It is alarming that many of us
still possess the conventional paradigms of terrorist
organizations characterized by well-defined
hierarchies, a specific political agenda and a
conventional arsenal. The global indifference to the
evolution which has taken place in terrorist networks
and their modalities has prevented us from effectively
thwarting terrorists. For example, when the Aum
Shinrikyo cult attacked Tokyo's subway network with
deadly sarin gas in March 1995, countries around the
globe were gripped with shock and scrambled to ask
themselves whether they were prepared to handle
similar biological or chemical terrorist attacks.

When the world watched with disbelief and
horror on 11 September last year, much of the shock
had to do with the fact that commercial aircraft with
ordinary civilians on board had been hijacked by Al-
Qaeda terrorists and used as attack weapons. Only then
did the rest of the world begin to grapple with the
prospect of similar unconventional terrorist attacks on
their own soil.

These events were just two of the many that
illustrate clearly that we should have no illusions about
modern-day terrorism. Terrorist groups have gone
through a privatization process by receiving private
funding and training, and they have adapted to new
technology and methods to become highly networked
organizational structures which are much less visible
but much more lethal. As the world is besieged with
the internationalization of terrorism, it is critical for
Member States to examine the current modalities and
to institutionalize mechanisms to deepen the exchange
of information between intelligence and law
enforcement officers at the regional and international
levels, thereby forming our own closely coordinated
networks. It takes a network to beat a network.

The third challenge is the need to increase
technical assistance to Member States. Bearing in mind
the first two challenges that we have outlined above,
this third is the most crucial. We live in a globalized
environment where terrorism can and will exploit the
porous borders and international trade of goods and
services for their heinous ends. Therefore, it makes a
great deal of sense for the international community and
the United Nations to put together an extensive mutual
assistance programme to strengthen the capacity of
those Member States that lack the resources or
experience to deal with terrorism effectively. In
particular, the CTC needs to have a clear plan of action
to deal with those States that have not taken firm action
to counter terrorism, as required by resolution 1373
(2001). We strongly urge the CTC to focus
considerable attention on the development of full-
fledged outreach programmes to galvanize
international assistance to those States that need the
necessary aid and support to strengthen their national
capacities to combat terrorism.

Singapore is ready to stand with the rest of the
international community against the threat of the
globalization of terrorism. We recognize that it is
difficult for any one country to fight terrorism alone.
Furthermore, we are situated in a region that has been
dubbed "the second front" in the war on terror.
Consequently, we are committed to regional efforts to
eradicate international terrorism and to the deepening
of our exchanges with regional and international
players. For example, Singapore, Japan and the
Republic of Korea will be co-hosting an Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum
workshop on counter-terrorism and security issues in
Tokyo next week. The other regional efforts, in which
we continue to participate, will be outlined in the joint
ASEAN statement that I referred to earlier, and I will
not repeat them.

Finally, I cannot overemphasize that the war
against terrorism is a never-ending battle, with no
guarantee of complete success. However, we have no
choice but to work continuously, conscientiously and in
partnership with others to combat international
terrorism. We cannot afford to lose this war.

