Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
acceding countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the
Slovak Republic and Slovenia, and the associated
countries Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey, declare that
they align themselves with this statement.

Please accept my warm congratulations,
Mr. President, on your initiative to hold this meeting.
The quest for peace being a constant - if often
elusive - goal, the international community has
constantly been investing in formulating ways and
advancing mechanisms to achieve long-lasting peace
and security.

The European Union wishes to reaffirm that the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security rests with the Security
Council and that the United Nations has a central role
to play in the peace-building process in order to
achieve stability and legitimacy in post-conflict State-
building, utilizing its unique capacity and experience.
Peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-building are
often closely interrelated. That interrelationship
requires a comprehensive approach in order to preserve
the results achieved and to prevent the re-emergence of
conflicts.
The European Union believes that this quest for
peace also requires a comprehensive, concerted and
determined approach to address the root causes of
conflicts, including the economic, social, political,
cultural and humanitarian problems that are often
associated with them. In that respect, effective peace-
building requires action - both long-term and short-
term - that aims at addressing areas such as
sustainable development, good governance, the
eradication of poverty and inequality, the promotion of
democracy, respect for human rights and the rule of
law. Economic rehabilitation and reconstruction, in
particular, constitute important elements in the long-
term development of post-conflict societies and in the
maintenance of lasting peace; international assistance
also plays an important role in that regard.

The European Union believes that a
comprehensive peace-building strategy must involve
all the relevant actors in those fields and should take
into account the specific circumstances of each conflict
situation. The European Union believes that non-
governmental organizations and civil society play
important and complementary roles in consolidating
peace, in promoting reconciliation and in strengthening
democratic institutions. We believe that strong
democratic institutions can help societies reduce the
likelihood of resorting to violence.

The European Union has been constant in
recognizing the important role that regional
organizations can play in post-conflict situations, in
particular by building institutional mechanisms that
will deal with conflicts in a more structured and more
coherent way. We also firmly support close interaction
and cooperation with the Security Council in facing
those problems. Such cooperation requires an
assessment of needs, information-sharing and
coordination. We welcome an active role for the United
Nations, specifically in the areas of information-
sharing, promoting transparency, mobilizing support
and stimulating contacts between recipients and donors
of assistance in various areas such as training,
equipment and logistics.

The European Union, within the context of the
European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP), its
member States and the European Commission play an
active role in supporting and strengthening United
Nations peacekeeping and peace-building activities
around the world. European Union member States
contribute military and civilian police personnel,
and - along with the European Commission - they
provide personnel for financial, logistical, technical
and political support for most African peace
operations, mediation and peace processes. In that
context, the European Union also welcomes the efforts
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to work
closely with all relevant actors in Africa at the
regional, subregional and national levels, in particular
for the enhancement of the capabilities of troop
contributors and in capacity-building for regional and
subregional organizations.

The European Union would like to underline the
significance of including peace-building elements in
the mandates of peacekeeping operations, as is the case
with the important preventive role played by the
civilian police, one of the priorities of the ESDP in the
civilian field.

The European Union's first crisis management
operation, the European Union Police Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, began functioning on 1
January this year. That operation was conceived and
established as a follow-up to the United Nations
International Police Task Force based in Bosnia for the
past seven years, and is aimed at consolidating the
success of the United Nations Mission in reforming the
Bosnia and Herzegovina police and in ensuring that the
achievements of the United Nations are sustained over
time.

The European Union emphasizes the need for the
United Nations to develop peace-building capacities
and strategies and to implement programmes to support
them. That requires increased solidarity, sustained
political will and adequate resources on the part of the
international community.

