Mr. Powles (New Zealand): I shall try- not
least because of the lateness of the hour - to be very
brief.

May I first of all express through you, Mr.
President, my appreciation to Mr. Vieira de Mello for
the excellent briefing he has given today and, indeed,
to thank you, Sir, for the opportunity provided to non-
members to participate in a public meeting of the
Council under your presidency on this important issue.

The United Nations Transitional Administration
in East Timor (UNTAET) has made very considerable
progress on the security and humanitarian aspects of its
mandate since its establishment. We must, however,
express our concern at the recent incursions by militias
and attacks on United Nations peacekeepers, including
the wounding of an Australian peacekeeper. New
Zealand currently has over 600 of its defence force
personnel patrolling the western border of East Timor
under the United Nations flag, so our interest is real
and direct. We are also concerned about the
deteriorating security situation in some refugee camps
in West Timor, which has led to the suspension of
United Nations relief assistance. We acknowledge the
actions taken by Indonesia to date, but call for renewed
efforts by the Indonesian Government to rein in the
militias in West Timor. My delegation therefore agrees
strongly with the unequivocal comments made in this
regard at this meeting by several members of the
Council.

My Government very much welcomes the
proposal by UNTAET and the National Council of
Timorese Resistance for co-government in East Timor,
which was foreshadowed at the very successful donors'
meeting in Lisbon last week. It represents a significant
step towards greater participation by East Timorese in
government and shared political responsibility. We
would want to encourage UNTAET and the East
Timorese people to develop further the necessary
constitutional and political frameworks to prepare East
Timor for full independence. This process must have
East Timorese ownership and be driven by the East
Timorese, but it will obviously also require active input
by UNTAET, drawing on the best constitutional advice
available. Both these aspects will be critical for the
unique United Nations task of preparing the territory of
East Timor for independence.

Those are the main points I wish to make today.

