Mr. Klein: First, let me thank the Council
collectively. Each member has received a folder
containing the basic mission briefing, other background
material and a small gift for their continued support. At
present, in my mission, I have 89 nationalities - from
Australia to Zimbabwe. We have 13 of the 15 members
of the Council represented in our mission. It is truly a
United Nations mission, and the Council can be
extremely proud of what the men and women in the
mission are doing.

With regard to the issue of the ratio of weapons to
disarmed personnel, the Council should recall that a
good number of those personnel were women, who did
not necessarily have a weapons but who serviced
mortars, did the cooking and provided other basic
support to the fighters. We made the decision early on
that they were indeed part of the combatant force and
that we could not leave them out. The same goes for
the children. That is why one often sees a discrepancy
between the number of combatants and weapons and
the actual total numbers. I think that has to be factored
in.

With regard to reintegration, that is our major
concern now, obviously. In a country with an 85 per
cent unemployment rate, how do you integrate another
45,000 to 50,000 people into society? Fortunately,
members of the Council - specifically members of the
European Union, the United States and others,
bilaterally - have come through, and we have some
major programmes. We have a programme for about
35,200 in the context of our own DDR trust fund. The
United States Agency for International Development
has come up with a programme whereby it will take an
initial 10,000 - 2,000 a month - to give them basic
skills and then put them out repairing roads, repairing
bridges, et cetera.

We have also engaged the Liberian business
community. I personally wrote letters to the whole
entrepreneurial infrastructure, including, for example,
Firestone. I said, "You now need to take 300, 400 or
500 young people into an apprentice programme. You
need to teach them how to do business". We are doing
the same thing with the merchants within Liberia itself.
All of those things are in process.

Our relationships with our contiguous neighbours
are excellent. I can tell you candidly - I want to put
this on record - that we owe a great debt to the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) for its
strong support during our start-up phase. Many of our
personnel came from UNAMSIL. Much of the
equipment I have - the Bailey bridges, generators and
logistics support - came from that Mission. We have
had regular meetings.

You need to know that we have exchange
programmes - military and civilian - with other
missions, both in Sierra Leone and Cote d'Ivoire, and
with the liaison officer in Guinea. I have French
officers on my staff from Cote d'Ivoire. My people are
in Cote d'Ivoire, as well. We have the same
relationship with our colleagues in UNAMSIL. I can
tell you - I hope that I am correct - that as far as I
know, as of today we have seen no major movement of
weapons. That is, we patrol by air. Members of the
sanctions Committee were out there themselves. They
also monitored timber cutting; they monitored gold and
diamond mining. We have found no abuses to date in
that respect. We are watching the situation very
carefully, because the rumours are obviously ongoing.

Besides the numbers that you have in your folder
on weapons taken in, there is a whole separate category
that we are also collecting. Through informants, with a
bag or two of rice and a little money, sizeable weapons
caches are coming in. In Lofa county three weeks ago,
80 millimetre mortars and several hundred rounds of
ammunition were brought in by an informant. We do
not tally that, because it does not relate to a specific
combatant - it is a cache coming in.

Once the majority of the weapons are in our

hands we will have - and we have already started on
this - a very intensive programme to find out where
the other weapons might be. As you know, in the DDR
programme we have basically hired - they are on our
payroll - 48 of the generals from Liberians United for
Reconciliation and Democracy (LURD), the Movement
for Democracy in Liberia (MODEL) and the former
Taylor faction. They actually work with us. So when
we say to General Cobra, "Please bring 250 personnel
to this road junction tomorrow morning", they show
up. The reason for doing that is that we want to
maintain command and control for as long as we can
over the belligerents out there. What we do not want is
for the system to break down, with nobody any longer
in charge.

So that implies what all of you have said: quick
disarmament and quick demobilization, working with
the local commanders who still maintain discipline.

As for the question about the future Liberian
defence structure, that is something that, ultimately, the
Liberian Government and its own people will have to
decide. My own view is simple: Liberia does need a
defence structure. What should it be - an expanded
State Border Service, a national army? The first
question to ask - speaking from 35 years as a general
officer - is, "What is the mission of this army?" That
is the first question. That then defines the budget,
which defines how many personnel you have and what
kind of weapons you can buy. Ideally, Liberia does
need something on the border to control illegal
migration, smuggling, et cetera. Also, when you are
working in three eight-hour shifts doing something
constructive you are not out plotting coups somewhere.

Secondly, if the military is structured properly, it
can also be an instrument for nation-building, where
for the first six months you do reading and writing and
people are brought together. The second six months
you learn a basic skill - whether driving, refrigeration
repair, fork-lift operating, it does not matter. The you
do some military service, and then you return to
wherever you came from. And two or three years from
now, when you meet somewhere, what do you have in
common? The commonality is your military experience
together, which binds and heals nations and breaks
down ethnicity.

So those are the things that we are looking at.
Again I would like to thank the Government of the
United States in this case, which is taking the lead and
hopefully will eventually provide funding for a future
Liberian defence structure. But ultimately it is up to the
Government of Liberia to decide what it needs and
what it wants.

Lastly, on the issue of sanctions, to me - and
perhaps because I am a former military person I see
things rather simply - sanctions were put in place to
penalize the previous Government for egregious
wrongs. That Government has gone; a new
Government is in place. If that new Government can
demonstrate the transparency and the accountability
that you desire, then ultimately we have to say "Yes,
sanctions should be lifted". If you do not, you deprive
it of the very revenue source that it needs to build a
State. Then we, collectively, wind up paying the bill,
which ultimately Liberia could sustain if it had the
revenue resources, from at least timber and some of the
other things that are needed.

So I would ask you to look at that. I understand
your concerns. It is a question of transparency and
control. Does the money flow into a central bank
account? Is there accountability? All of that. But if that
can be demonstrated, then I do not think that we have
any other recourse but to give the Government of
Liberia the tools that it needs to meet the future.

I hope that answers most of the questions.

