Mr. Nsanze (Burundi) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for having
organized this informational meeting regarding my
country. We would like to reiterate our gratitude to the
Council for having selected Burundi as one of the first
beneficiaries of the services of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which has been operational since 2006
and whose overall encouraging mid-term report has
just been presented to the Council by the representative
of Sweden. We in Burundi have already begun to
consider the assessment indicators for the
implementation of the Strategic Framework for
Peacebuilding, which take into account the
recommendations made during the assessment meeting
that took place on 23 June 2008.

My delegation would like to pay heartfelt tribute
to Norway for the efforts of Mr. Johan Lovald, its
former Permanent Representative to the United
Nations, who carried out his duties in an outstanding
manner. The results of his work are Visible both here
and in the field. He will be remembered by everyone
who witnessed him work so methodically and with
unwavering dedication.

I should also like to take this opportunity to
warmly thank Sweden, which has graciously agreed to
inherit responsibility from its sister country, Norway.
That is a clear sign of friendship for my country, for
which we are very grateful. We wish Sweden every
success; we are prepared to work together to achieve
results of which both our countries can be proud.

The assessment of the work under way for two
years now in my country has shown us what has been
accomplished on the road that we have travelled thus
far, which has been short, and that which still lies
ahead, which will be very long. However, since it is
not customary to speak of conclusions with regard to
national policy and economy, but rather to speak of
progress achieved, which is easier, allow me to briefly
sketch out the present situation for the Council,
focusing on the implementation of the priority
peacebuilding plan in my country.

In terms of good governance, which is a vast
subject, and, more specifically, democratic governance,
a great deal has been accomplished, with various ups
and downs. Often, we had to hold our breath,
particularly when institutions found themselves at a
standstill. Today, parliament is functioning normally,
and the Government is less divided. The party in
power, the Conseil national pour la defense de la
democratie-Forces pour la defense de la democratic
(CNDD-FDD), has been rebuilt. It has once again
taken up its role as the unquestioned leader at the helm
of the country. The opposition is playing its role as
well, without, however, being able to endanger
democratic institutions, as we have observed over the
past few months.

I would even say that a great step has been taken.
During the past week, a workshop was held on the
framework for dialogue among the political parties.
The workshop was held in Gitega, in the centre of the
country, from 18 to 22 August. For the first time in our
eventful journey of the past 15 years, a genuine and
frank dialogue took place. The workshop involved the
participation of 34 political parties, who freely
gathered there. Participation in the workshop was
active and enthusiastic. The participants requested that
the framework become an ongoing framework for
dialogue among the political parties. The workshop
even proposed terms of reference in the event the
framework for dialogue did in fact become permanent.

The political parties are together committing
themselves to urgently deal with amendments for legal
texts, the Constitution, the law on political parties,
including the code of conduct, the electoral code, the
law on communities and other laws that may be of
interest to the citizens of Burundi. In addition, they
intend to update the status of the opposition and even
to review - and therefore re-write - the history of the
country in order to make it inclusive of all citizens. To
sum up, the workshop laid down the foundations for a
harmonious vision of a future that can reassure citizens
and also ensure that the elections of 2010 will take
place in a climate of social and political tranquillity.

The major party missing at this forum was the
Parti pour la liberaton du peuple hutu-Forces nationales
de liberation (PALIPEHUTU-FNL), for obvious
reasons: it has not yet been recognized as a political
party. Allow me here to dwell for a moment on that
case, which is of particular interest to us. As everyone
is well aware, the leaders of the PALIPEHUTU-FNL
returned to the country last May. The head of the
movement, Agathon Rwasa, was one of the guests of
honour as we celebrated the forty-sixth anniversary of
national independence on 1 July 2008. The
negotiations that began in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania,
continued in South Africa. Faithful to his commitment,
President Pierre Nkurunziza, on 18 August 2008,

08-4905]

received the leader of the PALIPEHUTU-FNL
movement. The mediator, Charles Nqakula, and his
deputy, Ambassador Kingsley Mamabolo, were
involved in the discussion. It was agreed that the
President of the Republic would meet the leader of the
PALIPEHUTU-FNL whenever necessary, so that all
issues would be resolved through dialogue. All of the
parties to mediation will be involved at each meeting,
so that appropriate responses can be found to all issues.

To step up the implementation of the ceasefire
agreement, the President of the Republic, Pierre
Nkurunziza, signed on that same day decree number
100/134 of 18 August 2008, providing legal status for
the dissidents of the PALIPEHUTU-FNL movement
who deserted after the signing of the ceasefire on
7 September 2006. That means that the issue of those
fighters who left before the FNL was at the negotiating
table and who are now regrouped at the sites of Randa
and Bulumata, a total of 3,321 individuals, will not be
treated any differently from the issue of the other
fighters, who are currently being regrouped, since they
are all members of the same movement, even if there
has been discord among them.

In order to continue the implementation of the
ceasefire agreement, the President of the Republic
signed decree number 100/136 of 19 August 2008,
creating a technical commission for the verification of
the status of combatant for those dissidents who have
left the PALIPEHUTU-FNL movement of Randa and
Burumata. That commission is an ad hoc technical
team that will be working under the supervision of the
National Commission for Demobilization, Reinsertion
and Reintegration. The mandate of the technical team
lasts 12 weeks, starting from the date of the entry into
force of the decree. That means that, three months from
now, the operation will come to an end.

Of course, following that, the status of combatant
will be verified for those troops that remained faithful
to Agathon Rwasa, who are currently being regrouped.
At present, there are 2,300 such fighters, who have
been regrouped, but we note that the movement is still
in the process of recruiting, in violation of the ceasefire
agreement, doubtless to achieve the exaggerated
figures that were announced at its inception.

Moreover, there are issues of a political nature
that are still outstanding. The PALIPEHUTU-FNL is
continuing to refuse to change its name, although the
constitution, in articles 77 and 78, forbids any political
entity with ethnic connotations. Article 77 states that:

"A political party consists of a non-profit
association of citizens involved in a project for a
democratic society based on national unity, with a
specific political programme and with specific
objectives, which meet the concern of serving the
general interest and providing for the prosperity
of all citizens."

Article 78 states that:

"Political parties, in their organization and
functioning, must act in accordance with
democratic principles. They must be open to all
citizens of Burundi and their national character
must also be reflected in their leadership. They
may not advocate violence, exclusion or hate in
any form whatsoever, in particular on the basis of
ethnic, regional, religious or gender affiliation."

We also note that other branches of the original
PALIPEHUTU long ago agreed to call themselves by
different names, including Parti Liberateur du Peuple
Burundais and Forces nationales de liberation-Icanzo.
In addition, PALIPEHUTU-FNL is demanding that
power he shared on a 50-50 basis, which is completely
unrealistic. Here too, negotiations must be conducted
in strict compliance with the constitution.

In any case, the delays observed in the
cantonment of combatants and the demands made in
the political negotiations must be monitored to prevent
further delays with respect to the programme of action
adopted on 23 February 2008 at Cape Town, South
Africa, which sets 31 December 2008 as the deadline
for integrating the PALIPEHUTU-FNL into State
institutions.

Therefore, it is important to stress once again
that, more than ever before, Burundi needs the
international community's support and understanding.
First of all, we need understanding because solutions to
problems of a political and military nature are not
always found overnight. There are stages that must be
gone through, lest we find ourselves putting the cart
before the horse, which can only lead to other
problems. The President of the Republic and his
Government are doing everything possible to ensure
that the negotiations with the PALIPEHUTU-FNL
succeed, but they require the international community's
support so that the PALIPEHUTU-FNL does not
continue to engage in polemics or set traps at a time
when the population as a whole aspires to peace and
development.

The second track of the strategic peacebuilding
plan concerns strengthening the rule of law within the
security forces. To quote from the Strategic Framework
for Peacebuilding in Burundi,

"Although there have been important gains
in the improvement of security, more particularly
through the reorganization of the [army] and
the Police together with the demobilization of
over 20,000 combatants, these results alone are
not enough in a situation where ex-combatants
need to be reintegrated permanently in society
and weapons and feelings of insecurity are
widespread in society

"... [T]he security forces are not always
perceived as acting in the best interest of the
population". (PBC/J/BD1/4, annex, paras. 26-27)

Since the Strategic Framework was drafted, some
progress has certainly been made, but new problems
have also emerged. At that time, demobilization did not
yet involve PALIPEHUTU-FNL combatants. Today,
demobilization of those combatants is imperative,
while the demobilization of former members of the
Burundian armed forces and former combatants of the
Conseil national pour la defense de la democratie-
Forces pour la defense de la democratie has not yet
been completed.

Moreover, those who are already demobilized
represent a potential insecurity factor, because they are
having difficulties reintegrating into society with the
scant resources provided to them. The Government
continues to proclaim loud and clear that the
demobilized will be a time bomb as long as their living
standards have not been improved.

The World Bank recently highlighted the extreme
poverty in which disabled demobilized persons waiting
for housing to be built for them are languishing. It
expects a new demobilization action plan from the
Government by next month to that it can readjust its
contribution. However, as noted earlier, demobilization
is one thing and reintegration into society is another.
Thus, Burundi needs support in this area from its
bilateral and multilateral partners, because the
demobilization process will be beneficial only if it is
completed.

I shall now discuss the strengthening of justice,
the promotion of human rights, national reconciliation
and the fight against impunity. Here, the principal
problems are strengthening the capacities of the
Ministry of Justice, ensuring the functioning of
effective transitional justice, establishing an
independent human rights commission and launching a
truth and reconciliation commission. In all those areas,
certain donors have already been active, including the
Peacebuilding Fund. But the needs remain great, so
other donors must be considered if we wish to see
those projects completed.

Another urgent task is managing the land issue.
The traditional Burundian land ownership system
seems to have reached its limits. The pressure on the
land is such that more than 80 per cent of the cases
before the courts are linked to land disputes. The
settling of scores is rife and is the root cause of a
growing crime rate. A reform of the land code is
planned, but its implementation will require funds that
the Government cannot collect on its own.

In conclusion, we can state that the Government
and the people of Burundi are making remarkable
efforts that deserve to be supported. One need only
travel around the country to see the primary and
secondary school buildings under construction, not to
mention other initiatives such as the reforestation of
denuded mountains. In the area of public sector
management, some progress has been made, so that the
country has reached a decisive turning point. The
World Bank has just decided to suspend 92 per cent of
the country's debt, but that is not enough. The country
needs solid budgetary support and substantial
assistance so that reconstruction and development do
not remain mere words.

Thus, we call on Burundi's development partners,
in particular those that made pledges during the May
2006 round table, to honour their commitments. To
date, just 30 per cent of the funds promised have been
disbursed, and only within the framework of
peacebuilding. However, the funds pledged for the
financing of the socio-economic recovery are still not
forthcoming.

We are most grateful to the United Nations,
which, through the Peacebuilding Fund, is supporting
17 projects in the country, and we encourage the
United Nations to finance other ones as well. We are

08-4905]
also grateful for the assistance that the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund have promised us.

We thank all those bilateral and multilateral
partners who have shown us their understanding and
assisted us. We are asking them to do even more, so
that our people can benefit from the dividends of
peace.
08-49051

