Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): Over the
last three years the Government and people of Haiti have
made progress in building an inclusive and representative
democracy. Institutions such as the Haitian Parliament and
municipal governments have developed into independent
bodies. Political violence no longer threatens Haitians in
their daily lives, and today Haiti enjoys a free press.
Fundamental economic reforms are beginning, including the
first privatization of a State-owned industry. In short, the
foundation for broad-based growth is being laid.

The United Nations - through the United Nations
Transition Mission in Haiti (UNTMIH), the United Nations
Development Programme and the International Civilian
Mission in Haiti - is playing an essential role in this
process. As a sign of the progress to date, the remaining
United Nations military element can be withdrawn.

Today, the Haitian National Police includes over 6,000
officers who are present in all nine of Haiti's provinces. At
the request of President Rene Preval and at the
recommendation of the Secretary-General, we act today to
ensure its further development. The continued growth of the
Haitian National Police from a few young and
inexperienced recruits to an effective, independent police
force is crucial to Haiti's future. The creation of the United
Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH) to
assist in mentoring and training the Haitian National Police
will build upon a process already well begun. My
Government commends all those who have contributed to
MIPONUH's predecessor, UNTMIH, particularly the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Enrique ter Horst. The many nations that
have participated in UNTMIH's work can take pride in
their accomplishment. My Government remains
committed to supporting peaceful political and economic
development in Haiti. To this end, we are providing
helicopters, a medical unit and up to 50 civilian police for
MIPONUH, in addition to nearly $100 million in bilateral
economic assistance this year. We will also consider other
ways to support MIPONUH.

The Government of Haiti is fast approaching full
responsibility for public safety. But despite the progress,
obstacles remain. The Haitian National Police still needs
help in dealing with ruthless gangs, drug traffickers and
political groups that seek to manipulate the police for
their own ends. The presence of a civilian police mission
will allow Haiti's police to continue its growth in
competence for another year.

As the Secretary-General's report makes clear, we
must not close our eyes to the problems that persist. The
efforts of the international community come against a
backdrop of deep division within Haiti over the course
and the pace of political and economic change. There, as
elsewhere, democracy remains a work in progress. If the
Haitian people are to see a brighter future, they must
receive the necessary tools and assistance from the
international community. Creation of MIPONUH will do
just that, and for that reason the United States strongly
supports its establishment.

