Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): Let me to join others in
thanking His Excellency President Mkapa, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haile
Menkerios and Ambassador Mahmoud Kane for their
illuminating and inspiring statements today. Their
invaluable input throughout this historic process has
without a doubt contributed to the successful outcome
of the South Sudan referendum. I would also like to
welcome the representatives of the Governments of the
Sudan and South Sudan and thank them indeed for
their contributions to this meeting.

On behalf of my Government, I want to welcome
the final result of the South Sudan referendum, which
represents the true and valid wish of the people of
South Sudan, expressed in a free, fair and transparent
process.

In that connection, we want to once again
commend President Omer Al-Bashir and First Vice-
President Salva Kiir for leading the challenging
process to a successful conclusion. Their statements of
mutual support and timely acceptance of the outcome
of the referendum, reaffirmed here today by their
representatives, demonstrate their exemplary courage,
leadership, goodwill and dedication to the peace
process. The people of the Sudan and the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan also deserve our
commendation.

The announcement and acceptance of the
referendum results by all parties in the Sudan have
paved the way for a new State to emerge through a
peaceful process, and we look forward to welcoming
South Sudan into the United Nations and African

Union families in July. We hope that the parties in the
Sudan will seize the current moment to pursue sincere
negotiations on the remaining CPA and post-
referendum issues. It is possible, in our view, for both
parties, inspired by the success of the referendum to
work tirelessly between now and July to complete the
key outstanding tasks under the CPA.

We share the concerns expressed by Member
States today over the status of Abyei. We believe that it
is necessary to reach workable compromises on the
Abyei question, the North-South border, popular
consultations in Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan
states, and security arrangements between the North
and South. Undoubtedly, the successful determination
of these issues will engender a stable partnership
between North and South Sudan in the long term.

There is no doubt that South Sudan will face
formidable challenges on the road to achieving a stable
and effective Government. Indeed, the challenges of
State-building will be exacerbated by the rising
expectations of independence and statehood. The truth,
however, is that attaining economic, political and
social transformation is always an arduous process.
The leaders of South Sudan must therefore stay
focused on and remain committed to developing a
transparent and inclusive political process that
incorporates all segments, guarantees freedoms and
protects all people, particularly women and children.

We welcome in this regard First Vice-President
Salva Kiir's convening of a constitutional panel to
review the South's legal institutions. Nigeria
recognizes that Southern Sudanese leaders cannot
overcome the major challenges facing the territory on
their own. Now more than ever, this Council and the
international community must stand in solidarity with
Southern Sudan. Our solidarity will indeed be put to
the test in the quality and quantity of the assistance that
we provide to the Government and people of South
Sudan.
This Friday's Security Council debate on the
interdependence between security and development
will provide an opportunity for the Council to clarify
its role in that regard. It is important for the Council to
remain as united, resolute and committed as it has been
in the past. We implore the African Union, the
European Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, neighbouring countries and other
bilateral partners to join hands in assisting Southern
Sudan.

On Darfur, we welcome Joint Chief Mediator
Djibrill Bassole's extensive consultations within the
Sudan and in the region. We also welcome the
substantial progress in the Doha talks, and commend
the Joint Chief Mediator for his perseverance and the
Qatar Government for its enduring support. Once
again, we urge the Justice and Equality Movement, the
Sudan Liberation Movement-Abdul Wahid and the
Government of the Sudan to seize the opportunity to
engage fully in the Doha talks without preconditions.
Nigeria firmly believes that an internal political
process is indispensable to inclusiveness and
consensus-building in intercommunal relations in
Darfur. We therefore welcome the prospect of an open
and credible Darfur-based political process to support
and strengthen the Doha talks.

We would like to seize this opportunity to express
once again our unalloyed support for the work of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) under the leadership of Mr. Ibrahim
Gambari. I should note here that UNAMID is working
in a challenging environment in Darfur.

Nigeria takes this opportunity to reiterate its
commitment to the Sudanese peace process. We believe
that our collective support will be crucial as the people
of the Sudan, in the North and the South alike, make
the necessary adjustments and transform their fortunes.

