Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Madame Foreign
Minister, congratulations are owed to you and to
Colombia upon your assumption of the presidency of
the Council. It was Bangladesh's privilege to work
closely with Colombia, in general, and with my good
friend Ambassador Alfonso Valdivieso, in particular,
during our own membership on the Council last year.
We appreciate your invitation to take part in the open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The United Nations was established to save people
from the scourge of war. The responsibility to accord
such protection lies with all of us. But the onus, under
the Charter, lies indisputably with the Security Council.

In the past decade, armed conflicts claimed more
than 2.5 million civilian lives. Some 31 million were
displaced. The basic norms of our civilization were
assailed. The international humanitarian laws were
grossly and systematically violated. There were
genocides, war crimes and crimes against humanity.

There have been cases of ethnic cleansing, mass
murder, mutilation, abduction and unlawful detention.
Children have been recruited forcefully, drugged,
dehumanized and used as killing machines. Women and
girls have been subjected to humiliation of all kinds.
Rape has been used as a weapon of war. The kind of
protection due to be provided was clearly not available.
It is not too much to ask, therefore, that protection of
civilians remains high on the Council's agenda.

The legal framework for protection has been
progressively established by the Council in its
resolutions and presidential statements since 1999. The
report of the Secretary-General before us - the third
on the subject - presents a multi-faceted policy
agenda. They fall into three areas: humanitarian access,
separation of civilians and armed elements and the rule
of law, justice and reconciliation.

A roadmap proposed for protection comprises,
inter alia, a legal framework, organizational capacities,

prevention, implementation of sanctions and
prohibitions, inclusion of protection in peacekeeping
mandates and ending the commercial exploitation of
conflicts.
The Security Council will have our support in
elaborating the policy framework, as well as an agenda
for action. To be effective, such an agenda would,
however, need to be more than an ensemble of
palliatives. Addressing the consequences is important.
More important, perhaps, is the need to focus on the
causes.

Let me roll the map out on the table. This map of
failure of protection, of failure of prevention -
Somalia, Srebrenica, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Angola
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We have
reports on at least two of them - Srebrenica and
Rwanda - and we are aware of the findings and
recommendations. The question the Security Council
would be invited to ask itself is what went wrong in
each of those cases?

The conclusion of the Carlsson report is clear.
Rwanda was a preventable genocide. It required a
reinforcement of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Rwanda (UNAMIR). The Security Council,
instead, reduced the Mission's size from 2,500 to 270,
following the assassination of 10 peacekeepers.
Srebrenica presents a similar scenario. Was it a failure
to appreciate the imminent catastrophe? Or a failure of
analysis? A failure of democratic decision-making? A
failure to assume responsibility? The Council must be
well aware that the answers lie in a combination of all
these.

The ultimate success in Sierra Leone
demonstrates the validity of arguments in favour of the
Council's determination, the adequacy of the
peacekeeping mandate, physical involvement of the
major Powers or a directly concerned permanent
member. On the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Council has been slow to assume a substantial role
and responsibility, in the full knowledge of the
consequences of the war and the magnitude of human
suffering. When the Council authorized a peacekeeping
mission, it was with only a limited observation
mandate and limited strength, while foreign forces
fought deep inside the Congolese territory and the rebel
militias continued to wreak havoc on civilian lives.

We welcome the Council's resolve to pursue
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
the Great Lakes region. Bangladesh remains committed
to making a further contribution to the United Nations
Mission there. We have always argued in favour of
strong United Nations involvement in the resolution of
conflict. We continue to believe that the responsibility
of the United Nations, especially with respect to
maintaining peace and security, should not be
constrained by lack of troops or by budgetary
considerations.

The Secretary-General's report cites international
terrorism as a major threat in the context of protection.
Unresolved conflicts and the early withdrawal or
failure of peace-building efforts have proved extremely
dangerous. Abandoned, Afghanistan became a theatre
of proxy wars. It also became a bastion of international
terrorists. The Security Council remained stymied for
too long with regard to addressing the crisis. We are all
aware of the horrendous, resulting tragedies.

In the Middle East, civilian casualties are daily
news, as are the killings in occupied Palestine and the
toll of suicide bombings. The Secretary-General speaks
of punitive measures directed at civilians, the denial of
humanitarian access and a mounting humanitarian
crisis. International law, including international
humanitarian law, has universal validity. They must be
applied in this case also. The Security Council must
ensure it.

It is appropriate that the Secretary-General's
report should include, as it indeed does, commercial
exploitation of conflicts in the context of protection.
The arms bazaar, of which Nobel Laureate Oscar Arias
warned us a decade ago, has flourished in every
conflict zone in the past decade.

The Council imposed sanctions and prohibitions,
albeit without any effective implementation or
monitoring mechanism. There have recently been some
welcome changes. Effective implementation of
sanctions on conflict diamonds crippled both Jonas
Savimbi and Foday Sankoh. The Angola monitoring
mechanism has yielded decisive results. The lifting
yesterday of the sanctions against the Uniao Nacional
para a Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA) bears
witness to what a determined and unified Council can
achieve. In the case of Liberia, results are yet to be
evidenced. In the case of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, expert panel reports on the illegal
exploitation of the country's natural resources - both
cause and consequence of the protracted war - await
concrete measures.

For real change to occur in these situations, there
needs to be political commitment, the commitment of
the major players, including regional Powers, and, of
course, of all of us, the international community.

