Mr. Townley (United States of America): I would
like to thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court for her briefing on her Office's efforts
to pursue accountability for atrocity crimes committed
in Libya.

Stability in Libya through unity and leadership is
critical for many reasons, including to ensuring that
human rights violations and abuses can be meaningfully
addressed. That includes addressing reports of arbitrary
detention, extrajudicial killings and the exploitation of
migrants. We must work diligently to end impunity for
such violations and abuses in Libya, since that in turn
can reinforce the rule of law and foster stability.

Political reconciliation among all Libyan parties
remains key to achieving peace and realizing the goal
of a Libya that is stable, democratic and free from the
violence that continues to cause great human suffering
throughout the country. We are encouraged by the recent
meetings of Libyan leaders in Abu Dhabi and Rome,
as well as by the international community's ongoing
support for the Libyan Political Agreement framework,
and we urge Libyans on all sides to work actively to
implement it. As Ambassador Haley told the Council
only a few weeks ago (see S/PV.7927), we need all the
Libyan parties and the country's leadership to work
together to rebuild the country, engage in dialogue and
find a compromise. The road ahead will be challenging,
but the ongoing discord and conflict will have far graver
consequences for the Libyan people.

Moreover, violent extremism flourishes where
instability is prevalent. We remain deeply concerned
about the continuing terrorist threat in Libya, which
raises the potential risk of further atrocities. Although
we are encouraged by the recent successes in driving
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham out of Sirte
and Benghazi, we must ensure that terrorist groups
do not have the opportunity to establish themselves
and regain power in the absence of strong Libyan
institutions and leadership. The conflict in and around
Tamanhint airfield reminds us that the risk of division
and escalating violence in Libya requires our urgent
attention. At the same time, we must remain mindful
of the importance of complying with international law
during counter-terrorism operations.

The United States remains dedicated to pursuing
accountability for violations and abuses committed
during the 2011 revolution. In that regard, we appreciate
the continuing efforts to bring SaifAl-IslamAl-Qadhafi,
accused of helping to orchestrate the murder and
persecution ofhundreds of civilians, to justice. We urge
all the relevant Libyan actors to facilitate the transfer
of Al-Qadhafi to The Hague so that he can stand trial
for his alleged crimes against humanity. We welcome
the reports of Libya's continued cooperation with the
Prosecutor, consistent with the Council's calls for such
cooperation and Libya's obligations under resolution
1970 (2011). We have also taken note of the Court's
recent decision to lift the seal on an arrest warrant for
Mr. Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled, who is accused of
being responsible for war crimes and crimes against
humanity in Libya. We stress the importance ofworking
to ensure accountability for such atrocity crimes and
thereby sending a vital deterrent signal in the midst of
ongoing violence that those who commit such crimes in
Libya will ultimately face justice.

The United States remains committed to supporting
the Libyan people as they struggle for peace, prosperity
and democratic governance. Accountability for crimes
in Libya will be key to enduring success in that
endeavour. We look forward to continued collaboration
with the Council in order to realize a better future for
all Libyans.

