The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

We would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for presenting the biannual report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2018/602). We also note the
effective work being done by Mr. Karel van Oosterom,
Permanent Representative of the Netherlands, as
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). We would also like to thank Mr. Vale de Almeida
for his briefing.

We fully agree with the Secretary-General in
his report when he states that he deeply regrets
the withdrawal of the United States from the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and points
out that issues not within the scope of the agreement
should not be used as a pretext for dismantling it. In
that regard, we would like to recall that the Russian
Federation has frequently taken the floor in the Council
to condemn the irresponsible attempts by the United
States to torpedo the JCPOA and has expressed the
hope that reason would nonetheless prevail and issues
of global security and stability would no longer be held
hostage to Washington's internal political processes.
Now, following the withdrawal of the United States
from the agreement, we are obliged to conclude that our
calls went unheeded and that the unique potential of the
JCPOA, which has not been allowed to function at full
strength, is under threat. Furthermore, the step taken
by the American side will do serious harm both to the
nuclear non-proliferation regime and to the interests of
security in the Middle East.

Considering the significance that the unilateral
actions by the United States have for the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA, we were
astonished that the report mentions it only in passing.
It is simply unfathomable that it was possible to draft
a document entitled "Implementation of resolution
2231 (2015)" with no mention whatever of the fact that
Washington's reimposition of unilateral sanctions is
a direct violation not only of its obligations under the
JCPOA, but also of resolution 2231 (2015).

It is also striking that in referencing the resolution's
call to all Member States to support the implementation
of the JCPOA and refrain from actions that could
undermine it, the report completely ignores the public
statements by the leadership of the United States and
a number of other countries that fly in the face of that
position. We are surprised at the complete absence in
the report of any mention that Tehran has started a
dispute-settlement process under the JCPOA related to
the irresponsible actions of the United States, which the
Security Council and the Secretary-General were duly
informed in a letter of 11 May from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Iran. In general, the report is overtly
unbalanced and more like a collection of unproven
accusations about Iran than an attempt to paint an
objective picture of the situation concerning the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), an approach
that is all the more incomprehensible considering that
none of the examples of Tehran's alleged violations of the
resolution have been confirmed, owing to insufficient
information and the lack of a firm body of proof.

We are once again compelled to point out that it is
unacceptable for the Secretariat to carry out any so-
called investigations ofpotential violations ofresolution
2231 (2015) without a clear mandate from the Security
Council, as provided for in paragraph 6 of the note by
the President dated 16 January 2016 (S/2016/44). We
again emphasize that Secretariat staff do not have the
qualifications or expertise for analysing and evaluating
missile systems or conventional weapons. In our view,
therefore, the technical information in the report on the
study of the missile components in Saudi Arabia that
were fired from Yemen proves nothing and is simply
groundless, while there was no independent expert
analysis of the Secretariat's conclusions. On top of that,
the very fact and the timeline of Iran's alleged transfers
of the ballistic-missile systems or their components to
the Houthis have not been established, as the report
emphasizes. The report therefore indicates an absence
of any of the elements that constitute a violation. The
same applies to the Secretariat's illegitimate inspections
in Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates.

In the absence of any facts pointing to a violation
of the requirements of resolution 2231 (2015), the need
for the inclusion in the report of a reference to the
facts of the participation of Iran's Defence Industries
Organization in a foreign arms exhibition in Iraq,
or of a memorandum of understanding between the
Iranian construction company Khatam al-Anbiya
and the Syrian authorities, raises serious questions.
We must continue to insist that the report should not
contain information from open sources or references
to unverified or unverifiable information provided by
individual countries, especially when it is not even being
brought to the attention of the members of the Security
Council. We believe such practices are completely
unacceptable and consider them malicious attempts to
create a groundlessly negative climate around Iran by
circumventing the Council.

In connection with all of this, we would like to
remind the Secretariat yet again that paragraph 7 of
the note by the President of 16 January 2016 provides
for semi-annual reports on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) as a whole, not its individual
parts. We hope that future reports will be prepared
strictly in line with the existing mandate and that all
activities that run counter to the Council's decisions, in
particular the entry into force of the unilateral measures
announced by the United States on 8 May, will receive
due attention.

At this point, the only way of preserving the
agreement is the conscientious implementation by all
the remaining States participating in it ofthe obligations
they voluntarily undertook. In that context, I would like
to note that there is clear evidence in the Secretary-
General's report ofIran's inarguable compliance with its
commitments under the JCPOA, which has consistently
been confirmed not just by the International Atomic
Energy Agency but also by the Secretariat, which, as
can be seen from the report, has no verified proof to
the contrary.

In conclusion, I would like to state that the Russian
Federation remains committed to the unconditional
and comprehensive implementation of the provisions
of resolution 2231 (2015) and the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action. Despite the withdrawal of the United
States, the implementation of the JCPOA by all of its
remaining participants is currently continuing in full.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Germany.

