Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): First
of all, on behalf of Canada, allow me to extend my
deepest condolences to the families of the victims
and the Government and the people of Burkina Faso
following the recent terrorist attacks. We express our
full solidarity with Burkina Faso.

(spoke in English)

I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
meeting. We also thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix for his comprehensive annual briefing on the
reform of United Nations peacekeeping operations. We
stand ready to continue to support him in implementing
the Council's direction.

I would also like to take five seconds to congratulate
my colleague of Pakistan, who just made six excellent
key points. I would like to commend her for her
precision. I am not as precise in my comments but I
will do my best.

United Nations peacekeeping serves us all. It
serves the rules-based international order. It serves
States, regions and the international community as a
whole. But most of all, it serves the communities and
people directly affected by armed conflict. Effectively
and efficiently serving them is unquestionably the
ultimate objective of the Organization. As was said,
Canada chairs the Working Group of the Whole of the
General Assembly Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations (C-34), in full support of that goal.

As a subsidiary body of the General Assembly,
the C-34 is uniquely mandated to review peacekeeping
operations in all their aspects. Moreover, that
United Nations Committee includes troop- and
police-contributing countries and major financial
contributors alike, as well as host Governments. It is
precisely that diversity of experience that enriches the
Committee's capacity to contribute to our collective
understanding of United Nations peacekeeping
operations and how they are evolving.

As Chair, we have been privileged to lead the
negotiations on the C-34's annual report. In that capacity,
we have seen first-hand the seriousness with which
Committee members approach their deliberations.
While many may dwell on differences of view, we are
struck by a clear, common desire to improve the way
peacekeeping operations are designed and delivered.

The Security Council, of course, determines when
and where a United Nations peace operation will be
deployed. Council members determine the range of
tasks assigned to United Nations operations. They
also set troop ceilings in support of those tasks. Those
are perhaps among their greatest responsibilities. As
United Nations peacekeeping operations become more
complex, more multifaceted and more dangerous, they
stand to benefit from taking the views of the C-34 into
account. Like Council members, C-34 members also
understand how decisions taken here affect operations
on the ground. After all, their nationals are the ones
seeking to implement those decisions. That is what
gives the Committee its credibility. That is what makes
its views so vital.

This past summer, following nearly three months
of intersessional consultations, the C-34 reached
an agreement in principle on a new structure for its
annual report. Motivated by a shared, cross-regional
desire to improve its output, the Committee chose to
use the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping
initiative as the basis of its annual report. C-34
members also committed to putting an emphasis on
reaching agreement on clear, concrete and specific
recommendations in its negotiations.

I would like to express my thanks to Nigeria,
Chair of the Special Committee, as well as to the other
members of the Bureau - Argentina, Egypt, Japan and
Poland - for their support during the intersessional
review. On behalf of the Bureau, I would also like
to thank all C-34 delegations for their constructive
engagement. Our success this summer was based
on a genuine openness to change and a tremendous
display of good faith on the part of all delegations. We
are confident that the outcome will produce a better
product that is accessible to all.

(spoke in French)

Allow me to add a few brief remarks in my national
capacity. Beyond our work on the C-34, Canada
remains firmly committed in support ofUnited Nations
peacekeeping. For that reason, we pay all of our United
Nations dues in full, on time and without condition.
We have done so consistently every year since the
establishment of the United Nations, including 2019. I
am pleased to report that we have already paid each
of our assessed contributions for all United Nations
peacekeeping operations in their entirety for this year
as well.

In addition, our commitment was also recently
demonstrated through the provision of an air task force
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. The Canadian contingent
undertook 11 forward aeromedical evacuations over the
course of that deployment, treating some 40 casualties
in what has proved to be a uniquely complex operating
environment. I am especially proud that we worked
hand in hand with our Romanian partners to ensure a
smooth transition.

Canada is also dedicated to supporting United
Nations operations by providing innovative
contributions and filling critical capability gaps. That
includes ensuring that the United Nations has reliable,
flexible and predictable access to the kind of high-
end military capabilities required to support peace
and security in areas affected by conflict. Our C-130
plane in Entebbe just completed its first rotation of
tactical airlift support for United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Africa. More flights are planned. It is
important to note that this innovation represented the
first time that such equipment has been made available
for United Nations peacekeeping operations. We must
continue to innovate in that manner so as to ensure
flexibility in peacekeeping operations.

The Council has always acknowledged that
gender equality plays a critical role in creating lasting
solutions to global challenges, including by advancing
the women and peace and security agenda. Translating
that understanding into meaningful, measurable action
can be hard. We need to better learn from one another
on what works best, why and how. To that end, we
contributed to the launch of the Elsie Initiative Fund
to help increase the number of uniformed women
in United Nations peacekeeping with an initial
contribution of $15 million. More recently, Prime
Minister Trudeau appointed Ms. Jacqueline O'Neill
as Canada's first Ambassador for Women, Peace and
Security. Ms. O'Neill will be here in New York later this
week at the invitation of the President of the General
Assembly for high-level events on women in power and
the culture of peace. I encourage all Member States to
take part in what promise to be stimulating discussions.

Increasing the number of women police officers
and military personnel at the heart of United Nations
missions is a top priority for Canada and for Prime
Minister Trudeau. Another priority for us is to address
the plight of child soldiers, which is why Canada is so
proud to have launched the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers. Over 100 countries have
already adhered to the Principles, and I thank them on
Canada's behalf.

A readiness to learn and to share, a proven interest
in innovation, a steady commitment to contributing
and unconditional financial reliability characterize
Canada's long-standing engagement in United Nations
peacekeeping. As highlighted by our Senegalese
colleague, we are also committed to deploying
multilingual forces. Canada has been a long-term
partner in ensuring that forces have multilingual
capabilities at their disposal. The Council can rest
assured that, if elected for the 2021-22 term, Canada
will bring this long-standing effort and dedication to
our work on the Council.
