Nana Akufo-Addo (Ghana): Ghana commends
the delegation of Greece, the League of Arab States
and you personally, Madam President, for organizing
this important meeting giving us yet another
opportunity to critically examine the options for
advancing the quest for a comprehensive, just and
durable peace in the Middle East. The tragic
consequences of the failure of previous peace
initiatives were enacted recently in Lebanon. Now that
the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) is under
way and the people of Lebanon have begun to rebuild
their country after the devastating 34-day war, we must
seize the new momentum for peace and work towards
achieving a meaningful change in the dangerous status
quo in the Middle East.

Ghana has always supported a two-State solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict that will meet the
aspirations of both peoples, alleviating the fear and
desperation that breed extremism. A sovereign and
independent democratic State of Palestine, with
structured and well-functioning institutions, will be
better placed to cooperate with Israel and guarantee the
State's long-term security.

In our assessment, the current stalemate in the
implementation of the road map serves no one's
interests. That is why we take a positive view of the
moves made by the Palestinians in their efforts to form
a Government of national unity. Such a Government
could help transform Hamas and bring it into the
political mainstream. We also welcome the outcome of
yesterday's meeting of the Quartet principals in New
York, especially the measures aimed at alleviating the
humanitarian conditions in the West Bank and Gaza.
These positive developments could be enhanced further
through the freeing of hostages and prisoners.

No one disputes that the Palestinian question is at
the core of the Middle East problem. But, in real terms,
how does that question translate into the rights and
obligations of all interested parties to the Middle East
conflict today? The international community must be
clear and consistent on these issues and be prepared to
hold both parties to their obligations.

All who genuinely believe in the vision of an
independent, viable and sovereign Palestinian State,
living side by side with Israel in peace and security,
must commit equally to the elimination of all direct
and indirect threats to the existence and security of
Israel. There can be no other path to lasting peace in
the Middle East, and we urge the parties to the conflict
to muster the courage to compromise and negotiate in
good faith for the sake of all the peoples in the region.
This is the position of the President of the Republic of
Ghana, His Excellency Mr. John Agyekum Kufuor and
his Government. It is the duty of the Security Council,
together with the Quartet, to provide the necessary
leadership.

