Mr. Foradori (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank Japan for convening this open debate on
the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of presidential note S/2006/507, the first note of the
President of the Security Council on the working methods
of the Council. I also wish to express my country's
appreciation for Japan's continued commitment to
improving transparency, inclusiveness and efficiency
in the work of the Council during its chairmanship of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Matters, both during this period and
during its previous term in 2009-2010.

Argentina has historically advocated for a more
transparent and democratic Security Council whenever
it has had the opportunity to do so. It was Argentina
that, in February 2000, during its presidency of the
Council, encouraged the adoption of presidential note
S/2000/155, in accordance with which recently elected
members were invited to participate as observers in
informal consultations during the month before the
beginning of their mandate.

More recently, Argentina was a driver and
supporter of various initiatives to achieve greater
transparency and access to the Council for the United
Nations membership as a whole, including dialogue
between the Council and countries and bodies that
are not members of the Council; consultations among
the Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries; greater involvement by
the elected members of the Council in the drafting
of Council documents; and the efforts to ensure the
continuity of the work of the subsidiary bodies of
the Council.

Argentina considers essential the regular review
of the implementation of presidential note S/2006/507
and other relevant notes aimed at identifying successful
practices and possible shortcomings, and at considering
the implementation of the necessary adjustments.
In that regard, Argentina encourages the Informal
Working Group to continue working towards a single
comprehensive document in order to consolidate and
rationalize all decisions on working methods. The
goal of having a more democratic and transparent
Security Council presupposes and requires that the
path to the Council's transformation be through the
practices I have referred to, in consultation with the
entire membership, so as to bring it about in the most
legitimate and representative way possible. That will
ensure that the process of methodological development
moves forward in a positive way, while respecting
and taking into account the expectations of the entire
international community.
As has recently been stated, what is at stake is the
Council's decision-making culture and its effectiveness,
which fully affect its performance. The updating of the
Security Council's working methods in response to the
demands of the international community, with a view to
strengthening its democratization and ensuring greater
inclusiveness, accountability and transparency, remains
an important objective, which Argentina endorses. In
that regard, Argentina reaffirms and pledges its best
efforts to contribute to this process.

Argentina endorses the principle of the non-indifference
in the internal affairs of States. We are not indifferent
in the face of violations of the basic principles of
democracy, regardless of where they occur. We want
to be consistent with that premise and those principles.
In that regard, we want point out that we are concerned
when the democratization process affects certain
bodies, for we believe that when those principles are
promoted, they should be promoted everywhere, in
every situation and throughout all entities. That is why
we believe that the Security Council is not the exception
and that it is very important to uphold the principles of
democracy in all their forms and on all occasions.

