Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to welcome you,
Mr. President, as you preside over this important
meeting. I would also like to express my congratulations
to you, Sir, on your country's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also take this opportunity to congratulate you and the
permanent delegations of Ethiopia, Italy, Kazakhstan
and Bolivia for assuming their responsibilities as
non-permanent members of the Security Council.

My delegation is interested in discussing the role of
the Security Council in maintaining international peace
and security, on the basis of the principles, objectives
and purposes of the Charter of the United nations, free
from the practices of double standards, politicization
of issues and the exacerbation of the phenomenon of
investing in terrorism as a political weapon. That
practice has been adopted by Governments of States
inside the Security Council, in an attempt to achieve
agendas that contradict the purposes of the Charter,
to justify interference in the internal affairs of other
States and violate their sovereignty and undermine
their independence and territorial integrity. Over the
past decade, that represented the gravest threat to
international peace and security, creating hotspots for
armed conflicts, extremism and terrorism. Examples
are vivid in in all of our minds.

A review of the archives of United Nations
resolutions in general, and Security Council resolutions
in particular, proves that we do not lack resolutions
or mechanisms or necessary mandates to maintain
international peace and security. Instead, we lack the
political will by the Governments of some States that
continue, along with their allies, to consider themselves
as tutors of the international Organization and
authorities superior to international law. They refuse to
abide by the provisions of the Charter and refrain from
implementing resolutions of international legitimacy.

Despite the hundreds of resolutions of the General
Assembly and the other Security Council resolutions,
the Israeli occupation of Arab territories has continued
for nearly half a century. Despite many resolutions
on counter-terrorism unanimously adopted by the
Security Council in accordance with Chapter VII of
the Charter, which have provided broad mandates,
flexible prerogatives and deterrent procedures that
were supposed to ensure the eradication of terrorism,
the scourge of terrorism is still spreading in numerous
parts of the world.

My country, Syria, is still suffering from the terrorist
war imposed upon it as the result of the failure of some
States to abide by resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014),
2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015). Foreign terrorist fighters
are still flowing in across borders. The Governments
of some States are still providing declared financial,
military and political support to terrorist groups. Those
Governments are still sponsoring the extremist terrorist
ideology by issuing fatwas for killing and destruction,
providing platforms for preachers of mutiny and callers
for hate while the wold is watching. Those Governments
are still establishing camps to train those terrorists on
their own territories, under the supervision of military
and security experts from Governments of States,
some of which are permanent members of the Security
Council, and which were mandated by the Charter to
maintain international peace and security.

I must stress that the misleading statements that
the delegations of some States made in today's meeting
about the reality of the terrorism faced by my country
are no longer heard by the international community, and
international public opinion has realized the truth about
the involvement of the Governments of those countries
in supporting armed terrorist groups and the emergence
of the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters
What we need today is to develop and activate the
work of the United Nations to ensure that it carries out
its role with integrity and seriousness as an international
body that is mandated to shoulder the responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security,
while addressing the root causes of armed conflicts,
committing to dialogue and political solutions and
avoiding the threat of the use of force in international
relations, in such a way to provide our peoples with
safe, prosperous and peaceful lives. We also need to
abide by the provisions and purposes and principles of
the Charter. We should not ignore it or manipulate its
provisions or derive from it new terms and concepts
that run counter to its provisions and are still a source
of deep controversy and disagreement among Member
States.

That is due to the hidden purposes of the
Governments of certain Member States in the use of
terms such as "violent extremism", which have been
put forward even before reaching an international
consensus on a crystal-clear legal definition of
terrorism. That is also the case for the "responsibility
to protect", which the Governments of some States are
trying to exploit to interfere in the internal affairs of
other States and violate their sovereignty. Obviously,
the term "moderate armed opposition" will not be the
last such dangerous and abnormal phrase used by their
authors to try to to deviate the United Nations from its
purposes and principles.

In conclusion, my country, Syria, is still calling on
the international community and the United Nations
to take a clear and firm position that respects the
Charter and its purposes, with regard to the use by
the Governments of some states, notably the United
States and the European Union, of unilateral economic
coercive measures as a tool to bring political pressure
to bear on certain developing countries, including
my country, thereby targeting citizens in all aspects
of their lives and whole segments of society, thereby
undermining the ability of our community to bring
about socioeconomic development. Putting an end to
such coercive measures, which are illegitimate and
coercive in nature, would in the end maintain the
effectiveness and credibility of the Organization.

