Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): As I take the floor on behalf of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea at this important debate, I would
first like to congratulate the United States Mission and
Ambassador Nikki Haley for including the important
issue of corruption on the agenda of the Security Council
for the first time. Today's debate is taking place one day
after Africa Day, on 9 September, which was celebrated
under the theme "Winning the Fight against Corruption:
A Sustainable Path to Africa's Transformation". I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, and Mr. Prendergast
for their insightful briefings, which greatly enrich
today's debate.
If we understand corruption as the act of corrupting
someone or allowing oneself to be corrupted, misusing
one's official position to obtain or grant an illegitimate
advantage, then we can say that corruption is a form of
moral turpitude and that its sphere of influence pervades
all layers, especially the civil service but also the private
business sector. Obviously, the term "corrupt" implies
a diversion of services or the results thereof, which are
generally economic, to other illegitimate recipients,
which constitutes misappropriation. Therefore, in one
way or another, it is covered by Article 26 of the Charter
of the United Nations.

Influence peddling, bribery, extortion and fraud
are some of the corrupt practices that are reflected
in actions such as giving money to public officials in
exchange for a service or the omission of their official
responsibility. Unfortunately, we are facing a scourge
that does not differentiate among States; it is found in
developed and developing countries alike. While there
may be more cases in some countries than in others, it
is a shared problem and concern for all nations of the
world - so much so that international cooperation and
the exchange of experiences and strategies in that area
are of global interest.

Although it is not their only source of financing, the
mafias, terrorists, criminal networks and mercenaries,
in satisfying their different ambitions, also resort to
extorting and corrupting certain officials in order to
obtain public goods and services, which leads to war,
public disorder, waste and so forth, with the ultimate
objective, in most cases, of seizing the countries'
political or economic power, in particular their natural
resources. My country, Equatorial Guinea, has fallen
victim several times to those types of attempts, the
most recent of which took place in December.

As far as the Republic of Equatorial Guinea is
concerned, not only does the law on civil servants of
the central administration of the State prohibit and
penalize, including with separation from service,
officials who engage in those types of practices, but
also, on 5 February 2004, a decree was enacted that
put into effect the law on ethics and dignity in the
exercise of public punctions. In our view, if civil
servants maintain high moral and ethical values, it will
be harder for them to lower themselves to committing
crimes, such as corruption, which are totally contrary
to their code of ethics.

Aware of the relevance of that issue and the great
damage it causes for society throughout the world, His
Excellency Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, President of
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, and the Government
have on several occasions publicly condemned that
practice and taken appropriate actions and urged the
country's legislature to develop every possible legal
instruments aimed at combating corruption.

I must also point out that our national development
plan, known as Horizon 2020, includes as one of its
main objectives the achievement of good governance,
which obviously includes supporting measures such as
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, including
poverty reduction. It is hoped that, in attaining the
Goals, it will be harder tojustify misleading or derailing
certain public servants. However, many researchers
have agreed that improving working conditions is
among the aspects that need to be reviewed to reduce
the impact of the problem. Therefore, we encourage the
international community to ensure that each country
takes all possible measures to ensure good governance
and thereby improve the standard of living of its people
in order to reduce the tendency towards corruption.

In the area of peacebuilding, the Government of
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea has contributed to
the best of its ability by always providing human and
financial resources in the subregion of Central Africa
and on the African continent in general. In order for
the international community to succeed in this area,
States must get involved by improving their domestic
legislation to allow them to tackle this universal
scourge and enhance cooperation. In that regard, I
take this opportunity to commend the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime on its work and the great
effort it has undertaken so far in several States to
eradicate corruption with a view to reducing the serious
conflicts that simmer and persist in those countries.
Consequently, for the purpose of preventing conflicts
fuelled by corruption in all their manifestations, it
is the duty of States to cooperate with the competent
international organizations and to take preventive
measures to reduce this practice, which is becoming
systemic in many societies.

Unfortunately, transnational corporations, backed
by some powerful countries and with many financial
resources, in order to achieve their objectives of
maximum profits, sometimes corrupt officials,
especially from the poorest countries, with a View to
obtaining large profits by working outside the legally
established rules. Therefore, there is also a moral duty
to be borne by corporate actors and their backers to
comply with the law of the countries where they operate
and submit to the rule of law and avoid impunity,
another source of social unrest, and therefore a possible
cause of conflict.

In accordance with the position of the African
Union, we urge States in conflict to strengthen their
public institutions, transparency and accountability for
the perpetrators of corrupt acts that strengthen armed
groups and facilitate the trafficking in arms, drugs and
persons for personal gain and who destabilize society as
a whole. These actions are essential in order to achieve
the noble goal of silencing the weapons and putting an
end to all wars on our continent as soon as possible.

We believe that the mandates of peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and political missions must include
measures and strategies that allow them greater access
to international financial information pertaining to the
parties to a conflict in order to reduce corruption, which
influences the length ofa conflict and, for each specific
case, a specific formula for the control and monitoring
of funds on the ground, necessary expenditures and
payments that have actually been made, thereby
ensuring an exhaustive and impartial accounting.

Let me conclude my statement by quoting Argentine
journalist Hugo Alconada Mon, who stated in his book
The Root ofAll Evil: "Corruption is like tango; it takes
two to dance."

