Mr. Talbot (Guyana): Guyana greets you,
Mr. President, as a neighbour and congratulates
Venezuela on its assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of February. We
thank you for convening this open debate and for the
theme, which calls our attention, in the context of the
maintenance of international peace and security, to the
importance of respect for the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations - respect too often
observed in the breach, despite many professions to the
contrary. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
insightful briefing this morning.

For us, as a small developing State, the current
theme permeates our very existence, both as the cradle
of our foreign policy and the standard which we expect
others to observe in their conduct towards us. The
enduring relevance and validity of the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations cannot
be overstated. They point to the continuing need for
collective effort and multilateral action in maintaining
international peace and security, developing friendly
relations among nations, achieving international
cooperation and solving global problems, and to the
role of the United Nations in harmonizing our several
options to those ends.

Respect for sovereign equality, sovereignty and
territorial integrity, the settlement of international
disputes by peaceful means, refraining from the
threat or use of force in international relations,
non-interference in the affairs of other States and
fulfilment of the obligations assumed by States under
the Charter are among the cardinal underpinnings of
today's international order. They afford to all States,
in particular the small and vulnerable, the prospect of
protection in the face of a diverse array of threats of
increasing complexity, including climate change, the
vagaries of transnational criminal networks, the illicit
flow of small arms and light weapons and drugs, the
spread of disease and the scourge of terrorism.

The faithful adherence of all to the purposes and
principles of the Charter is essential to effectively
promoting peace and security, sustainable development
and human rights in our world. It is incumbent on the
Council, charged with the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
and by extension its members, to be exemplary in such
adherence and to eschew conduct inimical to the pursuit
of that mandate, thereby providing a basis for enduring
confidence in the efficacy and legitimacy of the actions
of the Council in the eyes of the global community. But
no member of the international community is exempt
from the imperative of similar adherence. The Council
and all Member States should be held accountable for
compliance with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations.

We live in a global society that increasingly
charges us to be our brothers' and sisters' keeper. To
maintain peace, we must ensure that development
is sustained and human rights are respected, so it
behooves to ensure that peace endures in our societies
and that we not allow discord and violence to spill over
into other societies. In those interlinked pursuits, the
organs of the United Nations -the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and the Security
Council in particular - must work in cooperation and
complementarity, as should Member States. We should
not discount the important role that the Secretary-
General can play in upholding respect for the values
of the Organization through the exercise of his good
offices.

We would do well to be constantly mindful that the
Charter is but a framework of values to be actualized by
the actions countries take or decline to take in relation
to it. It is the cornerstone of the rule of international
law, the promotion of which is integral to the promotion
of respect for the principles and purposes of the Charter
of the United Nations. In that regard, the International
Court of Justice, set up as one of the pillars of the
international system in 1945, has a significant role
to play in contributing to ensuring respect for the
Charter's precepts, affording recourse to the peaceful
settlement of disputes and controversies where they
exist and facilitating the peace of the civilized.

Similarly, on the foundations of the regulatory
framework of the Charter the world has built monumental
legal frameworks as complementary instruments that
further codify the rights and responsibilities of States, in
keeping with Charter principles. One such framework,
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea - the so-called constitution of the oceans - is one

of the great achievements of the United Nations and is
subscribed to by the vast majority ofthe world's nations.
The Convention, including the International Tribunal
for the Law of the Sea established thereunder, has
made and continues to make an important contribution
to international cooperation, dispute resolution and
peace. In that connection, Guyana also calls attention
to the importance of respect for the sanctity of treaties,
without which the world falls apart.

In conclusion, my country, as one of the smallest
countries ofour hemisphere, looks to the United Nations
for protection from all who would do us harm or in any
way threaten the sovereignty and territorial integrity
with which we have been endowed. The Charter is not
only for large countries; it is for small States like mine.
Its purposes and principles are not only for the rich and
powerful, but for the poor and the powerless. It is the
weak who need it most and whose adherence to it is
often truest.

