Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
fully associates itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union. My delegation, acting
in its national capacity, would like to make some
additional remarks. Today's thematic debate provides
us a unique opportunity to comment on the relationship
between the Security Council and the International
Criminal Court a decade after the Court came into
being.

In handing down its first verdict in the Lubanga
case, the International Criminal Court has confirmed
its commitment to being at the forefront of the fight
against impunity. In that struggle, the cooperation
between the Security Council and the International
Criminal Court is essential. That relationship promotes
the rule of law, encourages respect for human rights
and contributes to the establishment of lasting peace.
Although mass atrocities amounting to crimes under
the Rome Statute very often are threats to peace
and security, the very existence of the International
Criminal Court has a preventive effect fully consistent
with the vocation of the Security Council. The Council,
too, has repeatedly reaffirmed its strong opposition to
impunity for the perpetrators of serious violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.

I shall restrict myself to making three points.
First, the fact that the Security Council is increasingly
including provisions related to the International
Criminal Court in its resolutions on specific countries
is a positive development. However, the Council's
unwillingness to respond when the Court informs it of
non-cooperation by some States in cases referred to it
harms its credibility and is, for Belgium, a cause for
concern. The cooperation of States is essential to the
proper functioning of the Court. The Security Council
should encourage all Member States to cooperate fully
with the Court in its investigations and prosecutions
with which it has been entrusted.

Generally, a regular interactive dialogue between
the Security Council and the International Criminal
Court about challenges that both institutions face
could usefully contribute to strengthening synergies
and the coherence of their action. In addition, Belgium
wishes to reiterate how much it regrets that the Security
Council places the financial burden of investigations
and prosecutions arising from the two referrals on the
State parties alone. It calls on the States Members ofthe
United Nations to take collective responsibility in order
to enable the International Criminal Court to fulfil its
mandate as is appropriate.

Secondly, in accordance with the principle of
complementarity, the Security Council may first
request the competent national authorities to investigate
and prosecute serious crimes of concern at the
international level, instead of referring them right away
to the International Criminal Court. Complementarity
will only be fully implemented by States under two
conditions. On the one hand, States would have to adopt
legislation and adequate resources at the national level
to enable effective prosecution of war crimes, crimes
against humanity and crimes of genocide. On the
other hand, it is essential that they have the legal tools
necessary for full inter-State judicial cooperation in
the matter, given the multitude of extraneous elements
in prosecutions. It is within the framework of that last
point that Belgium, in conjunction with the Netherlands
and Slovenia, is launching a new initiative to negotiate a
new international instrument on mutual legal assistance
and extradition in those areas.

Finally, I would like to mention the initiative of
Switzerland aimed at asking the Security Council to
initiate investigations into all allegations of serious
crimes committed in Syria, regardless of their
perpetrators, and do everything possible so that those
responsible for the crimes in question are prosecuted
and punished. A referral of the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court is one possible approach
in that regard. Belgium therefore supports the Swiss
initiative and calls on other States committed to the
fight against impunity in the world to join the 35 others
that have already signed on to it.

In conclusion, Mr. President, I would like once
again to warmly thank you and your country for having
taken the initiative to hold today's debate. I express
the hope that we will have the opportunity to continue
the discussion within the Security Council on the
relationship between the Council and the International
Criminal Court.

