Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would first
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council this
month. The Republic of Korea welcomes and supports
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2270 (2016)
today. We thank the United States for having taken the
initiative on this resolution and the People's Republic
of China for having engaged in lengthy consultations,
as well as all other members of the Security Council.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea's latest
nuclear test and long-range missile launch are grave
violations of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
They pose a clear threat to international peace and
security. They are by far the most serious provocations
of their kind, as they show that the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea is advancing closer to a comprehensive
and operational nuclear weapon capability. A nuclear-
armed North Korea would seriously impair the regime
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, and could induce an arms race in the region,
undermining the security of the whole world. The
international community is therefore at an important
crossroads. If we cannot stop the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea now, then it may soon reach the point
of no return. We must act quickly and decisively to
prevent this from happening.

Today's resolution introduces one of the most robust
sanctions regimes in the history of the United Nations.
Its unanimous adoption demonstrates the firm, united
resolve of the whole international community that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's weapons of
mass destruction programmes will never be tolerated.
These measures, when fully implemented, will impede
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's weapons
of mass destruction-related activities in all aspects,
leaving Pyongyang with no other option but to choose
denuclearization. We have seen in the past how effective
sanctions can lead to change ofpolicy in other contexts.

As noted in the resolution, it is deplorable that
the DPRK is diverting its scarce resources to the
development of weapons of mass destruction while its
own citizens are suffering abject poverty and human
rights abuses. As pointed out by members ofthe Council,
while the sanctions set out in this resolution are most
comprehensive in scope, they do not target the North
Korean population or intend to negatively affect their
livelihood. On the contrary, they explicitly target the
pursuit of weapons of mass destruction by the regime
that is causing the hardship of the North Korean people.
We hope this resolution will help alleviate their plight.

Finally, as a fellow Korean, I would like to say
a few words in appeal to those who are ruling North
Korea. I would say, in Korean, "please, stop it now".
I would ask them: Why do you need these weapons?
In South Korea we do not have a nuclear bomb. As we
border each other, you do not need an intercontinental
missile if you are targeting us. Why do you need these
weapons? You say that the United States is a threat
to you. Why would the United States threaten you?
Why would the strongest military Power in the world
threaten a small country far across the Pacific? There
is no threat. It is a figment of your imagination. If you
continue in this way, the only people who will suffer
from what you are doing are your own people, and they
are also my people, and our people as well. So please,
wake up, open your eyes, look out at what is happening
in the world. Give up the nukes. Join the rest of us in the
world and we can all live together in safety and peace."

The meeting rose at11.25 a.m.
