The Secretary-General: My report is already in the
Council's hands. If I may, I will make just a few brief
remarks about the oil-for-food programme, limiting myself
to the humanitarian aspects of resolution 1284 (1999) and
the actions that they call for from the United Nations.

I also have with me Ms. Carol Bellamy, Executive
Director of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF),
and Mr. Benon Sevan, Executive Director of the Iraq
Programme, who will be available to answer any questions
the Council may have.

As the Council knows, the oil-for-food programme has
been in existence for a little over three years. Its purpose is
to alleviate the impact of sanctions on the Iraqi population,
since they are not its direct targets. It has undoubtedly
brought them some relief, but many of the essential needs
of the population remain unsatisfied.

In its original form, it was subject to tight restrictions,
both on the types of goods Iraq was allowed to import,
which were limited to food and medicine and other
strictly humanitarian items, and on the revenue it was
allowed to generate by oil exports. Since then, as a result
of decisions made by this Council over the past three
years, the list of items Iraq is allowed to import has been
considerably expanded and liberalized. Now, under the
terms of resolution 1284 (1999), the ceiling on oil exports
has been completely eliminated.

Furthermore, the recent rise in the price of oil has
greatly increased the value of the exports, with the result
that a much larger income is now available for the
programme. However, Iraq's oil industry is seriously
hampered by a lack of spare parts and equipment, and
this threatens to undermine the programme's income in
the long term. That is why I have repeatedly
recommended a significant increase in the allocation of
resources under the programme for the purchase of spare
parts for the oil industry.

I understand that the Council is now ready to
consider these recommendations favourably, and I would
very much welcome that. But I should also mention that
many of the holds on contract applications, imposed by
members of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 661 (1990), do have a direct negative impact
on the humanitarian programme and on efforts to
rehabilitate Iraq's infrastructure, most of which is in
appalling disrepair. We need a mechanism to review these
holds, in order to ensure the smooth functioning of the
programme.

Of course, we also need the cooperation of the
Government of Iraq. I would urge it to take all necessary
steps to ensure the effective and prompt distribution of
the imported items. I am sure that, if the programme as
amended by resolution 1284 (1999) is fully implemented,
there will soon be a considerable improvement in the
humanitarian situation. But let us be under no illusions:
even if it is implemented perfectly, it is possible that our
efforts will prove insufficient to satisfy the population's
needs. The Council therefore needs to keep the
effectiveness and impact of the programme constantly
under review and take further steps to improve it should
that prove necessary.

Let me conclude by saying that the humanitarian
situation in Iraq poses a serious moral dilemma for this
Organization. The United Nations has always been on the
side of the vulnerable and the weak and has always
sought to relieve suffering. Yet here we are accused of
causing suffering to an entire population. We are in
 

danger of losing the argument, or the propaganda war - if
we have not lost it already - about who is responsible for
this situation in Iraq: President Saddam Hussein or the
United Nations.

I am particularly concerned about the situation of Iraqi
children, whose suffering and, in all too many cases,
untimely death, have been documented in the report
prepared last year by UNICEF and the Iraqi Ministry of
Health. That report, which has been echoed by many other
observers, showed that, in the centre and south of Iraq,
infant mortality and morbidity have increased dramatically
and reached unacceptable levels.

We cannot in all conscience ignore such reports, or
assume that they are wrong. It is imperative that we all -
the Secretariat, the Council and the Committee established
by resolution 661 (1990) - implement fully and
expeditiously what the Council's resolutions demand of us.
I am very happy, therefore, to hear that the Committee is
now ready to give us the list of drugs and other medical
supplies which, under resolution 1284 (1999), the
Secretariat will henceforth be able to approve on its own
authority. Indeed, the Council should seek every
opportunity to alleviate the suffering of the population. For,
after all, they are not the intended targets of sanctions.

That said, all of us must realize that the people of a
State which is the object of sanctions must always, in some
degree, be Victims - often, Victims both of their own
Government and of the measures taken against it. The only
satisfactory outcome of any such situation is for the State
in question to return to full compliance with the decisions
of the Council, so that sanctions can be ended as quickly as
possible. I have no doubt that all of us look forward with
impatience to the day when that will happen in the case of
Iraq.

