Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): Allow me,
first of all, on behalf of the Government of Haiti, to
welcome the initiative taken by Senegal and to warmly
congratulate its Government. By inviting the Security
Council and the entire international community
to address the important issue of water in relation
to international peace and security, Senegal once
again has demonstrated its well-known commitment
to the issue of water as an element of peace and
international cooperation.

The Senegalese initiative is all the more timely given
that it takes place in the wake of the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change and the recent Marrakesh Climate
Change Conference. It also responds to growing
concerns that water has become a potential source of
crisis and conflict in a context of growing scarcity
exacerbated by climate change and the abusive use of
and pollution of this raw material.

Water is an essential factor in the global security
environment. Indeed, demand is rising steadily and the
prospect of an overall increase of 30 per cent by 2030
can only have a serious impact on the economies of
many countries, especially in the South. My country,
the Republic of Haiti, is part of those regions already
under water stress, which, according to projections, will
include half of the world's population by 2025, with all
the negative consequences that involves when it comes
to economic, social and health development, as well as
the unyielding acceleration of migratory movements.

All the more disturbing is the fact that water is and
can be used as a weapon ofwar. It is the cause of, and has
contributed to, the worsening ofmany local and regional
conflicts in recent decades. In some cases, control over
water resources is itself a strategic issue. In the long
term, the scarcity of this raw material - renewable,
but limited - can only exacerbate the potential for
conflicts related to its availability, access, distribution
and use, at both the domestic level and among States.

Consequently, there is every reason to fear that
the dialectic of the dreaded water shortage and the
continuously growing needs of the global population
could lead to conflicts, which could constitute a threat
to international peace and security. Today's meeting
of the Council is therefore an opportunity for us to
strategically reflect together on the issue of water as a
factor for peace and security, while recognizing that it
is essential not only to protect water from the effects of
war, but also to safeguard this vital natural resource for
the sustainable development of humankind.

Access to water, just like access to shelter,
food, education and health care, is recognized as a
fundamental right of every human being. It is crucial
for social cohesion, political stability, development and
poverty reduction. In sum, it is essential for peace. In
several regions of the world - whether in the Middle
East, Latin America and the Caribbean, Africa or
Asia - the scarcity of water, its high cost, uneven
distribution and lack of accessibility all dramatically
limit the full enjoyment of that right. Such factors
contribute to exacerbating poverty, suffering and the
vulnerability of populations deprived of it. In some
cases, they are the common denominators of unrest,
civil wars and fratricidal struggles that afflict affected
populations. I would like to underscore the tragic
situation in Haiti, which in recent years has had to face
serious challenges largely due to the lack of access to
reliable water resources and sanitation infrastructure.

In addition to exposure to the traditional infectious
diseases, since 2010, Haiti has endured the painful
experience of a cholera epidemic. In six years, cholera
has already claimed the lives of more than 1,000. It has
intensified since Hurricane Matthew swept through
the country and continues to sow desolation among the
Haitian population. It should be emphasized that, after
having long refused to admit the obvious, the United
Nations recently assumed its moral responsibility in
the outbreak of that health tragedy and the suffering
caused. In addition to being a perfect illustration of
the catastrophic consequences of water pollution in
an already impoverished country, it is clear that that
tragedy has also revealed the unexpected shortcomings
of a peacekeeping mission mandated by the Security
Council. It has undoubtedly taken too long to adopt the
corrective and adaptive measures that were necessary
in view of the serious nature of the challenges and
extent of the consequences.

Ultimately, the cholera epidemic in Haiti was
also the result of a lack of empathy and international
solidarity towards a country struggling with an
unprecedented health disaster. Indeed, it is shameful
that repeated appeals by the United Nations to obtain
the necessary funding that would have considerably
contained the spread of the epidemic did not receive the
desired response. Fortunately, Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, who should be commended, recently launched
a new two-pronged approach, which calls for vigorous
action, both now and over the next two years, to assist
the victims and their families and, above all, to help
Haiti build public health-care infrastructure that will
enable the country to contain the disease and, over the
long term, address the serious challenges of providing
safe drinking water and sanitation. The Haitian people,
in particular the victims, their relatives and the affected
population, are eagerly hoping that international
solidarity will not be lacking this time around.

Before concluding, I would like to make
three observations.

First, this discussion at the level of the Security
Council is timely given the multiple possibilities for
future conflicts that could be caused by water scarcity
throughout the world. I firmly believe that concrete
proposals will emerge from today's meeting that will
underscore water's essential role as a fundamental
pillar of development and reaffirm the inextricable link
that exists between water and international peace and
security and, as such, grant it all the importance that it
deserves in the Security Council's work programmes,
including its peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations. In that regard, we believe that it is judicious
to look ahead and put in place appropriate mechanisms
in order to, as needed, minimize or mitigate the
consequences of natural or man-made disasters on
water resources and populations concerned.

Secondly, access to water is a fundamental right
and that will never be emphasized enough. In the light
of the concept note prepared by the Permanent Mission
of Senegal, we hope that today's discussion will identify
new avenues for action on the most effective means of

promoting the enjoyment and respect of the universal
right to reliable water resources that are available
in sufficient quantities. It is up to the international
community to redouble its efforts to ensure that
the enjoyment of that right is made possible for the
1.7 billion people who continue to live without access
to a minimum quality of water or sanitation because of
insufficient investment.

Thirdly, I fervently hope that today's discussion
will be ongoing and lead to innovative guidelines
that can contribute to the strengthening of the
principles of international water law; the effective
prevention and upstream settlement of inter-State
water resources-related conflicts; national capacity-
building in developing countries, in particular in the
areas of sustainable water management and resolution
of related conflicts, and better international protection
of this primary resource - water - and significant
improvement in access, which are all indissociable
elements of the triptych of development, peace
and security.

We are confident that the work of today's meeting
will make a significant contribution to the establishment
of an environment of peace, security and cooperation
that is conducive to sustainable development, in which
the full access to water is guaranteed on the basis of
the cardinal principles of equality, equity and justice
and solidarity.

In conclusion, let me now address the representative
of Senegal. Allow me to quote the late Leon Laleau, a
Haitian author and politician who was also Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Haiti:

"Do you feel the pain and the despair, unlike any
other, that seeks to tame the heart that Senegal gave
me, with words from France?"

