Mr. Lopes da Rosa (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): On behalf of the delegation of Guinea-
Bissau, I wish first of all to congratulate you sincerely,
Madam, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February. Aware as we
are of your skill and your mastery of international issues,
we are convinced that your work will be successful. My
delegation wishes to assure you of its complete cooperation
as you carry out your tasks.

We also wish most sincerely to thank Ambassador Sir
John Weston of the United Kingdom for the outstanding
way in which he guided the work of the Council in
January.

Regarding the question before the Council today,
Guinea-Bissau wishes to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/1996/75) on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III). That report, which is
the object of particular attention by my delegation, makes
reference to a number of aspects of the implementation of
the Lusaka Protocol signed by the Government of Angola
and the Uniao Nacional para a Independencia Total de
Angola (UNITA) with a View to restoring peace and
national reconciliation in that country, which is a friend
and brother of Guinea-Bissau and with which my country
shares an age-old linguistic and cultural heritage and has
excellent relations of cooperation and brotherhood.

The accidents and vicissitudes of history have
written a common past for these two peoples. In the
middle of the fifteenth century, two Portuguese navigators
entered the African continent. Nunes Tristao reached the
Gulf of Guinea in 1446 and Diogo Cao reached Angola
by the River Congo in 1487. Since then, the force of
historic events has forged a cultural relationship between
these two peoples and has charted for them a common
destiny, in space and in time, in the search for a new
horizon.

More than 500 years later, armed struggle broke out
as an act of cultural resistance against the colonial Power,
in Angola in 1962 and in Guinea-Bissau in 1963, in order
to attain independence and the emancipation for our
respective peoples. Guinea-Bissau proclaimed its
independence on 24 September 1973 and Angola on 11
November 1975, following the signing of the Alvor
agreement.

Today, more than 30 years after this act of cultural
resistance, another coincidence of history finds Guinea-
Bissau among the members of the Security Council to
debate the situation in Angola, which is still deprived of
peace and calm.

There is no need for us to reaffirm at this stage the
importance we attach to questions concerning Angola and
how dedicated we are to everything concerning it, since
on numerous occasions, in diverse circumstances, my
country has shown its concern and has reiterated its
willingness to search for a lasting peace in Angola. It is
in this spirit that we have participated from the outset in
several peace-keeping operations in Angola, and we
reiterate our readiness to participate further if the need
arises.

The slow pace of the implementation of the peace
process in Angola is of serious concern to Guinea-Bissau.
The lack of respect for the Lusaka Protocol, followed by
the resumption of military hostilities, does serious damage
to the credibility of this process in the eyes of the
international community and shatters the hopes of the
Angolan people, which, today more than ever, needs
calm. We note with satisfaction, finally, the positive
measures taken recently by the Angolan Government, in
particular, the release of prisoners, the repatriation of
 

military experts, the withdrawal of troops stationed near the
UNITA quartering zones and the beginning of the
quartering process of the rapid reaction police force, in
accordance with the Lusaka Protocol.

We request that UNITA act in turn by resuming the
quartering of its troops, freeing all prisoners, cooperating
fully with UNAVEM. III and refraining from acts of
hostility and intimidation directed towards its personnel. We
also hope that the target date of 8 February for the
quartering of 16,500 soldiers will be respected as promised
by Mr. Savimbi.

Despite this setback in the process, we note that the
parties have demonstrated their firm determination to
pursue their consultations for peace following the drawing
up of a new timetable for the implementation of the
agreements concluded on 21 December. This initiative
deserves our full support, and we urge the parties to respect
them in full. We also welcome the decision taken by the
Government and UNITA regarding the establishment of a
group for conflict prevention, made up of high-ranking
military personnel from the two parties. In this context, we
warmly encourage a meeting between President dos Santos
and Mr. Savimbi in order to re-establish an atmosphere of
confidence and credibility in this process.

Given the complexity of the implementation of the
peace agreement in Angola, my delegation appeals urgently
to our Angolan brothers to respect scrupulously the cease-
fire and to refrain from any actions that might jeopardize
the development of the process under way. We also
encourage the parties to speed up the demining process to
allow extensive movement throughout the country, thus
making possible the return of refugees and displaced
persons. We ask the international community to support the
plans for demining in Angola.

Regarding the issue of human rights, my delegation
has taken note of the seminar organized by the Government
with the assistance of UNAVEM. III and welcomes its
conclusions regarding issues dealing with respect for human
rights. With regard to the humanitarian aspect, we note with
regret that the situation has deteriorated in the zones
controlled by UNITA because of certain restrictions
imposed on the transport of assistance and on
non-governmental organization personnel, who, in some
cases, have been harassed and detained. Nevertheless, we
are gratified to learn that UNITA has now reconsidered its
position and has promised to facilitate the work of the
humanitarian organizations.

The economic situation in Angola should also be the
subject of special attention on the part of the international
community, given its specific nature, characterized by a
devastating war lasting more than 30 years that has
destroyed the entire infrastructure of the country and has
disrupted its economic system. International financial
institutions and donor countries must respect the
commitments they made at the round-table conference
held in Brussels last September in order to ensure the
consolidation of peace and national reconstruction in
Angola.

Before concluding, my country would like to thank
all the countries and international organizations that are
working together to re-establish peace and bring about
reconciliation in Angola, particularly the troika, as well as
the African countries that have spared no effort in this
process. Nor can we forget the enormous efforts of the
United Nations and, in particular, the tireless commitment
of our Secretary-General, his Special Representative and
all the personnel of UNAVEM. III.

In the light of the extremely important and highly
commendable role that UNAVEM. 111 has continued to
play in Angola to re-establish peace and bring about
national reconciliation, Guinea-Bissau recommends the
extension of its mission.

