The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Central African Republic, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Poakre-
Kano (Central African Republic) took a seat at
the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Sable-Work
Zewde, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in the Central African Republic.

It is so decided.

I invite Ms. Zewde to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Jan Grauls, Chair of the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of
Belgium.

It is so decided.
2
I invite Mr. Grauls to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document 8/2009/627, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic and on the activities of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in that country.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde and Ambassador
Jan Grauls. I now give the floor to Ms. Zewde.


