Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to begin by congratulating Malaysia on assuming
the presidency of the Council and organizing this timely
open debate.

According to the Secretary-General's report
(S/2016/360), 2015 was, sadly, another horrific year
for children trapped in conflict zones and targeted
by warring factions with no respect for international
humanitarian law or the welfare of our children. The
complete disregard for civilians, including children,
exhibited by Da'esh, Al-Qaeda and their affiliates,
especially in Syria and Iraq, has been particularly
shocking, and the proliferation of these tactics among
such groups worrying. Violent extremists have
adopted widespread abduction as a feature of their
operations to inflict terror and for the purpose of
political brainwashing, ransom, retaliation or sexual
exploitation. Boko Haram's gangs have been ravaging
parts of Nigeria and terrorizing children. Likewise,
the targeting of the children of religious and ethnic
minority groups is also a matter of grave concern.

The situation of children in Yemen, and especially
the United Nations-verified sixfold increase in the
number of children killed and maimed, is also a
matter of great concern. The Secretary-General's
report indicates that, of a total 1,953 child casualties,
including 785 children killed and 1,168 injured, 60 per
cent of them were caused by air strikes. This marks
an exponential and unacceptable leap compared to the
entire year of 2014 and makes clear how the intensity of
the conflict in Yemen can lead to humanitarian crises.

The Secretary-General's 2015 report on this issue
(S/2015/409) and other United Nations agencies attest
to the fact that, only in Gaza between 8 July and
26 August 2014, 540 Palestinian children were killed,
2,955 injured, among whom as many as 1,000 were
estimated to be permanently disabled as a result of the
latest Israeli invasion of Gaza. The number of schools,
kindergartens and hospitals damaged or completely
destroyed by Israeli forces during the same period is
the highest recorded numbers of all situations in 2014.
The international community, including the Security
Council, should ensure serious follow-up efforts to
bring an end to Israel's impunity and to secure justice
for the victims. This impunity has led to actions taken
by the Israeli Government "that further restrict the
rights of Palestinians, including children" (S/2016/360, para. 79).

In the face of children killed and their homes,
schools and hospitals destroyed, it is disappointing
that undue pressure and lobbying were exerted that
could change the course of events. Last year, Israel was
not blacklisted despite flagrantly targeting children
in Gaza. This year in Yemen, the Saudi Arabia-led
coalition was first blacklisted, based on United Nations
findings that it was directly responsible for 60 per cent
of child casualties, including the deaths of 785 children
due to bombing campaigns. But surprisingly, its name
was finally removed from the list.

Finally, have the ongoing airstrikes in Yemen, which
have already led to the deaths of hundreds of Yemeni
children, had any result other than strengthening
Da'esh and Al-Qaida'? While the world seems mostly
unconscious of and indifferent to the killing and
suffering of Yemeni children, can the international
community be protected against the growing strategic
threat of terrorism and violent extremism?

