Mr. Kumalo: I thank the Security Council for
inviting me to participate in my capacity as Chairman
of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau
established by the Economic and Social Council. I am
also representing the President of the Economic and
Social Council, Ambassador Gert Rosenthal of
Guatemala, who could not be with us today. For us, it
is important that the Security Council has again invited
the Economic and Social Council to exchange views on
the matter of peace and security in Guinea-Bissau. We
greatly appreciate and thank the Council for this
opportunity.

It is significant that there will again be a joint
visit to Guinea-Bissau by members of the Security
Council and members of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group
on Guinea-Bissau established by the Economic and
Social Council. That visit next week will convey a
collective message that we wish to strengthen the
confidence between the people of Guinea-Bissau and
their international partners.

The Secretary-General has captured the situation
in Guinea-Bissau probably in the most sobering words
contained in paragraph 3 of his report (S/2003/62l). He
writes that "I regret to say that in the reporting period
the overall situation in Guinea-Bissau has not
improved. In fact, it has worsened".

Guinea-Bissau is a country that is still emerging
from conflict. As we have already reported to the
Economic and Social Council, Guinea-Bissau first
emerged from conflict three years ago and even
received post-conflict assistance from donors and the
Bretton Woods institutions. In fact, Guinea-Bissau was
among the countries that benefited from their inclusion
in the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
(HIPC) Initiative. As the Secretary-General confirms in
his report, the economic, social and political situation
in the country suggests that Guinea-Bissau may be
sliding back towards chaos and even conflict.

At the present moment, Guinea-Bissau is a
country that exists in a grey area, and that therefore
presents the international community with a unique
challenge. The instruments that the Security Council
employs to maintain international peace and security
do not apply to Guinea-Bissau. Neither does Guinea-
Bissau qualify for the instruments that donors and the
Bretton Woods institutions provide to countries that are
in a post-conflict phase. Yet, in spite of that challenge,
the Secretary-General reports that, "the political will of
the international community to provide support to
Guinea-Bissau and its people is palpable" (8/2003/62], para. 27).

Guinea-Bissau is a country with a democratically
elected head of State, President Koumba Yala, with a
full Cabinet of ministers assigned various portfolios.
At this time, the one critical institution that Guinea-
Bissau does not have is a parliament of elected
representatives who can make decisions about the
direction the country needs to follow in addressing
political, economic and social matters.

For several months, Guinea-Bissau has awaited
an election that has already been once postponed.
There is general agreement that the situation in Guinea-
Bissau may change for the better as soon as a
parliament is back in place. The Secretary-General has
reported that the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) has made available an initial grant
of $500,000 to support electoral registers; and
Portugal, which is among the Friends of Guinea-
Bissau, has provided the necessary materials for
holding an election.

What appear to be missing are conditions for
holding free and fair parliamentary elections. However,
the fact that a few years ago the people of Guinea-
Bissau participated in a national election that was
declared to be free and fair is an encouraging sign. We
urge the international community to give the necessary
support for a credible election to be held in Guinea-
Bissau.

We note that the Secretary-General has reported
that preparations for such an election have been slow,
since "donors have conditioned financial support for
the elections on the creation of propitious conditions
for credible elections" (ihid., para. 6). As long as
Guinea-Bissau does not have a parliament, questions of
governance will remain, thereby discouraging donors
from providing desperately needed assistance.
The humanitarian situation in Guinea-Bissau is
worsening all the time. United Nations agencies
continue to report that hundreds of children are dying
from hunger and preventable diseases. There are
reports of civil servants, including teachers and nurses,
who have not been paid for many months. The World
Food Programme (WFP) has been operating feeding
schemes for more than 80,000 children since the
beginning of this year. Recently, more than 2,000
metric tons of rice donated by Japan, another Friend of
Guinea-Bissau, have been delivered to the country. We
are encouraged that the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund have continued to send
missions to Guinea-Bissau to help create systems under
which this country can receive and manage
international aid.

Despite all those signs indicating willingness by
the international community to assist the people of
Guinea-Bissau, the world expects more from the
Government of Guinea-Bissau. As the Secretary-
General states in his report, "The lack of progress in
the constitutional and electoral spheres has been
mirrored by the general deterioration in the political
climate" (ihid., para. 4). To further quote the
Secretary-General, "more is needed to restore
confidence and trust within the country and between
Guinea-Bissau and its international partners" (ibid., para. 28). We believe that the uncertainty of the
political situation has an impact on efforts to address
the humanitarian needs of the country.

The upcoming joint visit to Guinea-Bissau by
members of the Security Council and members of the
Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group
on Guinea-Bissau will offer an opportunity to engage
the authorities in finding a way out of this situation.
The objectives we in the Economic and Social Council
have set for ourselves will be to promote a dialogue
with the authorities of Guinea-Bissau, to appeal to the
Government to take measures to prepare for the
forthcoming elections and to ensure that they are seen
to be free and fair, to promote a better understanding
between Guinea-Bissau authorities and the donor
community, and to address the humanitarian situation
in the country.

We believe that those objectives coincide very
well with those that members of the Security Council
have set for themselves. We look forward to a historic
and successful visit to Guinea-Bissau.

