Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
for his briefing. I would also like to thank Special Envoy
Mr. Nicholas Haysom both for his briefing and for his
excellent work during his tenure to support peace and
stability between South Sudan and the Sudan. We look
forward to working with him in his new role.

I would like to touch on three issues. First, I
would like to talk about the progress that has been
made by the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA), and particularly by the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM),
against the benchmarks set out in resolution 2412
(2018). The United Kingdom welcomes the maintenance
of standing clearance for all UNISFA air and ground
patrols, along with the support of both Governments
for the mission, particularly in ceasing to obstruct
the movements of the mission, as we saw in previous
reporting periods. However, as the representative of
the Netherlands said, the lack of progress against other
benchmarks has been disappointing. We urge both
Governments to devote their efforts to changing that.
Establishing the four remaining JBVMM. team sites and
holding two meetings of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism must be a priority.

While the efforts of both Governments are
essential to progress, we recognize, as Special Envoy
Haysom said, that the wider dynamics, including both
the commendable focus of the two Governments on the
South Sudan peace process and a lack of agreement
among the local communities for the JBVMM. team
sites, have contributed to the delays. We therefore
believe that it is essential, as the representative of
France said, that UNISFA and the JBVMM. engage
the local communities so that their concerns can be
considered and their support garnered.

Secondly, let me touch on the Secretary-General's
recommendations for UNISFA, which, broadly
speaking, we welcome. We support the recommendation
to augment the civilian component of UNIFSA,
particularly through the deployment of community
liaison officers. We also acknowledge the Secretary-
General's recommendation to deploy a civilian Deputy
Head of Mission. We commend UNIFSA for improving
the security situation in Abyei and for reducing the need
for a large military presence in the Area. We therefore
welcome the Secretary-General's recommendation
that the UNIFSA military component concentrate
its deployment along the borders of the Abyei Area
in the light of the finding that cross-border military
action is the most likely threat to security in the Area.
Despite the improvements to the security situation, like
many other speakers, we are concerned by reports of
increased criminality within the Abyei Area and about
the continued delays to establish the joint administrative
arrangements, including the Abyei police service. We
therefore fully support the recommendation to deploy
three formed police units to the three major population
centres in the Abyei Area.

Thirdly, and finally - again as other speakers
have said - only a political settlement can address the
underlying causes of the conflict and ensure that long-
term stability for the people of Abyei is a reality. It is
therefore the responsibility of the Security Council to
ensure that the mission is resourced appropriately to
support that overarching aim. We very much welcome
Special Envoy Haysom's sense of optimism, which
I detected, with regard to the fact that the Sudan and
South Sudan are now more willing and more able to
make progress on the political track. I look forward to
hearing from the representatives of both those countries
today as to how they intend to do that. Of course, they
will have our full support.

