Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting and for providing me
with the opportunity to share my reflections and
observations as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya for
the past two years and as Chair of the Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations for the past year.

I will begin with the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
Only in its fourth year, the regime has likely been the
most rapidly evolving Security Council sanctions regime
in recent years. While initially the core objectives of
the measures were to prevent further attacks against the
civilian population in Libya, the political context has
necessitated modifications of the measures that have
provided better support to the Libyan-led transition and
the rebuilding process, and benefitted regional security.

The sanctions regime has also provided a good
example of how the Security Council has been
proactive in terms of quickly moving to respond to
developments on the ground, as evidenced by the 10
resolutions adopted in the record time of four years,
with four resolutions during my tenure. As one
example, this year, as the security situation in Libya
was deteriorating, the Security Council acted quickly
in adopting resolution 2174 (2014), which reinforced
the arms embargo and introduced criteria to designate
spoilers to Libya's political transition. Following an
incident in March 2014 involving the illegal seizure of
oil by a militia in Libya, the Council also responded
with resolution 2146 (2014), introducing measures in
relation to attempts to illicitly export crude oil. In all,
the flexibility of the Council in that case allowed the
sanctions regime to evolve to better serve its remedial
and preventative purpose.

As well stated by Ambassador Lucas regarding
the cooperation between the various sanctions
committees with INTERPOL, during Rwanda's tenure
the Committee reached an agreement with INTERPOL
concerning the INTERPOL-Security Council Special
Notices. INTERPOL is an important partner in
promoting effective implementation of measures. It is
our beliefthat the Council and its sanctions committees
could strengthen even more interaction with relevant
international and regional organizations.

As for interaction with Member States, in February
we convened an informal open briefing for all Member
States with the participation of the Panel of Experts, and
in November a briefing with Libya and the interested

Member States, in particular those of the region. In
both briefings there was interactive participation from
Member States. For instance, at our briefing with
neighbouring countries, the views and perspectives
expressed on the challenges faced in implementing
the measures imposed by the Security Council shed
light on how the Committee can better assist Member
States. We therefore endorse continuing this practice,
since we believe that these types of dialogue help to
increase transparency and initiate an important process
that can contribute greatly to the effectiveness of the
Committee's work.

As for interaction between the Committee
and the States concerned, we have noted some
success, particularly the invitation to the Permanent
Representative of Libya to join the Committee at
two meetings. Additionally, in our efforts to be more
transparent, the Committee shared with Libya unofficial
and informal information on the exemption requests
and notifications relating to the assets freeze and arms
embargo imposed under resolution 1970 (2011) and
modified by subsequent resolutions. That was a first
step in the right direction and I am sure that in future
the Committee will try to improve information-sharing
with the Permanent Mission of Libya. I should also add
that in the light of the increased relevance of the work
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to the Committee's work in the wake of the adoption of
resolution 2174 (2014), we believe it will be useful to
invite him to Committee meetings in the near future.
We regret that we could not organize such a meeting
during my tenure.

Concerning the scope of the Committee's work, we
note that while the total number of issues before it has
decreased, their complexity has increased significantly.
That has been due largely to the changes that have been
made to the measures, with a particular focus on the
arms embargo, which has received a lot of attention,
especially in recent months. The Committee has
exercised vigilance with regard to exemption requests
and exchanged letters with individual Member States
seeking clarification when necessary. However, despite
our vigilance, the situation on the ground today shows
gaps in the implementation of the arms embargo. The
Panel of Experts has reported transfers of non-exempt
material, both into and out of Libya. In that context, I
would like to emphasize that the Committee's vigilance
is not a silver bullet, and that Member States should
fully implement the arms embargo. It is also important
to emphasize that the Committee will remain ready to
provide guidance on the scope and application of the
measures to any Member State requesting it, in order
to ensure a clear and consistent understanding on
everyone's part.
Regarding the Panel of Experts, 1 would first like
to extend my sincere appreciation to the experts for
the tremendous work they do and for their consistent
provision of detailed and exhaustive reports. During
Rwanda's tenure, the Committee has been proactive
and in regular communication with Member States,
seeking support for the Panel and following up on
its recommendations and input. Unfortunately, the
response rate remains low, and I would encourage
Member States to cooperate more closely with the
Committee.

I would also like to express my deep gratitude to
the secretariat of the Subsidiary Organs Branch for
its invaluable assistance, and to the members of the
Committee for their support and cooperation during
the past two years, which has enabled us to address the
complex issues submitted to the Committee in a timely
manner.

Turning now to the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, during its tenure Rwanda has addressed
important thematic debates relating to the complexity of
international peacekeeping operations today. Overall,
the programme of meetings, eight in total, including
the upcoming one scheduled for 17 December, has
reflected not only the current activities of the wider
Security Council and its members' priorities, but also
the concerns and issues important to Member States
that have personnel and equipment on the ground.
Specific topics have included mission start-ups and
rehatting challenges, inter-mission cooperation,
women's participation in peacekeeping, troop and
police preparedness, and the role of United Nations
police in peacekeeping. For our first subject, given the
earlier rehatting challenges in Mali, we believed it was
critical to improve future rehatting processes, and our
topic in April was on the Central African Republic,
ahead of the rehatting of the African-led International
Support Mission to the Central African Republic
into the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.

The following month we considered the question
of inter-mission cooperation, focusing on the recent
example of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan. Several participants made proposals that could
make such cooperation more effective, including
the possibility of developing airlift capabilities for
the regional service centres. In June, we addressed
the challenges confronting United Nations efforts
to increase female participation in peacekeeping
operations, both in the field and at Headquarters.
Rwanda's Assistant Commissioner of Police travelled
all the way from Kigali to share insights into how
Rwanda is able to deploy such a high percentage of
female peacekeepers to United Nations operations.
Many Member States raised important points,
including recognizing the value of national action
plans in promoting the use of women, providing more
opportunities for predeployment training, utilizing
the skill sets that female personnel have to offer and
recruiting women into leadership posts.

The last meeting I would like to highlight will be
our final one, scheduled for 17 December, next week.
It will address the complex issue of the protection of
civilians, with the aim of working towards a common
understanding of the definition of the protection of
civilians and mandate design and implementation. We
believe it paramount that we delve into the evolution
of protection-of-civilian mandates and address key
conceptual issues that affect the work on the ground.
It is our hope that the discussion among Member
States will illustrate varying visions for the protection
of civilians, as well as laying the groundwork for an
attempt to move this discussion forward.

In conclusion, I would like to point out that next year
the Secretary-General's High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations will provide, for the first time in
20 years, a comprehensive assessment of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions. We hope that
the recommendations of the Panel and of other review
and assessment efforts will inform the agenda of the
Working Group in 2015.

Finally, I would like to thank the Secretariat for
its support in ensuring that the work of the Working
Group has been conducted smoothly, and to thank all
Member States for their contributions, which without
a doubt have helped to enrich the discussion. I would
also like to wish the delegations of Chad and Malaysia
the best of luck in discharging their duties at the helm
of the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations and
the 1970 Committee, respectively.

