Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China commends the Niger for organizing today's meeting and thanks Executive Director Fore and Special Representative of the Secretary-General Gamba de Potgieter for their briefings. I also welcome the participation of the representatives of civil society. I would like to thank Rimana in particular for her briefing; her story is very moving and thought-provoking. In May, the General Assembly adopted resolution 74/275, proclaiming 9 September as the International Day to Protect Education from Attack. Yesterday, we jointly participated in the first celebration of the International Day. The initiative of the Niger, as President of the Security Council this month, to hold a debate on attacks against schools as a grave violation of children's rights is of special significance. More than 20 years have elapsed since the Council first considered the issue of children and armed conflict (see S/PV.4037). It is regrettable that a quarter of the children in the world are still living in countries affected by violent conflicts. For them, education could have been an opportunity to change their destiny and break the vicious cycle of violent conflict. However, in the past five years, attacks on educational facilities have killed or injured more than 20,000 students and educators. Ruthless wars and cruel terrorist activities have deprived children of their innocence and right to education and, worse still, have undermined the potential of social progress and development. Schools cannot fall victim to violent conflict. The international community must act to create a safe space for every child to realize his or her dream. In this regard, I would like to emphasize the following four points. First, school should be a place of peace, free from the transgression of armed conflict. Attacks on schools constitute one of the six grave violations against children's rights. The prohibition against attacks on schools, as provided for in international humanitarian law, is a redline that cannot be crossed. The civilian character of schools must be respected. Any attacks on schools, students and teaching staff as well as the use of schools for military purposes must be condemned in the strongest terms and be stopped immediately. China welcomes the presidential statement just adopted by the Council (S/PRST/2020/8) and encourages the Secretary-General and the relevant United Nations agencies to continue, in accordance with their mandates, to strengthen the monitoring and reporting of such attacks in conflict situations. Secondly, we should increase investment in education to prevent schools from becoming a weak link vulnerable to violent attacks. Education is an important means of peacebuilding, as it helps countries in conflict realize their vision of peace as they embark on a path of sustainable development. All countries should prioritize the development of education and increase investment in educational resources, including building and strengthening school infrastructure and expanding the resiliency of school premises against risks and shocks. At the same time, we should combine legal and administrative means to prevent schools from becoming targets of armed attacks. The international community and the relevant United Nations agencies should, on the basis of full respect for the ownership of the countries concerned, actively help these countries strengthen capacity-building and resolve, inter alia, practical difficulties in financing and technology. Thirdly, education cannot wait. The learning opportunities for children in conflict should be guaranteed. Education should not be subject to forced interruption because schools are destroyed by war, given that being away from schools may expose children to more threats of violence. It is urgent to restore and rebuild school buildings to create favourable conditions for children to return to school. Digital technology and remote learning have the potential to open up more learning opportunities for children affected by conflict and minimize the negative impact of school closures. The international community should help countries in conflict bridge the digital divide so that remote learning benefits every child. Relevant United Nations agencies should strengthen coordination to form synergy in expanding digital education in conflict areas. Fourthly, we must keep children away from gunfire and effectively take responsibility for the next generation. Only by preventing and resolving conflicts can we protect children from being harmed by armed conflicts. The coronavirus disease pandemic has exacerbated the plight of children in conflict areas. All parties should therefore continue to provide humanitarian assistance to children in conflict, take measures to alleviate the impacts of unilateral sanctions on children and make the greatest effort to ensure their health and safety. China calls on all parties to conflict to heed the call of Secretary-General Guterres for a global ceasefire and to promote, through consultation and negotiations, the process of peace and reconciliation. The Council should earnestly fulfil its primary responsibility for maintaining international peace and security, strive to settle disputes and conflicts through mediation, and create a peaceful and stable environment for children to grow. Education is the foundation of a long-term plan. China has always made the development of education a Strategic priority. At the same time, it attaches great importance to providing educational assistance to other developing countries. In the past five years, China has helped build 123 schools and vocational training centres for fellow developing countries. In Bujumbura, the capital of Burundi, a vocational school that China helped to build can accommodate 500 students studying mechanical automation, agricultural-producefood processing, and other disciplines. In the town of Al-Majadel, in south-eastern Lebanon, Ali, an 11-year- old boy, drew a picture for Chinese peacekeepers after learning that they were there to help build a square and renovate classrooms in his school. The two peace doves in the picture carry the flags of China and Lebanon, respectively. Clearly, Ali deeply longs for and cherishes the opportunity to learn. Children in conflict have already experienced too much undeserved pain and suffering, yet so long as there is education, there is hope. Let us join hands and try our utmost to guarantee each and every child the right to education and protect his or her safety and healthy growth. Therein lies the meaning of all our work, which is also the basic premise for building a better future.
