The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Jamaica.

Let me express my delegation's appreciation to
Assistant Secretary-General He'di Annabi for his
briefing. We also wish to pay tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Hans
Haekkerup, for the leadership he provided to the
electoral process in Kosovo and to the tireless efforts
of the men and women of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and
KFOR. UNMIK's work in Kosovo over the past two
years has charted a course from what seemed to be
insurmountable challenges to widespread progress
throughout the territory.

At the beginning of last year, the main concern of
the Council was the security situation and violence
against minority groups. Peaceful coexistence seemed
an insurmountable challenge. Work on the judicial
system and law enforcement initiatives had just begun.
A large number of refugees could not return to their
homes. UNMIK has worked tirelessly to improve the
situation in Kosovo, and the Security Council missions
to Kosovo in April 2000 and in June of this year gave
the Council an opportunity to witness the progress and
to provide valuable input.

We have seen significant changes in the security
situation, from a territory where ethnic strife prevailed
and on which an arms embargo had been imposed to
one in which elections could be held without incident
in an atmosphere of calm and in which border
crossings and weapons controls have been put in place.

We have also witnessed steady progress in the
development of law enforcement and in the return of
refugees. Improvements have also been made with
regard to missing persons and towards reconciliation.
We were therefore gratified that this progress
culminated in the successful holding of elections in
Kosovo on 17 November, and we are pleased that the
elections were conducted in an atmosphere that was
relatively calm and free of violence.

We are also pleased that there was significant
participation of the minority communities, including
Kosovo Serbs residing within and outside of Kosovo.
We have always stressed the importance of the
participation of all communities in the governance of
Kosovo in order to create viable democratic
institutions. We appreciate the attention given to
ensuring the participation of minority communities and
the response to the appeals made by the Security
Council, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
Serbian authorities.

We take this opportunity to congratulate the
Democratic League of Kosovo on obtaining a majority
of the votes and welcome the creation of a new
representative assembly, made up of 14 parties and
which will include the 22 seats that will be allocated to
the Return Coalition.

We are optimistic that a strong foundation has
been created for a viable and sustainable system of
government, and we encourage all the parties in the
assembly to work together in a spirit of cooperation
and compromise within a multi-ethnic framework.

Following the success of the elections and the
progress made so far in implementing resolution 1244
(1999), we can now look forward to the formation of
the government and to the further transfer of authority
to the people of Kosovo.

The role of the United Nations in Kosovo is
elaborated in resolution 1244 (1999). This resolution
also makes provision for substantial autonomy and
meaningful self-administration, and we emphasize that
there must be strict adherence to its provisions. As Mr.
Annabi reminded us, UNMIK now has to make sure
that provisional self-government becomes a reality, and
the international community must therefore continue to
support UNMIK's efforts to promote peace,
reconciliation and stability and to create viable
democratic institutions.

Our focus must return to unresolved issues that
demand our attention, including those relating to
refugees, displaced persons and detainees, the security
situation in Mitrovica and the overall law and order
situation in Kosovo. We also need to increase efforts to
create a viable and sustainable economy in Kosovo. We
remain concerned about these issues and urge all
involved to continue to work diligently to achieve a
lasting solution. We agree with the Ambassador of
Bangladesh, who pointed out that civil society,
including women's groups, must be an integral part of
this process.

UNMIK has made good progress on the
implementation of initiatives that would provide
greater protection for minority communities and
facilitate the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons. Work must continue on the creation of a safe
and secure environment, with an acceptable level of
freedom of movement for returnees. UNMIK's efforts
to improve law and order and to reduce crime and
violence are crucial to the return process and to the
overall stability of Kosovo. We therefore appreciate the
attention being given to tackling organized crime and
to streamlining police and judicial institutions.

My delegation is particularly encouraged by the
improvement in relations between UNMIK and the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. This
close collaboration proved important to the election
process and contributed to the high level of Serb
participation. We must now build on this momentum to
ensure widespread Serb participation in the institutions
of self-government and in future elections in Kosovo.
We have maintained that only through dialogue can
obstacles to the improvement of relations with Serbia
and the advancement of reconciliation in Kosovo be
overcome. The benefits of frequent dialogue with the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia are
now clearly evident and should continue to be
facilitated. We are hopeful that the signing of the
common document on 5 November will indeed provide
a solid basis for a cooperative relationship between
UNMIK and the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and contribute to stability in South-Eastern
Europe.

This morning the Security Council was briefed by
the Presidents and Prosecutor of the International
Tribunals for Yugoslavia and Rwanda. We welcome the
progress being made in the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and the impact that
this process can have on reconciliation efforts in
Kosovo, and we wish to stress the importance of
providing adequate resources for its work.

In conclusion, let me congratulate the people of
Kosovo for the important steps that they have taken
this month. We assure them of our continued support
and commitment as they seek to improve their quality
of life and overcome the challenges of creating a multi-
ethnic society.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Belgium, whom I invite to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.

