Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): Today,
the United States joins other members of the Security
Council in welcoming the agreement by the Government of
Angola and UNITA to a timetable for the completion of the
remaining tasks of the Lusaka Protocol by 28 February
1998. This agreement, combined with the upcoming summit
meeting between President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi in
Angola in February, signals a renewed commitment by the
Angolan Government and UNITA to end the decades-long
conflict and to begin the work of national reconciliation and
reconstruction. The fulfilment of the peace process is now
in sight.

I would also like to extend my thanks to the Secretary-
General's Special Representative, Maitre Blondin Beye, for
his devotion to the cause of peace in Angola. I wish him a
speedy recovery and look forward to his return to Luanda.
I would also like to commend Mr. Sadry for his
contributions since his appointment as Deputy Special
Representative.

The United States urges the Government of Angola
and UNITA to comply strictly with the timetable for the
completion of the remaining tasks of the Lusaka Protocol
and, in the spirit of national reconciliation, to exercise
restraint and protect the rights of all Angolan citizens as
the implementation of the peace process proceeds. As we
stated at the time of the adoption of resolution 1135
(1997), if UNITA moves rapidly to complete the
remaining tasks in the peace process, the United States
stands ready to reconsider the need for sanctions. The
burden is on UNITA.
UNITA and the Angolan Government will be able to
count on continued international support during this
critical final stage of the peace process. Today, the United
States will join other Council members in voting for a
three-month extension of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola (MONUA), including the retention of
up to 1,045 military personnel. We believe that MONUA
will help to promote a secure environment conducive to
the implementation of the remaining tasks of the peace
process.

With the expected completion of the remaining tasks
of the Lusaka Protocol by the end of February, the
international community should review its engagement in
and assistance to Angola. This draft resolution provides
the needed flexibility by requesting a mid-term report in
March from the Secretary-General. At that time, the
Council will be able to review the progress of the peace
process and consider whether and how the international
community could be of further assistance in a post-
MONUA context.

A related issue is the continued presence of Angolan
Government forces in Congo-Brazzaville. We again urge
the Government of Angola to withdraw its forces
expeditiously.

The United States looks forward to the day when the
last United Nations military forces can be withdrawn from
Angola and MONUA can become the unarmed observer
mission it was originally intended to be. Even then,
however, we recognize that security problems may
remain. For that reason, this draft resolution asks the
Government of Angola to take steps to assume the
security functions that MONUA troops currently provide
for United Nations and humanitarian personnel. The
United States believes that the Government of Angola's

 

integrated police and armed forces should protect United
Nations and other international personnel as MONUA
transitions out of Angola.

The United States endorses the Secretary-Generals
appeal to the Government of Angola and UNITA, as
signatories to the Lusaka Protocol, to consider ways in
which they might provide additional in-kind and financial
support to MONUA, particularly as the fulfilment of the
peace process is achieved.

In addition, we call on States to respond to the
consolidated inter-agency appeal for Angola for 1998. In
particular, the United States is concerned that only about
10,000 of an estimated 6 to 8 million landmines have been
cleared from Angolan soil. The United States asks all
countries to join our efforts to increase the pace of
demining in Angola and globally so that all landmines that
threaten civilians can be removed by the year 2010.

I would like to take this opportunity to commend the
personnel of MONUA - those being withdrawn after a
successful mission as well as those remaining in the
country - for their contribution to securing a lasting peace
for Angola.

