Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting on
peacekeeping inter-mission cooperation, as well as for
the concept paper on the topic. We are also grateful
to Mr. Ladsous and Ms. Haq for their informative
presentations.

Peacekeeping is a unique mechanism and an
indispensable tool for our collective actions to
maintain international peace and security. While
gradually evolving into a more complex institution
with multifaceted mandates, peacekeeping missions
constantly encounter a number of challenges that
negatively affect the implementation of their primary
tasks, especially in the light of the dynamically
changing political and security environment in certain
parts of the world. Today's meeting therefore provides
a useful opportunity to further deliberate on ways to
increase the effectiveness ofpeacekeeping, with a focus
on the notion of inter-mission cooperation.

Notwithstanding the nature of conflicts and the
challenges they present, peacekeeping operations have
a specific geographic scope. They have mandates that
guide and provide them with a clear vision of their tasks.
Mandates must therefore be realistic and achievable,
and they must be tailored and constantly adapted to the
realities on the ground. Most importantly, peacekeepers
must be fully equipped with all the operational and
logistical capabilities necessary to carry out their
mandates.

Increased coordination and cooperation among
missions operating in geographic proximity to one
another are an important requirement for making them
more efficient and cost-effective in the implementation
of their respective mandates, in particular on issues
having cross-border or regional dimensions. Many
instances of such cooperation have proven to be relevant
and useful. However, there are apparent differences
and cautiousness among Member States with regard to
proposals on elevating the issue to the next level, such
as the elaboration of definitions and the standardization
and codification of inter-mission cooperation. I would
like to share our approach to the issue.

All peacekeeping operations are set up to prevent
violence and preserve peace. In that sense, coordination
and cooperation among neighbouring missions on
challenges that transcend the area of their deployment
should be regarded as a normal, logical and continuous
process. That process includes information exchanges,
joint assessment and planning, the development of
common strategies, joint patrolling, monitoring and
training, and shared border responsibility, and so on.
Such a level of inter-mission cooperation should be
endorsed by the Council and envisaged in the mandates
of the respective peacekeeping operations. Needless
to say, joint activities on cross-border challenges can
be authorized only upon the agreement of the central
authorities of recipient States and must be coordinated
with troop-contributing countries.

In the context of today's deliberations, the
meaning of the term "inter-mission cooperation" has
been narrowed to refer to the process of transferring
enabling assets and contingents from one mission to
another in order to swiftly respond to a worsening
security situation and to fill existing capability gaps.
We view such cooperation, however - unlike the
cooperation I have just mentioned on cross-border or
regional challenges - as a temporary and short-term
measure applied on a case-by-case basis. Apart from
the Council's authorization, the consent of both the
recipient State and the troop- and asset-contributing
country is a prerequisite in each case. One mission's
capabilities must not be used as a permanent substitute
for the operational and logistical deficiency of another.

As a temporary stop-gap measure, the exchange
of assets and contingents is feasible between missions
in geographic proximity to one another. Therefore,
their mandates can envisage a certain flexibility for
larger inter-mission cooperation and rapid operational
adjustments in the face of a deteriorating situation on the
ground, provided that the legal, financial and procedural
implications of such adjustments are calculated in
advance. In order to inform the decision of the Security
Council in a timely manner, missions should elaborate
different scenarios and options based, inter alia, on

regular threat assessments and on prognoses of possible
political and security developments in the area of their
deployment.

In conclusion, Mr. President, I would like to express
my delegation's appreciation for your leadership
of the Council's Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations and your efforts to hold focused thematic
discussions, involving both Council members and the
wider United Nations membership, on different aspects
of peacekeeping, including last week's discussion on
inter-mission cooperation.

