I thank the Indonesian presidency for organizing today's high-level debate on this important topic. Let me also take this opportunity to express my sincere appreciation to Her Excellency Mrs. Retno L.P. Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, for presiding over this meeting. I thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-Moon and Ms. Sarah Cliffe for their insightful briefings. The spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the multidimensional disruptions caused by it is proving to have profound and long-lasting implications for societies, including, in some contexts, inflaming existing grievances and threats facing communities. In particular, this has intensified the challenges of peacebuilding and sustaining peace in countries which are already affected by fragility, conflict and violence. Tackling COVID-19 is doubly hard in countries where social and economic conditions were already unstable because of weak governance and State institutions, and unequal access to services for vulnerable populations. Many among them also face compounding challenges, including climate change shocks, forced displacement and food insecurity. In some contexts, Government responses to the unfolding crisis have exposed the existing structural inequalities. We have seen a noticeable increase in gender-based violence and a decline in access to basic services, alongside justice and health care, which disproportionately affects women and girls. It is therefore important that countries' immediate response and longer-term investments address these realities in order to avoid exacerbating existing sources of fragility and instead help build resilience, to both this crisis and future shocks. To achieve this, a major reorientation of peacebuilding approaches to respond to this multidimensional threat is required. Such approaches need to be conflict-sensitive and risk-informed, and should incorporate provisions for the most vulnerable and marginalized in society. If not addressed appropriately, our apprehensions are that efforts undertaken may undermine the peacebuilding gains made to date, and complicate future efforts to build more peaceful and inclusive societies. National Governments in conflict-affected countries are doing their best to save lives and mitigate the worst socioeconomic impacts. However, efforts by national Governments alone will not be enough to tackle the crisis; they need to be complemented through responsible and collaborative approaches from the international community. Let me share my thoughts for addressing the many impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on peacebuilding and sustaining peace. First, a system-wide implementation of the sustaining peace approach is critical to ensure that the United Nations response contributes to decreasing risks of violent conflict in the longer term, including efforts to build back better. In this context, the value of the humanitarian-development-peacebuilding nexus in particular gains more relevance. The United Nations system, national Governments and international partners should avoid focusing only on emergency response; rather, all should collaborate to work across the three pillars. Given that the risk factors for violence may be increasing during this crisis, building back better is also an opportunity to promote peaceful societies. Secondly, the activities of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in supporting conflict-affected countries must factor in the need for investing more in State institutions, including those dealing with health, law enforcement, disaster management, food security and education. Peacebuilding Fund projects should take this duly into consideration. Thirdly, in the changed situations on the ground brought about by the pandemic, peacebuilding efforts can draw upon the adjustments already being exercised by peacekeeping in certain common areas. Reorientation in community outreach, the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda, addressing infodemics, and the protection of civilians could be some such areas to consider. Fourthly, the Secretary-General's global ceasefire appeal and resolution 2532 (2020) could be used as the leveraging tools for rallying national Governments and warring parties to peacebuilding efforts. In that regard, the Security Council's explicit support for the work of the PBC will be crucial. Fifthly, as recommended in the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2020/773) on the comprehensive review of the peacebuilding architecture, the Peacebuilding Commission should enhance its partnership with regional and _ subregional organizations, including the African Union Peace and Security Council. That has become more relevant in the context of the pandemic. Greater engagement between the Council and such regional and subregional peace and security organizations could be the way forward. That would help customize peacebuilding activities to regional and subregional realities, and hence make them more effective. Sixthly, specific initiatives could be piloted in countries on the agenda. Current movement restrictions provide an opportunity to think about how to be more inclusive, since we have been able to work from home but still connect to each other. New actors can be included in the conversation as we create more robust virtual platforms. It can also change dynamics within societies. For example, since the disease affects young people to a lesser extent, it gives them an opportunity to be more active and meaningful contributors to building peace in their societies. Finally, the Peacebuilding Commission could play a more concrete role in mobilizing funding to respond to increased peacebuilding challenges linked to the COVID-19 crisis in the most fragile countries and vulnerable sectors of societies, including women and girls, by deepening partnerships with international and regional financial institutions, as well as with non-traditional actors such as private corporations and philanthropic organizations. Attracting private-sector funding for peacebuilding may not be easy when the global economy as a whole is contracting, let alone when it comes to the economies of countries emerging from conflict. Yet sectors that flourished during the pandemic - such as e-commerce, telemedicine, online education, as well as building the digital backbone - are areas where such partnerships could potentially be envisaged. The Security Council can play a convening role in such contexts to facilitate a system-wide push towards the sustaining peace agenda. In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Bangladesh's commitment to peacebuilding and sustaining peace and our willingness to remain engaged in further strengthening the United Nations peacebuilding architecture at a time when peacebuilding and conflict prevention have become more challenging.
