Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate you, Madam President, for the way
you have led the work of the Council during the month
of April. I also thank you for convening this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. I welcome the briefing by
Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process.

Bolivia aligns itself with the statemenst made by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement and by the Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People.

Once again, the Security Council is meeting
to discuss the situation in the Middle East, and
unfortunately, there has been little progress in
the implementation of the Council's international
responsibilities. In this International Year of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People, we welcome the fact that
Palestine has signed 15 international treaties, most
of which were related to human rights. It is a further
Sign of the will of the people and their Government
to belong to the community gathered together in this
Organization, on an equal footing, with equal rights
and obligations. We must not forget, however, that
Israel violated the agreement of 29 July 2013, under
which it was to release 104 Palestinian prisoners who
had beenjailed for over 20 years. Today, 78 are free, but
26 others have not yet regained their freedom, although
their release was scheduled to take place on 29 March.
In addition, on 1 April Israel announced plans for 700
new settlements in occupied Jerusalem.

Despite the situation, Bolivia welcomes the
reconciliation process between Hamas and the
Palestinian Authority that was successfully completed
last week. We believe that it sends a powerful message
of support for the efforts of President Mahmoud
Abbas to achieve a sustainable and lasting peace and
meet the demands and expectations of his people.
The statement issued on Sunday by the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Palestine lamenting the horrors of
the Holocaust - which, in our view, was the worst
crime of the twentieth century - is also of utmost
importance because it provides fresh evidence that the
denialism attributed to Palestinian authorities does not
in fact exist. We regret, however, that Israel unilaterally
suspended the talks - coincidentally, that same week.
I therefore once again urge us to seek to prevent by all
possible means the Palestinian people's falling victim
to what may be one of the greatest tragedies of the
twenty-first century.

Despite the high expectations raised by the peace
process initiated on 29 July last year, reality has proven
once again that agreements and commitments are not
always honoured by their proponents. Since then,
many Palestinians, including women and children,
have been killed by Israeli attacks. In 2013 alone,
4,553 Palestinians, including children, were arrested
and jailed, adding to the 5,000 already in prison; at
least 200 homes were demolished, forcibly displacing
thousands of people; and many more homes were built
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem - all in clear violation of international
humanitarian law. The Israeli blockade of the Gaza
Strip continues to inflict suffering, poverty and
inhumane conditions on Palestinian refugees.

We believe that Israel is not showing proof of good
faith when it acts in such a manner and when, in the
course of negotiations, it again and again postpones
discussions on substantive issues affecting the
Palestinian people, including the status of Palestine,
the illegal Israeli settlements, the status of Jerusalem,
access to water, borders, security and the situation of
the Palestinian refugees.

The Plurinational State ofBolivia defends the cause
of the Palestinian people, supports the exercise of their
rights and unequivocally condemns Israel's crimes. Our
position remains unchanged. In addition, we reiterate
our support for the establishment of a Palestinian State,
which Bolivia recognized as soon as it was announced,
on the basis of the pre-l967 borders, with its capital
in East Jerusalem. We reiterate Palestine's right to full
status as a United Nations Member State, with all the
rights and obligations that such a status entails, and
we highlighted that on 15 November 2013, when our
countries, Bolivia and Palestine, signed an agreement
on diplomatic relations. In addition, we are proud to
announce that we are a member of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.

We believe that, once again, the Security Council
has an important mission to help relaunch the peace
talks and above all to find a just, lasting and inclusive
agreement that will end the Israeli occupation of
Palestine and other Arab territories. Failure to exert
the utmost effort in that regard would only add to the
stream of constant criticism that this important United
Nations body has been subjected to in recent years.

