Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the members of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), comprising
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao
People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and my own country,
Viet Nam.

Twenty years have passed since the protection of
civiliansinarmedconflictwasfirstplacedontheSecurity
Council's agenda. Considerable progress has been
achieved in the normative and deliverable framework,
with 9 resolutions, 13 presidential statements, many
general debates and over 100 meetings of the informal
expert group on the protection ofcivilians. Nevertheless,
challenges remain, including those mentioned in the
Secretary-General's latest report (S/2019/373). ASEAN
therefore commends the Indonesian presidency for
convening this timely open debate and would like to
make the following observations.

First, every State has the primary responsibility to
protect its civilians. The protection of civilians in armed
conflict is a well-established obligation in international
humanitarian law that has been further strengthened.
However, the compliance of parties to armed conflicts
with the laws governing armed conflict is variable.
As such, ASEAN joins others in calling on all parties
to armed conflict to enhance respect for the law on
the conduct of hostilities. The protection of civilians
in armed conflict must be guided by the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
including respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of host States.

Secondly, peace operations can contribute to the
protection of civilians in certain cases, as long as they
have a clear mandate and are properly equipped and
backed with adequate resources. We note that 9 out
of the 14 current peacekeeping missions authorized
by the Security Council have a mandate to protect
civilians. Much can be learned and improved from their
experience, taking into consideration mission-specific
particularities. The importance of training cannot be
overemphasized and it should start at the national level
in troop- and police-contributing countries, supported
by the efforts of the United Nations and countries in
the region.

Last but not least, the best way to protect civilians
is by preventing conflict altogether. There is a lot of
wisdom and plenty of lessons to be learned from
peacebuilding and preventive diplomacy, from which
we can all benefit.

As embodied in the ASEAN Community
Vision 2025, ASEAN is a people-centred, rules-
based and peace-loving community. We adhere to
the principles of international law governing the
peaceful conduct of relations among States, including
refraining from the threat or use of force, resolving
differences and disputes by peaceful means, while
strengthening confidence-building measures and
preventive diplomacy.

ASEAN's contribution to the maintenance of
international peace and security has been constructive
and consistent with the spirit of the Charter, particularly
in consideration of the role of regional arrangements,
as stipulated in Chapter VIII. We therefore call for
the further strengthening of ASEAN-United Nations
cooperation with a View to assisting Member States in
training and sharing experiences, including through
the various peacekeeping training centres of ASEAN
member States. ASEAN also wishes to commend all
personnel involved in the protection of civilians for
their work. We affirm the joint commitment of ASEAN
to the protection of civilians and to our continued
participation in peace operations.

I will now speak in my national capacity.

As a country that has gone through many wars
to secure its independence and sovereignty, we have
experienced first-hand the suffering of the people
and fully empathize with the plights of the civilian
victims of armed conflicts around the world. We call
on all parties to armed conflicts to strictly comply with
their obligation to protect civilians under international
humanitarian law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, notably resolutions 1894 (2009) and 2286
(2016). In that regard, the State should take effective
measures to exercise its responsibility.

With regard to peace operations, while
acknowledging their contribution to the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts, we stress the importance
of making them more sensitive and responsive to local
dynamics, and of the peacebuilding strategy's being
tailored to the specific context of each conflict. Through
their participation and inclusion in the process, the local
people will also develop a sense of genuine ownership
of the process and build their capacity to protect
themselves and prevent the escalation of the conflict.

Since 2014, Vietnamese peacekeepers have been
sent to various conflict zones in Africa. In 2018, a
second-level field hospital was dispatched to South
Sudan to join the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
mandate, which includes the protection of civilians. We
attach great importance to predeployment training in
international humanitarian law for our peacekeepers
and have adopted a policy of zero tolerance for sexual
Violence and abuse.

In conclusion, we support the Security Council's
efforts to continue focusing on the protection ofcivilians
in armed conflicts as one of its agenda priorities.

