Mr. Seger (Switzerland): It is my honour to
speak on behalf of the Human Security Network,
namely, Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland,
Jordan, Mali, Norway, Slovenia, Thailand, South
Africa as an observer, and my own country,
Switzerland.

We welcome the efforts and the important
progress in different parts of the world in addressing
the six grave violations against children in armed
conflicts. The adoption of resolution 1998 (2011) today
fills an important gap in the comprehensive child-
protection framework by including attacks against
schools and hospitals as the latest trigger in the
monitoring and reporting mechanism. This step will
also complement ongoing efforts by other bodies of the
United Nations system. However, challenges remain.

Accountability for persistent perpetrators of
grave violations against children should further be
strengthened. We call on the Security Council for
further decisive action, including through targeted and
graduated measures against such perpetrators, and to
consider how to address the accountability gap through
proactive and effective means. We also call for more
efforts to address impunity and to investigate,
prosecute and punish all those who commit grave
violations against children.

We acknowledge the positive trend towards
mainstreaming the protection, rights and well-being of
children affected by armed conflict within some United
Nations missions on the ground. We encourage the
relevant departments of the Secretariat responsible for
providing support to the field to continue to work
closely together to ensure a more systematic and
consistent approach in all missions. The appointment
of more child protection advisers and the inclusion of
child protection modules in the pre-deployment
training of police and troop-contributing countries
could also contribute to that end.

From a human security perspective, it is
important to complement existing action plans with a
strong programmatic response to support Governments
in the implementation of comprehensive national
strategies that include prevention and provide a
multisectoral approach to the assistance and social
protection of children who have been associated with
armed forces and groups. Assistance measures must
focus on avoiding their marginalization and
stigmatization, as well as facilitating their social
reintegration. Furthermore, a more stable and long-
term funding structure to fulfil all the elements of the
action plans is crucial.

Last but not least, the Human Security Network
invites the Council to enhance its efforts in order to
approach the protection of civilians in a more
systematic and coordinated manner, taking into account
the situation of children and women. We therefore
appreciate the fact that consultations on how to foster
such synergies were held under Brazilian presidency of
the Council in February. We encourage further
discussions on this issue and call on members of the
Council to be as inclusive as possible.

(spoke in French)

With the President's permission, I should now
like to make a few comments in my national capacity.

With regard to General Assembly resolution
64/290, on the right to education in emergency
situations, Switzerland welcomes the fact that, through
resolution 1998 (2011), the Security Council has today
filled an important gap in the framework for the
protection of children by including in the list of
triggers recurrent attacks against school and hospital
facilities. The inclusion of those new elements should
make it possible to expand the roll of shame
maintained by the Secretary-General not only to
combatants who carry out such attacks in Violation of
international law and international humanitarian law,
but also to those who repeatedly threaten or attack all
those afforded protection in this context.

We also call for new and decisive steps be taken
against perpetrators. First of all, we urge all sanctions
committees to ensure that the gravest violations against
children be made subject to sanctions at the time that
mandates are established or renewed.

Secondly, we call on the Secretary-General to
include in his annual reports all the steps taken in
sanctions committees with regard to the actions called
for in those reports, as well as with regard to proposals
made to move towards greater responsibility for the
perpetrators of such violations.

Thirdly we remain very concerned about the lack
of responsibility owing to the lack of sanctions
committees charged with dealing with repeat
perpetrators of violations set out in the annexes to the
Secretary-General's reports. We commit to urgently
taking resolute measures against these offenders, thus
filling the gaps in a proactive manner.

Oversight of the implementation of the Working
Group's recommendations in implementation of
resolution 1882 (2009) is of capital importance. That is
why we would invite the Working Group to request a
response from countries or the concerned party, if
necessary, on the report on the conditions for the
implementation of the Working Group's
recommendations. We expect a strengthening of
existing tools, starting with field missions and making
extensive use of options already available, as well as
emergency meetings in order grapple with the
resurgence of violations on the ground.

Like my colleague from New Zealand, who just
spoke, Switzerland once again calls on Member States
to facilitate contacts between the United Nations and
local and international actors, with a view to
guaranteeing comprehensive and effective protection of
children. These contacts will in no way prejudge the
political and legal status of non-State actors.

Finally, children are increasingly being detained
for association with armed groups. Their detention
often includes the use of violence, abuse, threats of
violence or abuse and other brutality, with the sole
purpose of obtaining information from them.
Switzerland counts on the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
to address this issue in a working document and
propose appropriate measures for strengthening the
protection of children.

