Mr. Baja (Philippines): My delegation is pleased
that the Chilean presidency has included on our
programme the progress report of the Secretary-
General on the recommendations of the Security
Council mission to West Africa (S/2003/ll47). I also
wish to thank Assistant Secretary-General Tuliameni
Kalomoh for introducing the report.

In 1998, in his report on the causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa, the Secretary-General said:

"More than three decades after African
countries gained their independence, there is a
growing recognition among Africans themselves
that the continent must look beyond its colonial
past for the causes of current conflicts. Today
more than ever, Africa must look at itself."
(5/1998/318, para. 12)

Five years later, Africans have taken significant strides
to mobilize their own strengths and resources to
address their conflicts, especially and specifically
through regional cooperation. Interlocutors in the
region have been engaged in the formulation of home-
grown solutions.

The regional approach has assumed greater
significance in West Africa. Its regional group, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), is now 29 years old. Despite its members'
political and cultural divisions and economic
disparities, it has established one of the world's first
subregional security mechanisms, creating an
indigenous system for managing its own conflicts. In
cooperation with the United Nations, coordinated

efforts have led to positive developments - just
mentioned by the Assistant Secretary-General and by
the representative of the United Kingdom - in

Guinea-Bissau and Sierra Leone as well as to progress
in the peace processes in Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia.

However, cross-border issues remain daunting
challenges that threaten the stability of the subregion.
There is therefore a need to strengthen ECOWAS to
enhance its effectiveness through robust and sustained
technical, human and financial support from the
international community.

The main organs of the United Nations,
specifically the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council and its agencies, could play key roles in
extending assistance, especially in the areas just
mentioned by France. Some progress has been made in
these areas, and the Security Council, in coordination
with ECOWAS, has to preserve those gains. The
Security Council has identified the key areas in which
the United Nations can play a role, such as facilitating
peace negotiations, implementing peace agreements,
establishing the rule of law, preparing the groundwork
for the conduct of fair and transparent electoral
processes, setting up transitional administrations,
strengthening capabilities for the provision of security,
addressing human rights violations, delivering
humanitarian assistance and addressing the specific needs
of vulnerable groups such as women and children.

In that connection, we are prepared to endorse the
proposal for an increase in the troop strength of the
United Nations Mission in C6te d'Ivoire (MINUCI)
and its transformation into a United Nations
peacekeeping mission. The Philippines has a
contingent in Liberia, and we join the call for all
Member States to redeem their pledges of troops to the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) as soon as
possible. We attach great importance to the success of
the forthcoming international conference on the
reconstruction of Liberia. We support the projected
assessment mission to Sierra Leone to evaluate the
progress made in accomplishing the benchmarks that
should guide the drawdown of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL).

My delegation also awaits the recommendations
of the joint United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP)-United Nations Office for West Africa-
European Commission mission, which will visit
ECOWAS headquarters in Abuja to assess the capacity
of ECOWAS and suggest ways to enhance its
effectiveness.
We welcome the plan of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to West Africa to develop a
strategy to address those issues that are at the core of
the instability in the subregion, and we look forward to
his report on practical ways to address them.

