Mr. Schori (Sweden) (spoke in French): I offer
my warm thanks to Jean-Marie Guehenno for his
important contribution.

(spoke in English)

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU). The Central and Eastern
European countries associated with the European
Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia
and Slovenia - and the associated countries Cyprus,
Malta and Turkey, as well as the European Free Trade
Association country member of the European
Economic Area, Iceland, align themselves with this
statement.

First, the EU would like to pledge its full support
to Mr. Hans Haekkerup, the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Kosovo, as
he seeks to address the remaining challenges in
Kosovo.

The EU welcomes the progress made in Kosovo
in the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) and
fully supports the continued efforts of the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to establish
democratic, self-governing institutions in Kosovo in
order to provide substantial autonomy for the people of
Kosovo in accordance with that resolution. The EU
fully supports the efforts of the Special Representative
to establish a legal and administrative framework for
Kosovo-wide elections, aimed at creating a body of
democratically elected representatives of all national
communities. The involvement of the people of
Kosovo in the formation of their economic, social and
political future will bring in an important element of
accountability and is essential for the long-term
security and stability ofthe whole region.

It is the view of the EU that certain steps need to
be carried out before elections can be held. These
include the implementation of the results of the
municipal elections, preparations for a new and
inclusive voter registration and the definition of the
mandate and composition of a Kosovo-wide assembly,
as well as other Kosovo-wide institutions. It is of
crucial importance that all ethnic groups participate in
the elections. In this regard, the European Union
encourages the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to support the electoral process and to exert
their influence to ensure the participation of Kosovo
Serbs in this process.

The EU supports the efforts to increase the
dialogue and cooperation between the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and relevant institutions of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and welcomes the democratic progress
achieved in that country and in Serbia, most recently
through the victory of the democratic forces in the
elections of December 2000. The EU expects that this
progress will enable essential political, economic and
social reforms to be carried out within the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, which could also contribute to
reducing tensions in Kosovo and in the Presevo area of
southern Serbia.

In this respect, the EU urges Yugoslav and Serb
authorities to find the appropriate legal channels for a
speedy release of remaining Kosovo Albanian and
other prisoners held without charges or on political
grounds, as well as for an accounting of missing
persons from all sides. Such measures could also
constitute a significant contribution towards the
beginning of a dialogue between representatives of
Kosovo and Belgrade. The EU also reiterates its call on
Yugoslav/Serbian authorities to comply with their
obligation to fully cooperate with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

Action to combat violence and enhance the
security situation for everyone in Kosovo should
remain a top priority for UNMIK and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR). It is deplorable that men, women and children
in Kosovo continue to be killed because of their ethnic
background and that moderate opinions expressed by
politically engaged Kosovars can be dangerous to their
safety.

The EU vigorously condemns the use of violence,
extremism and any act which makes the coexistence of
communities more difficult and which adversely affects
regional stability. In this context, the EU encourages
further confidence-building measures between the
different ethnic communities in Kosovo and fully
supports the right of all displaced people from Kosovo
to return to their homes in peace, security and dignity.

The European Union is deeply concerned about
the recent upsurge of violence in the town of
Mitrovica. Such incidents severely jeopardize
confidence building between ethnic communities and
undermine the activities of the members of the
international community who work in the interest of
the people of Kosovo. Kosovo is benefiting from
substantial international political, military and financial
support aimed at creating conditions for a peaceful and
prosperous future. This support requires the active
cooperation of all citizens of Kosovo and their leaders.

An important aspect of enhancing the security
situation in Kosovo is to reduce the overall level of
criminality and to enforce respect for the rule of law.
To this end, more than 800 civilian police, as well as
judges and prosecutors, from EU member States are
serving in Kosovo. The EU also supports the work of
the Kosovo Police Service School to train local police
and police trainers. Furthermore, EU member States
contribute more than 60 per cent of the troops of
KFOR, which continues to play a crucial role in
maintaining stability and security in Kosovo. The EU is
also pleased to note that the efforts of the international
community to enhance security and stabilization have
been significantly supported by Central and Eastern
European countries associated with the EU, as well as
by the associated country Turkey, in the form of
contributions of troops, civilian police and other
specialists to KFOR and UNMIK.

Another priority for the European Union is to
contribute to the reconstruction and economic
development of Kosovo. Being by far the single largest
donor providing assistance to Kosovo, the European
Union has allocated nearly €900 million in
reconstruction and humanitarian aid since 1998. The
EU will remain at the forefront of the reconstruction
efforts in Kosovo, having committed €175 million for
this purpose for the year 2001. In this regard, the EU
believes that it is important to continue to create
favourable conditions for the economic development of
Kosovo by establishing viable and efficient economic
structures, including in the fiscal area.

The EU strongly condemns the violence and
illegal actions by ethnic Albanian armed groups in
southern Serbia, and particularly in the Ground Safety
Zone, and reiterates its call, as expressed in the
statement ofthe President of the Security Council of 19
December 2000, for an immediate and complete
cessation of violence in that area. The EU calls upon
all involved to exercise maximum restraint and to
resolve any differences exclusively through peaceful
dialogue. The EU is strongly concerned with increased
tensions in the area that could impede Transport
Corridor X, which constitutes one of the main northern
outlets of the Balkan countries. The EU welcomes
specific measures taken by KFOR and UNMIK to
address the problem, including increased surveillance
of the administrative boundary.

The EU also welcomes the commitment of the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
work towards a peaceful settlement and to respect the
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999) and the Military-
Technical Agreement, and encourages the efforts to
initiate confidence-building measures in order to
stabilize the situation in that area. These measures
should include the extension of civil rights to ethnic
Albanians in the area and concrete steps regarding the
posture of Yugoslav/Serb military and police in the
area.

In order to further contribute to the stabilization
of the situation, the EU is currently considering an
enhanced presence of its monitoring mission in the
affected area.

