Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Mr. President, it is an
honour to have you preside over the Security Council
this morning. I also welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Nigeria and recognize the presence among
us today of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia.
Let me also express appreciation to the Secretary-
General and Commissioner Lamamra for their
briefings.

Brazil concurs with the Secretary-General when
he states that

"Africa's needs are great, but so are the
contributions that Africans have made for many
years to keeping the peace in their region and
beyond." (S/2010/514, para. 65).

We are convinced of the urgency of increasing United
Nations support for the peacekeeping efforts of the
African Union (AU). This support is a key part of the
Organization's primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is
also a way of recognizing the major role that Africans
have come to play in ensuring stability on their
continent.

We thank the Secretary-General for the concrete
and specific measures for enhancing cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union that
are presented in his report (S/2010/514). The
establishment of the United Nations Office to the
African Union is of special relevance. We hope that the
Office will be a valuable channel of communication
and that it will help to increase cooperation between
the two organizations.

The report indicates a number of areas in which
the United Nations is assisting AU peacekeeping. We
welcome that collaboration. We encourage the
Secretary-General to continue exploring initiatives in
the area of peacekeeping support and invite him to
include his proposals in the report to the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations at the end of
the year.

The partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union in Somalia is an example of both the
positive results it can bring and the need to further
improve and strengthen our collaboration. The logistics
support package provided by the United Nations has
significantly improved the living and operations
conditions of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) troops on the ground. The planning team,
now part of the United Nations Office to the African
Union, has provided important advice to the African
Union Commission. Its work may become even more
instrumental as we consider the African Union's
proposal to increase the authorized strength of
AMISOM. to 20,000 troops, which Brazil supports.

Nevertheless, this support has still not been
sufficient to raise AMISOM's standards to those of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation. Elements of
the support package not covered by United Nations
assessed contributions, such as the provision of heavy
and lethal equipment and reimbursement for
contingent-owned equipment and troop allowances,
have suffered from piecemeal donor support. The
problem has been compounded by continued and
numerous caveats and earmarks that seriously
undermine the effectiveness of the support provided.

It is therefore necessary to continue to improve
AMISOM's standards and provide the Mission with the
enablers and capabilities needed for the fulfilment of
its mandate, which is all the more important as
AMISOM. operates in a conflict whose volatility is
extreme.

Beyond the specific case of AMISOM, we must
also examine, in a serious and action-oriented manner,
the question of financial support to African Union
peacekeeping missions in general. The requirement for
case-by-case authorization by the Council and
subsequent budgetary approval by the General
Assembly is a challenge that we can and should
effectively address. If there is political will, these
procedures should be sufficient to allow for adequate
support for African Union peacekeeping. Ensuring that
United Nations management regulations are duly
followed may require some creativity, but it should be
possible. Technical considerations, although important,
must not prevent us from responding positively to the
African Union to the maximum extent possible.

Before concluding, I would like to underline that,
as we strive to improve our support for African Union
peacekeeping, we cannot neglect the areas of conflict
prevention, mediation and peacebuilding. The United
Nations has learned, sometimes painfully, that
peacekeeping by itself is often not a sufficient strategy
for dealing with conflict. The African Union has, in
some cases, been even more aware than the United
Nations of the need for an integrated approach to such
situations. We must strengthen this approach and
support the African Union's conflict prevention and
mediation efforts.

The case for enhanced cooperation between the
African Union and the Security Council has been well
established. The cooperation has proven most valuable,
as illustrated by the examples of AMISOM. and the
African Union/United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. We must continue to strengthen that
collaboration and seek to extend it to the whole gamut
ofissues on our shared agenda.

