Mr. Nesho (Albania): First of all I would like to
commend Ambassador Abdoulie Momodou Sallah of
Gambia for his excellent job conducting the work of the
Security Council during this month.

 

The adoption of this resolution by the Security Council
attests to the immediate reaction of the international
community in order to reach a swift and peaceful solution,
thus avoiding a new tragedy which may have larger and
more frightening dimensions than the tragedy of Bosnia.
This action reaffirms the primary and important role of the
United Nations and its organs, which, working in close
cooperation through preventive diplomacy with the
democratic States, are striving to apply the new philosophy
of the end of this century: the new world order, the order
of democracy and freedom for citizens.

The Republic of Albania hails and supports every
initiative or action offered by the Contact Group, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and other countries and international organizations
which have assumed the responsibility of offering their
invaluable contribution to bring an end to the crisis in
Kosovo and to its peaceful resolution. The Albanian
Government commends the statements of the Contact
Group in London and Bonn, and the Security Council's
statement to the press on the situation in Kosovo, and it
appreciates all the efforts of the members of the
Coordinating and Consultative Process of the Contact
Group in New York (CCP) and the Security Council in
searching for the most acceptable position for the parties
involved with the goal of assuring stability and peace in the
region.

We all hoped that the achievement of peace in Bosnia
and the success of the Dayton process, as well as the tragic
loss of the lives of hundreds of thousand of innocent
citizens in the former Yugoslavia, would be a great historic
lesson in the way of understanding the value of coexistence
among nations and States, of bringing an end to the
instincts of hate and domination, thus enabling people to
cooperate and integrate with each other. It is quite to the
contrary in Kosovo, where, the ethnic Albanians
constituting over 90 per cent of the population, the violence
and terror exercised by the Serbian authorities not only
suppress the rights and the freedom of the citizens, but
above all deny the Albanian people the right to life.

There is no historic medieval symbol to justify or
legitimize the criminal killings of the innocent Albanian
civilian population. The Albanian people are resilient,
thanks to their philosophy of survival, which is a
philosophy of freedom and democracy, based on the right
to education and self-government and on their resolve to
gain their legitimate rights in a peaceful way, as was
testified once more in the last parliamentary elections of 22
March 1998 in Kosovo, which reconfirmed the peaceful
approach of Dr. Rugova.

The Government of the Republic of Albania has
long been elaborating the concept of cooperation among
the Balkan States, of mutual understanding among nations
as a precondition for the integration of the Balkans into
democratic European civilization. The summit of Crete
held last year was an expression of our good will to this
end. The Albanian Government has repeatedly appealed
to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to respect the national identity of the
Albanian population not only in accordance with the
standards of the former Yugoslavia, but also with the
standards of the nations and citizens of the free world,
and to legalize political, administrative, cultural, media
and religious institutions in Kosovo.

The Republic of Albania believes that there will be
no peace in the region as long as there no political and
economic balance between the forces, the States and the
nations involved. My Government favours a peaceful
resolution of the conflict, does not support the use of
violence and is firm in demanding a harsh condemnation
of Serbia. It calls for the immediate withdrawal of the
Serbian military, paramilitary and police forces and for
serious talks, declaring that borders will not change and
that the Kosovo problem must be considered as were
those of other Yugoslav republics, always by applying the
European model.

The adoption of this resolution by the Security
Council along with all initiatives and actions of various
countries and international organizations will guarantee
the establishment of the necessary balance in the region.
Given the dimensions of the Kosovo crisis and the danger
of it spilling over to the south of the Balkan Peninsula,
which might have unforeseeable dimensions, the crisis
goes far beyond the limits of "some implications for the
regional security". We do believe that the great
responsibility of the Member States of the Security
Council to preserve peace and security in the area, in
order to avoid a new tragedy, will guide them to take the
necessary decisions without delay.

The logic of normal diplomatic action and the logic
of historical precedent, as well as the observance of
traditional balances, cannot be successful in the face of a
new impending tragedy.

Allow me to express on this occasion my country's
gratitude for the swift action and long-term approach of

 

the United States of America, the European Union and the
members of the Contact Group towards the resolution of
the crisis. We believe that the spirit of responsibility and
understanding that accompany the adoption of this Security
Council resolution will guide its member States in their
future actions on this very important issue.

