Mr. Banbury: It is a pleasure to appear before the
Security Council to share the latest developments on
the Ebola crisis and response by the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER).

When the Security Council met in September and
adopted resolution 2177 (2014), almost 5,000 people
contracted the Ebola virus that month. There was a
rapid acceleration in cases and some very frightening
worst-case-scenario projections about what might
happen. While those worst-case scenarios have not
arisen, it is still the case that Ebola is a very serious
crisis threatening the entire region and that it poses
a global threat. A total of eight countries have had
Ebola cases within their borders, and many more are
threatened today.

The countries of the subregion that are at highest
risk, according to the World Health Organization, in
many cases do not have the capabilities or the systems
to respond quickly and effectively in the case of the
exportation of an Ebola case to one of those countries.
Even now, while the worst-case scenarios did not
materialize, their remain parts of Liberia, Sierra Leone
and Guinea where we see increasing case-loads and
indeed, in some cases, rapidly increasing case-loads
that are posing both big risks and big challenges.

Ebola is also a very complex emergency, and it is
very difficult to combat. While more than 5,400 people
are known to have died, it is certainly the case that
many more than that have actually died. Those are the
total reported cases, but we know that the real number
is no doubt significantly higher and that many more
people are still going to die - people who have not
yet become infected, who will become infected and are
going to die from this virus.

But beyond the human toll, Ebola is taking a
devastating toll on the social and economic livelihoods
ofthe most affected countries. This is a message I heard
repeatedly and quite strongly from the Heads of State
of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, as well as from
Government officials at all levels, down to the pre'fet
or district level. Even when Ebola was no longer a very
prevalent disease in their communities, its aftereffects
were widespread in the economies and livelihoods of
these communities.

There are many statistics that can demonstrate the
impact of Ebola beyond the health impact. The Liberian
Minister of Finance recently reported that, while the
Liberian economy had been projected to grow at 5.9 per
cent, it is now projected to shrink by 0.4 per cent.
UNICEF has reported more than 3,300 Ebola orphans.
In the three most affected countries, 10,000 schools are
closed and more than 2 million children who should be
in school are now not able to go to school. The World
Bank has reported that, in Liberia, 46 per cent of the
workforce at the time of the outbreak of the Ebola crisis
is now unemployed - almost half the members of the
workforce have lost their jobs since the outbreak began.

One of the impacts of all this is that, as the virus
spreads in countries, the needs of their Governments
to respond - including the financial needs - are
increasing significantly, but Government revenues are
decreasing. The gap between available means and needs
is therefore getting larger on a virtually daily basis.
There are many significant operational challenges
posed by the Ebola crisis. One of the most difficult is
the unknown nature of it. The world has never faced a
crisis like this before. Those countries have not; their
health-care systems have not; their societies have not;
nor have the United Nations health experts. We are
therefore obliged to fight this invisible enemy with
tools that we are forging at the same time that we are
putting them into use.

In addition, the Governments and countries most
affected do not have well-developed systems, be they
health-care systems, surveillance infrastructure,
road and transport infrastructure or communications
infrastructure; nor do the United Nations or
non-governmental organization partners have the kind
of infrastructure and geographic presence throughout
those countries that are now necessary in order to
effectively combat this disease.

In part because of all these reasons, the Secretary-
General decided to establish UNMEER following the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2177 (2014) and
General Assembly resolution 69/1. The attention that
the Security Council has paid to the Ebola crisis has,
I believe, been extremely important in mobilizing the
international political will and resources necessary to
effectively combat the disease.

In UNMEER's first 30 days of its existence,
we were very focused on deploying the necessary
capability on the ground. What we were trying to
achieve in 30 days in terms of information collection,
analysis, planning, deployment and the establishment
of operational capability is something that would
normally be done sequentially for a United Nations
mission over period of several months, and we tried to
do it all simultaneously and combine it in essentially
a 30-day period. I believe that, to a very large extent,
we were successful at that. We established a presence
in four countries; we are operational in the three most
affected ones. We have the leadership teams and the
necessary operational capability in place to carry
UNMEER operations. We are additionally deploying
more and more staff not just to the three most affected
countries but to remote locations in those countries,
where the disease is increasingly spreading and where,
in the end, we will have to fight it.

I should pause here for a minute to talk about
today's developments concerning Mali. While I said
that the Mission was operational in three countries
and had established a presence in four, today,
following consultations with President Keita of Mali,
the Secretary-General directed us to immediately
establish a presence in Mali to support that country's
national efforts to stop the disease before it spreads.
The Secretary-General is drawing on important lessons
from the current crisis and is determined that the
United Nations system take rapid and decisive action at
an early stage on the crisis in Mali before it has the kind
of devastating impact that some of Mali's neighbours
are experiencing.

UNMEER is a unique mission, tailored in many
ways to deal with a unique and unprecedented crisis. It
is unique in many ways. It is the first emergency health
mission and the first United Nations system-wide
mission. At its heart, it is a crisis-management mission,
with the singular objective of stopping Ebola. That is
the Mission's only objective. It is also unique because
of the way in which it is structured and focused on the
things that it must achieve, including safe burials, case
treatment and contact identification and tracing. That
means that the Mission is organized and structured
around the outcomes that it must achieve, as opposed
to the inputs it has been offered. We have put in place a
comprehensive 30-, 60- and 90-day plan, along with an
operational plan based on the objectives embedded in
the 30-, 60- and 90-day plan.

The operational plan is an absolutely necessary
precondition for success. We need a plan that is
achievable and that will, if achieved, accomplish the
identified objectives. That is an essential element of
good crisis management and one of the values that
UNMEER can bring to the table. Our work in the
operational area - those outcomes to which I just
referred, including case identification, safe burials, case
treatment and so on - are supported by five underlying
enabling activities: logistics; information management,
which is absolutely essential to accomplishing our
operational objectives; human resource mobilization,
not only with respect to UNMEER but in terms of
contact tracers; social mobilization; and the payment
of workers. UNMEER will not itself undertake all
of those activities. We will work on some of them,
but most are being carried out by others, including
United Nations agency partners working within the
UNMEER framework, as well as the non-governmental
organizations that are playing such an important role in
bringing the crisis under control. In that regard, I would
like to pay tribute to Me'decins Sans Frontieres, with
whom I have met on all my trips and from whose advice
I have benefitted greatly. They have done outstanding
work in dealing with the Ebola crisis from its outset in
March.

As the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
noted, we are starting to see significant improvements
in the crisis response. We have received some very
encouraging news. We know that the worst-case
scenarios of exponential growth have not materialized.
The new cases every week are declining or are at least
stabilizing. In terms of response, the latest World
Health Organization figures show that, for known
cases, we are achieving 55 per cent of our target in
terms of case isolation, and 87 percent in the case of
case burials. Those are very significant achievements
compared to where we were when the Council last met
on this subject (see S/PV.7279). However, we are far
from ending the crisis.
First of all, those numbers look better than they
are, because they refer to case isolations and safe
burials of known cases. The real number of cases is
much higher, so the achievement percentages are going
to be much lower. And even while we see important
progress in some areas, we see dramatic declines
in others with rapid acceleration in cases. Guinea in
particular is facing some difficulty. It has not received
the attention and resources from the international
community that Liberia and Sierra Leone have. Even
though the numbers in both those countries are higher,
the complexity of the response in Guinea, for a variety
of reasons related to geographic dispersal, aspects of
some of the communities, security concerns, as well
as resources from the international community, make
the challenges in bringing the crisis in Guinea under
control particularly severe. As a result, UNMEER is
enhancing its attention to the situation in Guinea and
is trying to focus additional resources there, even as
we try to do everything we can to support the efforts in
Liberia and Sierra Leone.

I would like to underline one of the important
reasons for success in the areas where progress has
been achieved, as pointed out by Special Envoy
Nabarro: communities themselves are taking action and
changing their behaviour to protect themselves. That
has been absolutely essential, and the United Nations
takes absolutely no credit for the work and actions of
the communities. However, it must be said that another
reason that we have seen important progress has been
the response by Governments, non-governmental
organizations and the United Nations system. I believe
that we have been able to prove that the strategy we
have adopted works when we apply it. It succeeds. That
is very heartening, but it also presents especially large
challenges, because the necessary operational response
is very complex. It requires a lot of moving pieces. It is
operationally complex and resource-intensive. It takes
a lot of people, infrastructure and assets to do all that
is required in an area facing an Ebola outbreak. That
means that the goal that Mr. Nabarro spoke of, which
we all share - the goal of zero transmission, where we
see the last case under treatment - is going to require
a tremendous increase in the resources on the ground
in a dispersed geographical area. We are not going to
be able to succeed based only on work in the capitals,
much less in Accra.
I would also like to highlight that we know not only
the strategy that works, but also some of the underlying
factors for success. In addition to the plan to which I
referred earlier, it is essential to have strong Government
leadership and a crisis management structure in place.
I am happy to say that in Sierra Leone, Guinea and
Liberia the Governments have taken a leadership role,
and there is strong support from UNMEER and other
partners for the crisis management structure. It is
working to varying degrees, but it is in place in each
country. We also need to ensure that there is a coherent,
coordinated international response. Again, I think that
is getting better on a daily basis in each of the three
countries, thanks in part to the role that UNMEER has
been playing. However, it is clear that much more must
be done to bring this crisis under control. Bending the
curve was hard, and getting to a declining case-load
was very hard. Getting it down to zero is going to be
much harder. The amount of effort, resources, contact
tracers, mobility and hard work in the most remote
areas required to bring it down to zero is going to be
very significant. There is a long battle ahead of us.

One of the great challenges we face is the increased
geographic dispersion of the disease, which has
significantly expanded the requirements of having
resources on the ground. Therefore, in order for us to
get ahead of the disease - not react to it, but to be
able to defeat it where it is - we need not only greater
geographic dispersal of capabilities, but more mobility
and a rapid response capability that includes the
contact tracers, health experts, laboratory capabilities,
social mobilization and the burial teams and the
accompanying infrastructure. It is highly challenging,
but will be absolutely necessary.

In conclusion, I believe we should be very
heartened, as Mr. Nabarro said in his remarks, by
the progress achieved. Those responsible for that,
especially the Governments and communities, as well
as the non-governmental organization community,
should take great pride in their achievements.

But we are deep in the midst ofthis Ebola crisis - a
very dangerous crisis that poses today, and will pose
tomorrow, a very serious threat to the people, societies,
communities and countries that are now affected, as
well as other countries throughout the world. As long
as Ebola is present and spreading in one country, we
know that it is a danger to all countries.

This is a unique challenge. The attention of the
Security Council is deeply welcomed. Right now we
must work hard, we must work fast, we must work
smart and we must work until the disease is finished.
