Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Ms. Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her sixth
report pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) and for her
briefing today. Let me reiterate our full support and
appreciation for her work. I would also like to welcome
the Permanent Representative of Libya, Mr. Dabbashi,
to the Council.

Luxembourg is a firm advocate of the International
Criminal Court. We think that justice and peace are
complementary and that the fight for the rule of law
and against impunity is of fundamental importance. In
that regard, we believe that the ICC Prosecutor and her
Office have a real role to play in Libya at a time when
the country is laying the foundations for its new State.
For that reason, like previous speakers we welcome the
fact that the Libyan authorities have reiterated their
willingness to cooperate with the Court by signing
a cooperation and burden-sharing memorandum of
understanding on new investigations and prosecutions
with the Office of the Prosecutor at the beginning of
the month. That is a promising develoment and an
example to be followed by other countries, some of
which are calling into question the very principle of
their cooperation with the Court. We are confident that
the Libyan Government will do its utmost to ensure the
effective implementation of that important agreement.

We understand and respect the fact that the Libyan
authorities wish, in some cases, to try individuals
accused of committing crimes that fall under the
Statute of Rome on their territory. In that regard, we
must welcome the fact that Libya has always complied
with the procedures of the Rome Statute when it has
raised objections of inadmissibility in the SaifAl-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi cases. With regard
to the latter case, the Court's Pre-Trial Chamber handed
down a judgement on 11 October, while a decision has
yet to be issued in connection with the Al-Qadhafi case.

We trust that the Libyan authorities will respect the
final decision of the Court on the case of SaifAl-Islam
Al-Qadhafi case. We are confident that they will
appropriately follow up on the rejection of the request
for suspensive effect of the requirement to surrender
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the ICC and will deliver
the accused to the ICC pending a definitive decision of
the Court on the admissibility challenge.

The Libyan authorities have the ultimate
responsibility to ensure respect for the rule of law in
their country. However, the current situation of major
insecurity is a serious obstacle to achieving that goal.
We therefore call on the Libyan authorities to do more
to create a favourable security environment, for there
cannot be real justice or genuine freedom without
security and stability also being guaranteed. For the
memorandum of understanding on the division of
labour between the Court and the Libyan authorities
to be properly implemented, it is important that the
Office of the Prosecutor be able to move unhindered
throughout Libya.

The international community must stand with
Libyans to help them meet the twin challenges of
security and national reconciliation. However, that
does not excuse us from remaining vigilant in ensuring
respect for fundamental freedoms. We therefore note
with concern the report published on 1 October by
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights on torture and mistreatment in detention
centres. The Libyan authorities have recognized the
seriousness of the problem, and we have no doubt
they will implement the recommendations contained
in the report, in particular concerning the transfer of
prisoners to detention centres controlled by the State, in
order to make a definitive break with the dark practices
inherited from the Al-Qadhafi regime. We also support,
along with Prosecutor Bensouda, the idea of a periodic
review of the implementation of the law criminalizing
torture that was adopted in April.

Let me conclude by acknowledging the very
positive development represented by the adoption, on
22 September by the Libyan General National Congress,
of the law on transitional justice. That text was long
overdue. It contains, among others, provisions relating
to the rights of and compensation for victims and the
identification of responsibilities for the crimes of the
past. It is our hope that the implementation of the law
will be swift and will facilitate the process of national
reconciliation.

