Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Madam President, allow me to congratulate you
on your leadership in leading the work of the Council
this month, and your entire team for its work. We
welcome the initiative of the United States for having
introduced a new way of conducting Security Council
consultations, which you also decided to use, while
providing several improvements. The method makes
our meetings more flexible.

We note with satisfaction that the debates
organized on the situation in the Sudan and South
Sudan (see S/PV.7276) allowed Council members
to better understand the status of Abyei, with all the
parametres and challenges represented by the elections
to be organized by Khartoum in 2015. It was under
your presidency, Madam President, that the Security
Council extended the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei to 28 February 2015.
The related resolution 2179 (2014), presented by the
United States, was adopted by the Security Council
and welcomed by the Permanent Representatives of the
Sudan and South Sudan.

Regarding the Ebola crisis, we also acknowledge
that your leadership has led to the issue's having been
considered twice by the Council and to important
measures have been taken. The open debate on Ebola
held on 14 October (see S/PV.7279), followed by
consultations, allowed the Council and the entire
international community to acknowledge that Ebola
constitutes a genuine threat to peace and security, not
only in the three most impacted countries but also for
all humankind. We would wish to see the momentum
of solidarity launched at that collective awareness-
raising event to be maintained and strengthened so as
to eradicate the epidemic at its source and to ensure
that it does not spread to the rest of the world. In
other words, the three most impacted countries should
receive multifaceted assistance that will allow them to
build upon their achievements in peacebuilding and
economic development.
The meeting with the Force Commanders of
United Nations peacekeeping missions (see S/PV.7275)
highlighted the tenuous nature of the conditions in
which Blue Helmets carry out their missions. They
increasingly face complex, hostile and unpredictable
situations, and they are regularly targeted by non-State
actors in the Golan, Syria, northern Mali, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic. Mandates must therefore be adjusted
to take that new element into account.

Regarding the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, we welcome the meetings convened by the
Argentine presidency, which allowed Council members
to clarify their stances on various matters. Nevertheless,
a lack of consensus within the Council has meant that
the Syrian and Palestinian questions have yet to find
medium- or long-term solutions.

Somalia has also been the subject of particular
attention this month. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the Special Representative of the
African Union for Somalia and the Head of the African
Union Mission in Somalia each described a hopeful
outlook for that devastated country. The military
success of Operation Indian Ocean and the political
efforts under way in Somalia should lead to the holding
of credible elections in 2016. My delegation believes
that the Security Council should consider the effective
implementation of resolution 2182 (2014), which, inter
alia, prohibits the export of charcoal.

On 23 October, the Security Council debated its
methods of work (see S/PV.7285) so as to improve the
effectiveness of its activities. This shed new light on
the need to enhance the transparency and regularity of
the sanctions regime. The participation in that meeting
by many Member States demonstrates the interest
attached to the matter by the broader United Nations
membership.

I cannot conclude without referring to the meeting
held on 28 October on the theme "Women and peace
and security - Displaced women and girls: leaders and
survivors" (see S/PV.7289), which led to the adoption
of presidential statement S/PRST/2014/21. We welcome
the fact that all speakers recognized the central role
that women can play in peace and security processes
throughout the world and the need to protect women
and to ensure their full and equal participation in all
efforts in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and
in post-conflict peacebuilding.

In conclusion, I wish to congratulate you, Madam
President, and the entire Argentine team for the
significant work accomplished, the relevance of the
topics chosen and the tireless efforts made throughout
your term. I take this opportunity to congratulate
Australia on assuming the presidency of the Council
for the month of November; I assure its delegation of
the full support of my own and wish it every success.

