Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): Allow me to extend my
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative and Special Representative of the
European Union (EU), and to thank him for his
briefing and his report (see S/2011/283). Croatia aligns
itself with the statement of the European Union, but
allow me to make an additional statement in my
national capacity.

The report presents a worrisome picture of a
post-electoral Bosnia and Herzegovina where virtually
no reforms have been implemented and progress
towards EU and NATO integration has been effectively
stalled. The situation has been further exacerbated by
the use of nationalistic and divisive rhetoric. In this
context, we agree with the assessment that it would be
premature to close the Office of the High
Representative this year.

Let me stress that the sustainable stability of
South-East Europe is in Croatia's strategic interest. A
clear Euro-Atlantic perspective is necessary for the
whole region, and we believe that progress towards
Euro-Atlantic integration is a precondition for the
long-term stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
countries in South-East Europe. We firmly support
Bosnia and Herzegovina in implementing the necessary
reforms, and we have invested a lot of effort in offering
our assistance and experience on its EU and NATO
integration path. We believe that membership of the
European Union represents the most suitable
framework for the overall development of all countries
of South-East Europe.

Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina maintain a
close relationship as two neighbouring and friendly
countries that have common interests in many different
areas. This fact has been exemplified by a series of
high-level visits, the most recent of which occurred
three months ago when the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina visited Zagreb and held meetings with
President Ivo Josipovie and Prime Minister Jadranka
Kosor. In addition, the Croatian President and Prime
Minister issued three joint statements in which they
emphasized Croatia's support for Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its Euro-Atlantic path and confirmed
its responsible policy towards Bosnia and Herzegovina
as a neighbouring sovereign country in which Croats
are a constitutive people.

These joint statements and high-level visits of
Croatian leaders represent a strong encouragement to
Bosnia and Herzegovina and to the principle of the
equality of all constituent peoples and citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Croatia also supports the
return of refugees to the country, primarily to the
Republika Srpska.

Croatia has expressed concern at the ongoing
political crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
threatens to aggravate relations in the Federation and
block the formation of a Government at the State level.
Croatia regards the country's territorial integrity, its
sovereignty and the equality of its three constitutive
peoples as the basic preconditions for Bosnia and
Herzegovina's stability and sustainability. Therefore,
Croatia believes that, notwithstanding the current
impasse in the formation of a Government, all parties
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the international
community should strive to agree on a set of
constitutional amendments that would move the
country forward towards Europe, while preserving the
full equality of all constitutive peoples and all citizens
throughout the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We are concerned by the fact that the political
option, which at present enjoys the support of the vast
majority of Bosnian Croats, is not represented at all
political levels. It is hard to imagine lasting
constitutional reform that would make Bosnia and
Herzegovina more effective and functional without the
political option enjoying the widest popular support of
one of the three constitutive peoples of the country.
There should be no alternative to a structured political
dialogue, and no effort should be spared to reach
legitimate solutions. All important decisions in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, especially those with potentially far-
reaching consequences, should be made through the
consensus of all three constitutive peoples. Otherwise,
we may witness the emergence of two entities, each
dominated by a single people and increasingly drifting
apart. There is also the potential that precious time to
implement the needed pro-European reforms will be
lost.

In this regard, we agree with the previous
speakers who have expressed serious concern about the

unilateral decision of the Republika Srpska to hold a
referendum on challenging the authority of State
judicial institutions and rejecting the authority and past
decisions of the High Representative. We believe that
this decision should be reversed, as it undermines the
constitutional structure of the country and could undo
the positive developments achieved since the entry into
force of the Dayton Peace Agreement.

If the referendum moves forward, it may foster
new tensions in the country and the region. Croatia
underscores that all parties should respect the Dayton
Peace Agreement and the actions of the High
Representative undertaken with the approval of the
Security Council, acting under the authority of Chapter
VII of the United Nations Charter.

Finally, the fight against impunity for war crimes
is crucial to the normalization of the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The two remaining fugitives,
Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic, indicted for the most
atrocious crimes committed in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Croatia, must be brought to justice. If they are not,
the mandate of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and its legacy in the region cannot
be declared complete.

