Ms. Sipilainen (Finland): 1 would like to thank
Peru for convening this debate. Finland commends
the progress study on youth, peace and security by the
Secretariat (see S/2018/86) and thanks Mr. Graeme
Simpson, along with his Advisory Group of Experts,
for their thorough work in carrying out the study.

Finland aligns itself with the statement just
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

The Security Council adopted resolution 2250
(2015), on youth, peace and security, in 2015, but the
seeds were planted by active youth long before then. The
resolution promotes the idea of youth as a positive force
towards peace. Today it is important to focus on the
effective implementation of the resolution. The progress
study at hand is an invaluable instrument in supporting
the full participation of youth in peace processes.

Finland is pleased that prevention has been
established at the centre of the agenda of Secretary-
General Guterres. The progress study emphasizes the
role of young people in conflict prevention.

It has become clear that an inclusive approach to
peacebuilding is necessary for the achievement of good
quality results and that sustaining peace requires the
involvement of a wide range of actors from different
parts of society. That means youth, women and
civil society.

In most of the societies suffering from violent
conflicts, women are underrepresented in both formal
and informal decision-making. As we know, youth
make up another significant part of the population that
is often marginalized from political processes. That
means that the voices of young women too often go
unheard, and especially so in conflict situations. In
Finland, Ms. Jutta Urpilainen, the Foreign Minister's
Special Representative on Mediation, has chosen
to focus her work on both young people and women
as priorities.

The women and peace and security agenda promoted
by resolution 1325 (2000) has gained significant
normative and political strength since its adoption,
18 years ago. Finland remains strongly committed to
advancing the women and peace and security agenda,
and our recently published third national action plan on
the resolution was drafted with the close participation of
civil society. We hope to see a similar path of progress
with regard to the youth, peace and security agenda.

I wish to take this opportunity to commend
Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake for her work as the
Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth. We look forward
to continuing our close cooperation with her.

Active Finnish youth organizations have played
a strong role in promoting resolution 2250 (2015). In
our future efforts to advance the implementation of the
resolution, we intend to keep civil society, especially
youth organizations, strongly involved in the process.
Our national 2250-Network, a group of stakeholders
and non-governmental organizations with a focus on
representing youth, is a concrete example of that work.

The progress study sends a strong message
about the importance of keeping young people on the
agenda of the Security Council. The youth perspective
should be a mainstreamed, overarching approach in
future resolutions, with mechanisms for following
up its implementation. The progress study teaches
us that building mutual trust between young people
and Governments is a prerequisite for improving
youth participation. That means actively promoting
their participation and giving them responsibility,
not just tolerating their presence. The report also
includes concrete recommendations that need to be
implemented. I would particularly like to highlight
recommendations related to education and media
literacy, which can contribute both to recovery and
building a peaceful future.

Our role as decision-makers in our societies is not
to work for the youth, but with them. Young men and
women do not need the voices of others to speak on their
behalf; they just need to be enabled to get on the stage
to speak for themselves, instead of being prevented
from doing so.

