Mr. Abelian (Armenia): First of all, allow me to
thank your delegation, Sir, for the timely initiative of
bringing this agenda item before the Security Council for
discussion.

In recent years, the world has faced a number of
complex emergencies entailing conflicts and massive
population displacements. Armenia notes with great
concern that the number of refugees throughout the world
has increased from 1 million in the 1950s to almost 26
million in the 19905.

The global nature of the problem requires the
international community to focus its attention on it,
seeking to create a secure environment for providing
humanitarian assistance to civilians in need.

 

The presence of hundreds of thousands of refugees is
a very heavy burden for any country, especially for a
country with an economy in transition. In Armenia, the
refugee crisis is further aggravated by the blockade imposed
by neighbouring Azerbaijan, transportation difficulties, and
the existence of the earthquake zone, only 35 per cent of
which has been reconstructed.

Nevertheless, having accommodated over 300,000
refugees from Azerbaijan, the Government of Armenia is
doing its utmost to assist them in meeting their needs.
Simultaneously, essential steps, including the adoption of
appropriate legislation, are being taken towards integrating
them into society. In November 1995, the Parliament
passed the Law on Citizenship, providing the refugees with
the right to become citizens of the Republic of Armenia.

The people of Armenia greatly appreciate the
humanitarian assistance extended to the refugees by
individual States, international organizations, and various
non-govemmental organizations. In this respect, we
particularly commend the activities of the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the United Nations
Children's Fund in Armenia directed towards the most
vulnerable groups of the population: refugees and displaced
persons, refugee children under 6 years old, children
deprived of one or both parents, single mothers, the
disabled and single elderly people.

We believe that the United Nations system and
affiliated organizations should also provide assistance to
those who cannot meet their own basic needs and for whom
there are no other available resources for this purpose. In
this regard, I would like to draw the attention of members
to the humanitarian situation in Nagomy Karabakh.

Humanitarian assistance should always be based on
need and on the principle of impartiality. The United
Nations should make all necessary arrangements to evaluate
the needs of the population of Nagorny Karabakh and to
provide humanitarian assistance to them. In order for this
assistance to reach the recipients, international relief efforts
should have free and unimpeded access to Nagomy
Karabakh. In this respect, humanitarian corridors or any
other form of humanitarian space could be considered as a
suitable mechanism.

We are convinced that, in order to find final and
lasting solutions to refugee problems all over the world, we
need to look at the root causes of these problems.
Preventive activities by humanitarian and human rights
organizations should be encouraged, and tolerance and
respect for individual and minority rights and ethnic
communities promoted.

Until those final solutions are found, direct
humanitarian assistance to those in need is, and will be,
of the utmost importance.

