Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): At the outset, I would like
to thank the President of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone, Justice Shireen Avis Fisher, and the Prosecutor,
Ms. Brenda Hollis, for their briefings. We also thank
Her Excellency Mrs. Ebun Jusu, Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone, for her statement. We
welcome the report of the Special Court, which was
shared with the Council.

Let me reiterate Pakistan's complete support for
the important work of the United Nations-established
special courts and tribunals. We commend their work in
promoting accountability and fighting impunity in the
particular situations of relevance.

The Special Court for Sierra Leone was established,
pursuant to resolution 1315 (2000), to prosecute persons
responsible for the horrific crimes committed during the
conflict in Sierra Leone. As the Court approaches the
conclusion of its mandate, it deserves recognition for
its work in addressing the most painful chapter in the
history of Sierra Leone. The Court has dealt well with the
crimes within its jurisdiction. The outreach activities of
the Court should help facilitate national reconciliation.
Programmes and activities for strengthening the national
legal and criminal justice system in Sierra Leone is
another important contribution of the Court.

As the Court winds up its activities, there are still
important areas of work that need to be brought to a
conclusion. Most important is the completion of the
appellate proceedings with regard to Mr. Charles Taylor.
We take note of the work under way for transferring
the long-term aspects of the Court's mandate to the
Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone, including
the enforcement of sentences, witness protection, the
management of archives and the trials of those still at
large. We urge all concerned stakeholders to cooperate
in this endeavour.

I would like to conclude by commending the
President, Prosecutor and other members of the Special
Court for their efforts and achievements.

