Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation is
pleased, Sir, to see you presiding over this important
meeting. It is indeed encouraging to see the Security
Council once again discussing the issue of Palestine.

Five days ago, the Secretary-General made what
is probably the most sobering assessment of the
situation in the Middle East. For the Security Council,
whose mandate is the maintenance of peace and
security, the Secretary-General's message could not
have been more urgent. To quote the Secretary-
General, we are indeed "nearing the edge of the abyss"
(S/PV.4474, p. 2).
S/PV.4478

 

The Non-Aligned Movement has consistently
maintained that ultimately there can be no military
solution to the conflict between the Palestinians and
the Israelis. The continued escalation of conflict cannot
contribute to any solution in the Middle East. In fact,
the events of the past 18 months have clearly
demonstrated that there can be no unilateral solution to
this crisis. It is foreign occupation, settlement
activities, collective punishment of Palestinian people,
extrajudicial killings, human rights abuses and poverty
that are the root causes of violence and insecurity in
the region.

Many years ago, the Security Council enshrined
the principle of land for peace in its resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), which still constitute the
internationally accepted basis for a negotiated
settlement to the dispute.

The Palestinian Authority was created as an
instrument to help lay the foundation for peace among
the Palestinian people. But the institutions of the
Palestinian Authority find themselves the target of
daily military attacks by the Israeli army. This
concerted effort is aimed at weakening and discrediting
President Arafat and the Palestinian Authority. The
continued restrictions on the movement of President
Arafat, aimed at keeping him under virtual house
arrest, are another unacceptable attempt to humiliate
the leader of the Palestinian people. However, we
believe that all these actions can only make peace
difficult to achieve.

The Non-Aligned Movement believes that the
Israelis and the Palestinians may not be able to end the
cycle of violence and resume dialogue without resolute
international assistance. The international community
must support a peace plan and ensure that there is
effective monitoring of the implementation of
agreements made. Although the Security Council has
yet to be convinced, we believe that the presence of a
credible, multinational monitoring mechanism is
required on the ground.

South Africa has undertaken many initiatives to
facilitate peace in the Middle East as mandated by the
Non-Aligned Movement. The Non-Aligned Movement
has a well known principled position calling for a
Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Recently, President Mbeki invited leading political
figures who support peace in the Middle East, both
Palestinians and Israelis, to join him and several other
prominent South Africans at a presidential retreat at the
Spier wine estate in Cape Town from 9 to 11 January
2002. The aims of the Spier retreat were: to support the
ongoing initiatives towards the creation of a favourable
environment to restart peace negotiations; to share
South Africa's experience in negotiations, peacemaking
and transition to democracy; and to support the
strengthening of the peace camps in Palestine and in
Israel, as well as the general dynamic towards peace in
the region.

The Spier communique, which was issued at the
conclusion of the meeting, demonstrates that there are
still leaders in Israel and in Palestine who are
genuinely committed to dialogue and to building a
partnership for peace. President Mbeki and his
colleagues are continuing discussions to build on that
initiative.

Even in the midst of the growing despair, there
remains hope. We appreciate the efforts of other
international groups, such as the European Union, in
seeking new ways to restart the peace process. We are
also particularly encouraged by recent signs of a
revival among the peace camps in both Israel and
Palestine. That is a fundamental acknowledgement
that, ultimately, reconciliation and peace lie in the
hands of the Israelis and the Palestinians themselves. It
is our collective duty to support them in their search
for peace; the international community has a particular
role to play in encouraging the re-emergence of those
in both Israel and Palestine who support peace.

