Mr. Okuda (Japan): I would like to thank the
Chairs of the Council's three counter-terrorism-related
Committees for their briefings on developments during
the past six months. I would also like to pay tribute to
the dedicated work of the Chairs and of the respective
expert groups.

Terrorism continues to constitute one of the most
serious threats to peace and security in the world.
Countering terrorism requires a comprehensive and
multifaceted approach, as well as enduring engagement
on the part of the international community. That is why
the United Nations is so important in leading and
coordinating the efforts to combat terrorism. The three
Committees play a central role in this endeavour,
pursuant to their respective mandates.

As we are all aware, the threat of terrorism posed
by Al-Qaida and the Taliban continues unabated. In
order for the regime under resolution 1267 (1999) to be
fully effective, the credibility of the consolidated list is
indispensable. In that regard, Japan welcomes the
adoption in December 2009 of resolution 1904 (2009),
which introduced a new mechanism to that end. We
welcome the establishment of the Office of the
Ombudsperson for de-listing procedures and hope that
the Secretary-General will soon appoint an eminent
individual to the post.

Resolution 1904 (2009) also introduced a new
process to keep the consolidated list updated, accurate
and transparent, as described by the Committee Chair.
Japan welcomes the three improvements and will
continue to take active part in the review process in the
latter half of this year.

The Committee has reached the final stage of the
review of the list pursuant to paragraph 25 of
resolution 1822 (2008). I would like to stress in this
regard that in order to carry out a meaningful review,
additional input from the relevant States, particularly
from the designating States and the States of residence,
is indispensable. I therefore call upon relevant States to
cooperate actively with requests for updated
information.

Japan welcomes the progress made in
streamlining the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), including reducing the frequency of
CTC meetings by making good use of the silence
procedure. We recognize that we have had fruitful
discussion this year on substantive issues in the field of
counter-terrorism. It is our hope that we will have
further discussion on thematic issues and that the
discussion will facilitate the accumulation of best
practices in counter-terrorism. We also expect positive
outcomes from the regional discussions to consider
specific challenges of some regions and how to address
those challenges.

Japan attaches great importance to the role of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) in identifying specific needs in the area of
counter-terrorism technical assistance. In this regard,
we support a stock-taking exercise consisting of a
review of the implementation by all Member States of
resolution 1373 (2001). This exercise will contribute to
identifying the challenges that Member States face and
the technical assistance that they require in this area.

We would like to highlight as well the importance
of the country visits conducted by CTED. Country
visits are among the valuable tools for CTED to
ascertain the current situation of counter-terrorism
efforts in a given country and to assess actual needs for
technical assistance for capacity-building, through
direct contact with the relevant authorities of the
country concerned. In this regard, Japan expresses deep
appreciation to CTED for sharing information
regarding technical assistance needs with members of
the Counter-Terrorism Action Group (CTAG). Japan
continues to support the coordination mechanism
between CTED and CTAG.

Japan expresses its appreciation for the strenuous
efforts of the 1540 Committee to promote full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
welcomes the submission of the final document on the
2009 comprehensive review of the status of
implementation of Security Council resolution 1540
(2004) (see S/2010/52), with a view to taking forward
action on the key findings and recommendations in the
report. Japan remains committed to playing a leading

role in strengthening the non-proliferation regime by
organizing seminars and capacity-building programmes
in fields related to resolution 1540 (2004). Such
activities could include export control, mainly for
Asian countries, with particular attention to a tailored
approach reflecting the specific needs of each
individual country.

Japan also welcomes the workplan of the Nuclear
Security Summit, in which the participating States
noted the need to fully implement resolution 1540
(2004) and to support the activities of the 1540
Committee.

Lastly, we appreciate the close cooperation
among the three subsidiary Committees to maximize
the functions mandated by the respective Security
Council resolutions. We also commend the contribution
made by of their work within the framework of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force. We
trust that cooperation and coordination in this regard
will make the most of the limited capacities and
resources available by avoiding overlaps and
duplications.

