Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would first like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov
for his briefing and commend him for his active efforts
to de-escalate the tensions in the region.

The current relations between Palestine and Israel
are deeply troubling. The situation in Gaza remains
fragile and tense and we cannot afford to ignore the
possibility that the violent clashes there may escalate
further. The prospects for a two-State solution are
unclear, and the efforts for a resumption of talks
between the two sides are stalled, while the construction
of settlements continues and Palestinian houses are still
being demolished. China is deeply concerned about the
developments on the ground and the casualties from
the conflicts. The use of force and efforts to prevent
violence with violence will not solve any problems.

We strongly condemn the wilful use of force and
oppose violence against civilians. We urge all parties
to bear in mind the safety and security of the people of
the region and the imperative of peaceful coexistence
by exercising restraint in order to prevent the situation
from escalating. The dire humanitarian situation in
Gaza only undermines regional stability. We hope that
the parties concerned will fully lift the Gaza blockade
as soon as possible.

The two-State solution is the optimal way to
resolve the conflict between Palestine and Israel. The
international community should abide by the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the principle of land for
peace and the Arab Peace Initiative in scaling up its
efforts for the resumption of talks. Concrete actions
should be taken to implement resolution 2334 (2016)
and cease all settlement activities in the occupied
territories and the demolition of Palestinian houses and
property. Steps should also be taken to prevent violence
against civilians.

The international community should remain united
in pushing for an early resumption of the peace talks
between the two sides. The parties should meet each
other halfway and refrain not only from any action or
rhetoric that might aggravate the situation but also from
any unilateral action that might undermine trust, so as
to create the conditions necessary for a resumption
of the dialogue. Parties that can bring influence to
bear on the question of the Middle East should play a
constructive role in that respect.

China appreciates the efforts made by Egypt and
others to actively promote national reconciliation
in Palestine. We support the convening of a new
international conference on the question of Palestine
and the exploring of innovative mechanisms to facilitate
peace in the Middle East so as to break the deadlock in
Palestinian-Israeli talks as soon as possible.

China firmly supports the establishment of an
independent and fully sovereign State ofPalestine based
on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
We support the greater integration of Palestine into the
international community. At the opening ceremony of
the eighth ministerial meeting of the China-Arab States
Cooperation Forum, on 10 July, Chinese President
Xi Jinping announced another ¥100 million in aid to
Palestine in support of its economic development and
to improve living conditions there.
China will continue to provide emergency
humanitarian assistance to Palestine and make an
additional contribution of $2 million to the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. In this regard, China has
always done what it believes it should do, to the extent
possible. We have no intention of competing with any
other country.

Peace, reform and development are the common
requirements of the countries of the Middle East.
Stability, tranquillity and happiness are the shared
aspirations of the people of the region. We should
address hot-spot issues in the Middle East in a peaceful,
just, constructive and inclusive manner.

To be specific, we should, first, remain committed
to a political solution and facilitate dialogue and
negotiations so as to stop the vicious circle of violence
for violence; secondly, be impartial and refrain from
imposing compromises so that stability can turn into
lasting peace rather than to a mere hiatus in turmoil;
thirdly, manage the situation in a constructive manner
that takes into consideration both history and reality,
so as to gradually build momentum for ending the
violence and improving the situation; and, fourthly,
accommodate the legitimate rights and interests of all
parties and refrain from making exclusive arrangements,
with a view to building an open and stable framework
for peace in the region.

Finally, I should like to reiterate that China stands
ready to work with the countries of the region to better
align our strategies and actions. We are committed to
safeguarding peace and stability in the Middle East,
upholding equity and justice, promoting common
development and advocating mutual learning and
friendship, with a view to contributing to the building
of a community with a shared future for humankind.

