Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by
thanking the Secretary-General as well as today's
briefers, Mr. Ozerdem and Ms. Elman, for their very
informative interventions. I would also like to thank
the British presidency and you personally, Sir, for
having organized this open debate, which addresses
one of the most crucial elements of peacebuilding and
sustaining peace.

While there is neither a common definition of
reconciliation nor one universal model that countries
can simply implement, it is essential for us to exchange
views on every aspect of this complex process. The
common denominator of all of the different models
and perceptions of the reconciliation process should
be a survivor-centred approach. It is essential that
the process itself and the priorities be set by the
communities affected.
National reconciliation and peacebuilding cannot
work if certain vulnerable groups or minorities -
including displaced persons, persons belonging
to religious minorities, women, young people and
people with disabilities - are discriminated against
or marginalized. Here, working hand in hand with
communities, religious leaders have to play their part.

Often religions and beliefs are perceived as a
factor of conflict, but we should not forget that it may
also be a part of the solution. The recent history of
my own country illustrates clearly the positive role of
the Church in creating conditions for social dialogue,
which 30 years ago resulted in peaceful, democratic
changes in Poland.

As pointed out in the excellent concept note
prepared by the United Kingdom presidency
(S/2019/871, annex), community and faith leaders can
play a critical role in reconciliation efforts at all levels,
especially in struggling with issues around freedom of
religion and belief.

In this context, interreligious and intercultural
dialogue is vital to building a lasting peace. For this
dialogue to be effective, it must be carried out in good
faith and based on knowledge, mutual understanding
and tolerance.

On 22 August, we observed for the first time the
International Day Commemorating the Victims of Acts
of Violence Based on Religion or Belief, established by
the General Assembly on the initiative of Poland with
the support of a cross-regional group of countries. We
believe that this initiative will positively contribute to
combating hate crimes and acts of violence based on
religion or belief and further strengthen interreligious
dialogue and respect for religious diversity. It creates
a platform for discussions and allows victims and
survivors to have their voices heard.

The first-ever Arria Formula meeting devoted to
this topic, held during the Polish presidency of the
Council last August, proved that the voices of victims,
while heartbreaking, give us hope and direction for the
way ahead.

