Mr. Riecken (Austria): It is my honour to speak
on behalf of the members of the Human Security
Network, namely, Costa Rica, Chile, Greece, Ireland,
Jordan, Mali, Norway, Panama, Slovenia, Switzerland,
Thailand, South Africa as an observer, and my own
country, Austria. The Human Security Network
is an informal group of States that advocates a
people-centred, holistic approach to human security,
complementing the more traditional understanding of
national and international security.

Let me take the opportunity to thank the United
States presidency of the Council for convening this
important open debate, as well as today's briefers
for their presentations and for sharing their moving
experiences with us, and Luxembourg for its work and
efforts as Chair of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict.

The Human Security Network welcomes the
Secretary-General's recent annual report on children
and armed conflict (S/2014/339), including the listing
of perpetrators in its annexes. We welcome the hard and
committed work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and UNICEF.

The Human Security Network wishes to draw
attention to the adoption of resolution 2143 (2014),
which sets out practical steps to combat violations
against children in armed conflict and to protect
their right to education, including through preventive
training in child protection for military personnel,
police and peacekeepers. Recent events have shown the
timeliness of such a focus on protecting schools from
military use, including as weapons storage facilities,
and we therefore underline the Council's call on
Member States to consider concrete measures to deter
the use of schools by armed forces and non-State armed
groups. In that regard, the Network also takes note with
interest of the work on the draft Lucens Guidelines on
the military use of schools.

Although we remain concerned about the
high number of parties listed in the annexes to the
Secretary-General's report, including the 31 persistent
perpetrators, we also acknowledge that there has been
significant progress, which confirms the benefits
and merits of the Security Council framework for the
protection of children in armed conflict.

We would like to commend the Chadian
Government for the various steps it took in 2013 that
led to the de-listing of its armed forces and encourage
it to take further measures to ensure the sustainability
and effective prevention of violations against children.
That progress is an important step towards achieving
the goal of the Children, Not Soldiers campaign. In that
regard, we also commend the Government of Yemen for
signing an action plan in May 2014 to end and prevent
the recruitment and use of children by the Yemeni
armed forces.

The Secretary-General's report also highlights
the ongoing crises in the Central African Republic,
South Sudan and the Syrian Arab Republic and their
devastating impact on children. Violence in the Syrian
Arab Republic reached unprecedented levels in 2013
and remains an urgent concern. The United Nations
estimates that more than 10,000 children have been
killed in the conflict, and the violations, including
indiscriminate shelling, attacks targeting civilians and
the killing, recruitment and use of children by armed
groups, continue unabated. The emergence of new
situations with worrying effects on children reminds
us that violence against children is a common feature
of conflict nowadays. Most recently, UNICEF reported
on 7 August that 429 children had been killed "as a
result of airstrikes and shelling" in Gaza. In Nigeria,
Boko Haram's attacks on schools and schoolchildren
are notorious. That reminds us of the particular
vulnerability of girls in armed conflict, who are often
used in support roles.

While we welcome the progress made, we would
like to point out that the overwhelming majority of
parties listed in the report of the Secretary-General are
armed non-State actors. We also call for more efforts
to address impunity and to investigate, prosecute and
punish all those who commit grave violations against
children.

Finally, the Human Security Network encourages
States that have not yet done so to ratify the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict.

