Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I wish to
begin by thanking Mr. Alvaro de Soto for his briefing
on the most recent events in the Middle East. I wish
him every success in his complex tasks.

It is with great concern that we have recently
witnessed a further deterioration of the situation and a
renewed rise of tension in the Middle East. Indeed,
following a calm of several months, extrajudicial
killings, repression and acts of violence have resumed
with fervour. We sadly note that, yet again, the victims
have been civilians and that the vast majority have
been Palestinian.

At a time when we were full of hope at seeing the
long-dormant peace process show some signs of life
and the resumption of the implementation of the road
map following the national Palestinian consensus on
the declaration of a ceasefire that allowed political
activities to resume and Israel's commitment to
withdraw from Gaza - and it must be recalled that the
withdrawal needs to be coordinated with the
Palestinian Authority and lead to a complete departure
from all territories occupied since 1967 - Israel has
once again cast doubt on the revived impetus of the
peace process. In point of fact, the Israeli Government
recently decided to extend settlements in the West
Bank, primarily around Al-Quds, and to step up
construction of the wall around that city. The
consequence and aim of that measure are quite clearly
to break the last remaining geographic link between the
Holy City and the rest of the Palestinian territories.

In that regard, I wish to recall that Israeli
settlements in Palestinian territory are unlawful and
illegal under international law and that the Israeli
decision to expand them is but a fresh attempt to
impose another fait accompli in order to obstruct
efforts aimed at a just and lasting settlement and
thereby impede the establishment of an independent
and viable Palestinian State.

Taking advantage of the impunity which it has
always enjoyed even within the Council, Israel has
consistently adopted a policy of fait accompli and of
the use of force, disregarding the principles of
international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions.

The latest provocation was the fact that the
decision taken by Israel on 9 July regarding the line of
the wall around Jerusalem coincides with the first
anniversary of the publication of the International
Court of Justice's advisory opinion, in which it stated
unequivocally that the construction of the separation
wall in Palestinian territory was illegal. That same
decision was taken by the General Assembly in
resolution ES-lO/ 15 on 20 July 2004. In its opinion, the
Court touched on the very source of the conflict in the
Middle East - the illegal occupation by Israel of
Palestinian territories.

The fact that Israel took that decision at that
precise time is proof - as if proof were needed - of
the disregard that Israel has always had for
international law. It is a harsh blow for the
international efforts under way, and it can lead only to
a deterioration of the recent positive climate that was
beginning to prevail recently in the region and unleash
further violence.

As recommended by the Court, the Security
Council should consider what actions should be taken
in order to put an end to the illegal situation resulting
from the construction of the wall. It should consider
also measures to induce Israel to end extrajudicial
executions and the demolition of houses, dismantle the
settlements and tear down the illegal separation wall.

Moreover, it is urgent for the Quartet to intervene
to dissuade Israel from implementing its decision to
expand its settlements and to induce it to honour its
commitments under the road map. That would allow
for the resumption of a serious and lasting peace
process, with a view to putting an end to Israeli
occupation and to guaranteeing the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its
capital.

Finally, the economic situation in the occupied
territories, as described, is of the greatest concern to
us. This situation is worsened by the financial
difficulties faced by Palestinian Authority, which has
already been weakened by Israel's incessant attacks on
its infrastructure, combined with blockades in the
territories and repeated Israeli incursions, particularly
those involving the demolition of houses.

Further, I would express the concern of my
delegation at the situation in the Syrian Golan, where
Israel's ongoing settlement policy continues to
undermine regional and international efforts aimed at
arriving at a just and comprehensive peace in the
region, as well as the situation in Lebanon, where,
despite Security Council resolutions, incidents have
been occurring once again and where violations and
acts of aggression against the sovereignty of that
country, as well as provocations, have taken place in
recent weeks.

The international community, represented by the
Quartet, must take action to arrive at a just and lasting
settlement of the conflict in the Middle East, based on
respect for resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
1397 (2002), as well as on the principle of land for
peace.

