Mr. Lovald (Norway): The challenges posed by
today's conflicts have become increasingly complex.
The fact that those challenges are comprehensive,
however, must not stop us from acting. On the
contrary, we must make sure that our response is
equally comprehensive by mainstreaming the many
issues covered by the protection-of-civilians umbrella
into all efforts undertaken by the Security Council to
alleviate this situation and by ensuring effective
implementation on the ground.

United Nations peacekeeping operations must be
given strong mandates and enough resources to protect
civilians. The Security Council must systematically
take account of the current resolutions on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict when it
reviews existing mandates and adopts new resolutions.
That applies especially to resolution 1325 (2000) on
women, peace and security and to resolution 1539
(2004) on children and armed conflict.

Furthermore, we would be eager to see the
adoption by the Security Council of a new resolution
on children and armed conflict. A resolution that
establishes a robust mechanism for monitoring and
reporting on serious international crimes against
children in armed conflicts and that contains provisions
for the effective implementation of already-existing
resolutions on the protection of children is sorely
needed.

While mandates are essential, the ability to carry
them out is equally important. Although much progress
has been made in recent years, we still have a long way
to go in ensuring the effectiveness of integrated
missions.

The current reform process is an opportunity to
create a more effective United Nations. We must seize
this opportunity. An integrated approach to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict must be
implemented in close conjunction with the
mainstreaming of human rights protection into the
whole United Nations system. The protection and
promotion of human rights is one of the three core
functions of the United Nations. Norway fully supports
the efforts to increase the focus on human rights
throughout the United Nations system, and we support
the idea of upgrading the Commission in Human
Rights to a standing Human Rights Council. That
would reflect at the institutional level the central
position of human rights in the United Nations system,
alongside security and development. The Human
Rights Council should have a strong mandate to
address urgent human rights situations, as well as the
necessary resources so that it can respond to imminent
human right violations.

The importance of placing human rights at the
core of policies aimed at addressing conflict was
underlined most recently in the plan of action adopted
by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. Norway supports the
High Commissioner in her efforts to strengthen the
operational response capacity of her Office in conflict-
prone zones.

We welcome the Secretary-General's proposals
for a more consistent approach to peacebuilding and to
establishing an interlocking system of peacekeeping
capacities between the United Nations and regional
organizations. The setting up of a new Peacebuilding
Commission could prove crucial in extending to post-
conflict recovery the period of political attention at the
international level. Time and again, we are reminded of
the risk of post-conflict situations relapsing into
conflict situations. That means it is vital to establish
systems that will facilitate long-term commitment and
continuous vigilance by the international community,
even after peace agreements have been concluded.

Adopting and applying the regulatory framework
for the protection of civilians is primarily the
responsibility of States. The international community
cannot, however, stand back and leave it to the State in
question to close the accountability gap when gross
atrocities are perpetrated.

Norway endorses the Secretary-General's appeal
to embrace the principle of the "responsibility to
protect" as a norm for collective action in cases of
genocide, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. In situations of mass atrocity, and when all
other means are exhausted, the Security Council has
the responsibility to act without hesitation, with
authority, and in an effective way. We agree with the
recommendation that the Security Council should
adopt a resolution setting out principles for the use of
force that are built on international law and expressing
its intention to be guided by them.

In conclusion, let me express our support for
more systematic reporting to the Security Council to
facilitate its deliberations, as was suggested by
Mr. Egeland.

