Mr. Jagne (Gambia): Like previous speakers, my
delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting on a subject of common concern
to the international community. We are also grateful to
Under-Secretary-General Vieira de Mello for his
comprehensive and thought-provoking briefing.

The question of humanitarian action has always been
on the agenda of the international community. But we
could also state, without any fear of contradiction, that the
Secretary-General's report on Africa rekindled interest in
this matter. Since the publication of the report, related
issues to the maintenance of international peace and
security have gained renewed attention.

It will be recalled that Ambassador Olara Otunnu
briefed us on the thorny issues of children in armed
conflict and post-conflict peace building. Madam Ogata,
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, also
spoke to us on the work of her agency. Today, Under-
Secretary-General Vieira de Mello is following in the
footsteps of Olara Otunnu and Madam Ogata.

 

We listened with great attention to Mr. Vieira de
Mello when he guided us step by step from the
environment, to the nature of modem-day warfare, to the
legal instruments available to deal with the attendant evils
of war.

When wars are no longer fought in the battlefield but
in cities and Villages, what can we expect? More civilians
die. The answer is simple. And among the civilians who
bear the brunt of such conflicts are women and children,
the most vulnerable groups. They are targeted for physical
elimination and abuse.

The situation in Sierra Leone is a classic example of
atrocities inflicted on civilians by armed rebel groups.
Those who survive the atrocities are reduced to the status
of displaced persons and refugees. Even then, there is still
no mercy, because humanitarian workers are often denied
access to them. Nothing can be more criminal than to deny
food and water to the needy.

In addition to that, humanitarian agencies are
sometimes left alone in extremely hostile situations,
exposed to all sorts of dangers and difficulties. In order to
deal with these issues, Under-Secretary-General Vieira de
Mello cited a number of international legal instruments
ranging from the Convention on the Rights of the Child to
the most recent, the Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel. As in similar situations,
all that we can do is join the appeal for States parties to
recommit themselves to the aims and objectives of these
international legal instruments and international
humanitarian law.

The problem is made even more difficult because of
the nature of conflicts today, when we are dealing with
armed groups that have no regard for the sanctity of life.
This is why we understand both the United Nations and
other international humanitarian agencies when they insist
on minimum guarantees from all the parties to a conflict
before moving in or resuming work.
As we tackle the problem of impeded access to the
needy, we should also redouble our efforts in dealing with
the question of impunity. In this connection, we follow with
keen interest the work of the International Tribunals for
Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia. With the establishment
of the International Criminal Court, we, the Member States,
should cooperate even more closely to pursue and bring to
justice perpetrators of gross violations of human rights.

In this regard, it is important to use the media
judiciously for the dissemination of information, as widely
as possible and in all languages, so that all nations will
uphold international humanitarian law. It is certainly not
an easy task, but let us start.

This briefing has been an eye-opener. It has been
very useful, and we are convinced that, through concerted
international efforts, we can together make a big
difference in the lives of the less fortunate members of
the family of nations.

