Mr. Takasu (Japan): I wish first to thank Special
Representative Kai Eide for his very interesting
briefing this afternoon. A year ago in this Chamber, the
Council discussed the need for strong leadership for
the United Nations Mission in Afghanistan and
welcomed Mr. Eide's appointment. The Council then
identified the priorities for the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
gave it a stronger role in coordinating the international
efforts in the country. We highly appreciate the efforts
of Mr. Eide and the dedicated staff of UNAMA, and
wish to assure them of our strong support.

When we look at the situation in Afghanistan, we
tend to see the glass as half empty. We should
recognize, however, that steady progress has been
made in the face of daunting challenges. To name but a
few positive steps during the reporting period, we have
seen improvements in civil-military coordination, a
continued decrease in poppy production, and renewed
momentum in the reform of the police and the Ministry
of Interior. Mr. Eide referred to many other positive
developments.

Acknowledging such progress by no means
suggests that we can afford to slacken our pace; rather,
we must redouble our efforts in order to focus on the
serious challenges, in particular improving the security
situation and strengthening the national security
capacity. In addressing those challenges, the
international community and the Afghan Government
must coordinate closely with one another, with a strong
emphasis on ownership by the Government and people
of Afghanistan.

For the past few months, many Governments
have been reviewing strategies to explore how we can
best assist Afghanistan. Many of them, including
Japan, have appointed special representatives for
assistance to Afghanistan and Pakistan to coordinate
and discuss the way forward with other partners from
the perspective of the regional approach and to address
Afghanistan and the neighbouring area as a whole in a
comprehensive context. Those moves are welcome, as
they reflect the continuing and ever-growing
commitment of the international community to the
stability of Afghanistan.

In this context, we welcome the forthcoming
international conference on Afghanistan on 31 March,
to be hosted by the United Nations, opened by the
Secretary-General and chaired by the Special
Representative, together with the Governments of
Afghanistan and the Netherlands. We hope that the
conference will provide an opportunity for countries
concerned to share their strategies and agree on the
future course of common action. I am certain that, at
the conference, the essential role of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in coordinating
the efforts of international actors on the ground will be
stressed in order to formulate common strategy.

The most important political event of the year is
the presidential election. It is crucial that the upcoming
elections be successful in order to consolidate peace

and democracy in Afghanistan. We are pleased that the
registration process was conducted smoothly, and we
pay tribute to the efforts and decisions of the
authorities and people of the country. We must ensure
that the entire electoral process is fair, smooth and
credible, with the widest possible popular participation
and observed by international monitors. We respect the
prudent choice of the Afghan people and are confident
that the Special Representative will make himself
available to provide necessary advice and support.

In discussing the strategy, the regional dimension
is an important factor. Afghanistan's stability and
prosperity hinge upon the stability of its neighbours,
such as Pakistan and Central Asian countries. Japan is
pleased to host a meeting of the friends of democratic
Pakistan group and the Pakistan donors conference in
Tokyo in mid-April. The international community
should spare no effort in supporting the region as a
whole, politically as well as financially.

As we enter a critical phase for the future of
Afghanistan, Japan is committed to remaining a
staunch supporter of the country's endeavours. To
steadily implement the pledge of $2 billion we made in
Paris and to meet the urgent needs of Afghanistan, we
will disburse $300 million by the end of this month,
including in support of the presidential election and
assistance equivalent to six months' salary for all
80,000 Afghan police officers to meet the pressing
need for police reform.

I agree with the Special Representative that
stability cannot take root without economic
development and capacity-building. To that end, Japan
has assisted in the construction of infrastructure,
including more than 650 kilometres of roads and the
recently opened terminal building of Kabul
International Airport. Japan places priority on
agriculture and rural development. We have also
prioritized education, as noted by the Special
Representative, and the results of our support include
the construction or restoration of 500 schools and the
training of 10,000 teachers. I can assure the Council
that our assistance is not limited to certain areas. We
intend to expand our assistance in these fields.
Before concluding, let me reiterate the important
role of the United Nations in Afghanistan. With
international attention focused closely on the country,
expectations for the role of the United Nations are
higher than ever. A few months ago, Member States
gave UNAMA increased resources to implement its
strengthened role. We look forward to tangible
progress in the country, facilitated through
coordination by the United Nations Mission and the
strong leadership of the Special Representative.

Japan, as the lead country on Afghanistan in the
Council, is pleased to submit a draft resolution
extending the mandate of UNAMA for a further
12 months. It is our sincere hope that the Council will
reaffirm its unwavering support for the United Nations
Mission by adopting the draft resolution unanimously
in the next few days.

