Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I would like to thank
Mr. Edmond Mulet for his comprehensive briefing and
remarkable work in a difficult and challenging
environment. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Haiti for the additional comments he
provided to the Council.

I will focus my remarks on elections,
humanitarian challenges and security issues. With
respect to elections, the positive atmosphere in Haiti
since the adoption of resolution 1927 (2010) and the
successful hosting of several donor conferences has
helped to create conditions favourable to the holding of
presidential, legislative and municipal elections in the
country before the end of 2010. There is, however, a
disturbing disquiet within the polity about the
modalities for the conduct of the election that must not
be allowed to derail either the electoral process or the
peace and stability achieved so far.
All stakeholders are encouraged to work towards
free and fair elections and a negotiated settlement of
their differences. The United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) has a critical role to
play in supporting the electoral process, particularly in
providing logistical and technical assistance for the
conduct of the election. The mediatory role played by
the Special Representative in re-establishing
confidence among Haiti's major political actors and the
electoral process is commended.

On security, we are pleased to note that the
security situation in Haiti improved during the
reporting period. The MINUSTAH troop increase
authorized by resolution 1908 (2010) and enhanced
operational activities contributed substantially to this
development. However, the continued existence of a
large number of camps of internally displaced persons
and rampant cases of sexual and gender-based violence
in these camps constitute security threats that should be
addressed urgently. Women and girls should be
protected and sexual offenders held accountable.

Illicit drug trafficking through Haiti's borders is
having a negative effect on general development in the
country and should be effectively tackled. Sustained
international support is necessary to build the capacity
of local law enforcement agencies to enable them to
perform their constitutional duties, especially with
regard to effective internal checks, border management
and tackling the illegal weapons flow.

On humanitarian issues, as observed by the Inter-
Agency Standing Committee in its July report on the
response to the humanitarian crisis in Haiti, although
Haiti's relief operations have achieved many of the
objectives, humanitarian needs, particularly for shelter,
remain immense. A more comprehensive strategy is
therefore needed to address the plight of internally
displaced persons, provide humanitarian protection and
shelter, and meet their basic needs, including health
care, energy and education. Priority should be given to
women and children.

We welcome MINUSTAH's collaborative efforts
with the United Nations country team and international
partners in working to strengthen the Government of
Haiti's capacity to govern. We commend the cash- and
food-for-work projects, which have empowered over
150,000 people since the beginning of the year.

We also commend the important role played by
the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission, under the
co-chairmanship of Prime Minister Bellerive and
former United States President Bill Clinton, in
channelling needed resources to the country. The
timely disbursement of funds donated at the March

2010 international conference will not only enable the
Government to implement its Action Plan towards
Haiti's full recovery, but will also facilitate full
ownership of the reconstruction process by the
Government. In this connection, Nigeria will, in the
coming days, be presenting a check for $5 million in
fulfilment of its pledge made during the March donor
conference.

Considering the crucial role MINUSTAH
continues to play in Haiti, we support the renewal of its
mandate for one more year.

