Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Some colleagues raised important questions in their statements, and I am ready to answer them after I read out my own statement, should the presidency allow me to do so. For eight years, we have been telling the Security Council that there is a raging elephant distorting the political and humanitarian situation with a view to offend, defame and demonize my country's Government in anticipation of another future escalation. Today, I have received information from my capital that certain non-governmental humanitarian organizations operating on the ground in Syria, including the Danish Refugee Council and the Adventist Development and Relief Agency, among others, are having trouble transferring money allocated for humanitarian activities in Syria. The problem began in July 2019. Those organizations are therefore trying to find alternative ways to transfer the funds. However, such transfers - whether in euros or dollars -are being blocked by intermediary banks in Europe and New York, which directly affects those humanitarian organizations and their ability to plan other humanitarian projects and programmes for the year. That is an example of the true situation in my country concerning actions taken against Western, international, European and American non-governmental organizations. No one, however, sees or wants to see this situation. It is as if they were addicted to a unilateral version of the situation that they want to see. But, in the Security Council, it is not advised to watch the overall version. At the outset, I thank the delegations of the States that called for this emergency meeting for their strong commitment in their briefings today to the provisions of international law and the Charter of the United Nations, as demonstrated in their firm condemnation of the aggression, occupation, pillaging and theft being perpetrated by the Turkish regime against my country. We also thank the same delegations for their initiatives and steps to uphold the values of the Charter and international law by compelling the Turkish regime to stop supporting terrorism. We thank them as well for compelling the Turkish regime to stop bringing its new janissary Ottoman militias, made up of Uighurs, Uzbeks, Turks, Chechens, Turkmens, Kazakhs, Tajiks, Kyrgyz and Arabs, to settle on Syrian territories adjacent to Turkey once the Syrian population is displaced, and to prevent the Turkish regime from carrying out a demographic change reminiscent of Israeli crimes against Palestinians. We sincerely thank those same delegations for standing up against the operations of the Turkish regime to transfer thousandsof "moderate terrorists", who are genetically modified but also armed, and mercenaries to Libya and then to Europe, Africa and other places. We also thank those delegations who called for holding this meeting for their eagerness to enable the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities in a professional and credible manner by condemning the United States occupation of parts of my country's territory, including the area of Al-Tanf, where Rukban camp is located, and by condemning the United States occupation forces for sponsoring Maghawir Al-Thawra, a terrorist organization that is operating in that area whose crimes are not limited to the population of Rukban camp but have reached peaceful civilians in the governorate of As-Suwayda, as I explained to the Council in a previous statement. We also thank the States that called for convening this meeting for condemning the illegitimate presence of their troops in parts of Syrian territory and for relentlessly demanding their tripartite occupation to withdraw its forces, for disbanding their agent militias and for compensating for the devastation they caused to the infrastructure, along with compensating for what they and their agent militias and terrorist groups have pillaged in oil, gas, wheat, artefacts and myriad possessions that belong to Syrians. We thank the delegations that called for this meeting for exercising pressure and engage in active diplomacy in order to adopt a draft resolution under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations to condemn Israeli attacks against my country. The latest such attack was launched at dawn today from above the occupied Syrian Golan and coincided - as a result of Israeli-Turkish alliance and high-level coordination between them - with more Turkish troops and heavy military equipment entering into Idlib through the so-called humanitarian crossing of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. The aim is to undermine the efforts of the Syrian State and its allies to end terrorist control over Idlib and normalize life there. To the President and members of the Security Council, I would like to say that a few hours ago Jabhat Al-Nusra - a Security Council-designated terrorist group - and the Turkish troops occupying part of my country met at Taftanaz airport, near Aleppo. Together they took part in an offensive in the area of Al-Nayrab, in Aleppo. I disclose that information so that the Council can assess it. We thank the delegations that called for this meeting for striving to unify the Council with a view to ensuring that its resolutions on combating terrorism - of which there are dozens - are implemented and to supporting the efforts of the Syrian State and its allies to combat terrorism and foreign terrorists fighters, cleanse our territory of their evil and compel the Member States concerned, especially those in Europe, to take back their nationals without delay. We furthermore thank them for their unwavering commitment to international law and United Nations resolutions, as well as for their humanitarian concern for the Syrian people, as demonstrated by their rejection of the unilateral coercive measures that would constitute economic terrorism and collective punishment. Some colleagues boasted about that today. I also thank the Secretariat staff for their close review and follow-up of all 900 official letters that we addressed to them regarding the so-called crisis in Syria. Forgive me for thinking that I was in the Security Council, which, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, we entrusted with maintaining international peace and security, rather than being in a council that the Governments of some permanent members have turned into a NATO forum with the aim of inciting against my country, discredit it and exercise all kinds of pressure on the Syrian State, including by hysterically calling for repeated meetings on the situation there and requesting the Secretariat to provide countless reports and briefings to serve their interventionist and aggressive goals. Everyone heard the intervention by my colleague the Permanent Representative of the United States, when she said that Turkey is a NATO ally. Hence we are not in the Security Council. Somebody is trying to use this Council as a NATO forum. It is an unacceptable threat to say in this Chamber that the United States of America protects Turkey from the repercussions of its violations of the Charter and principles of international law. My delegation reiterates that attempts by certain countries to impose the NATO agenda on the Security Council will undermine its credibility and negate all the pretexts used by some to demonize the Syrian State and provide political and military cover for the crimes committed against my country by NATO members, including the Turkish regime. Do those present not remember Erdogan's announcement on 5 September 2012 that he, along with allegiant terrorist organizations, would soonpray in the Umayyad Mosque in Damascus? Was that announcement, eight years ago, not an indication of prior aggressive intention and a declaration of war against my country? If people said that they would occupy Turkey and pray in the Blue Mosque in Istanbul, or that they would occupy one of the NATO capitals and pray in its most prominent places of worship, what would NATO's response be? The story we have presented today on the positions of certain Council members might be fiction, but it is legitimate fiction because it is underpinned by our belief in the provisions of the Charter and international law, while their practices and realities lead to undermining the Charter and manipulating the principles of international law. Western Governments were clear in their quest to destroy my country and spread creative chaos, pillage our wealth and settle their old accounts with us. They clearly pointed out the tools they would use to achieve that goal. The memoirs of the politicians of those States and the WikiLeaks scandals are brimming with arguments proving our point. Therefore, we reiterate that improving the living and humanitarian conditions in Syria and achieving a political solution require, first and foremost, aggressive Western States to reconsider their policies, adopt approaches based on international law and the provisions of the Charter, put an end to aggression, occupation, coercion and investment in terrorism and respect the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. It also requires that they support the efforts of the Syrian State and those of its allies in combating terrorism, which is a right and duty that we will spare no effort to fulfil in order to liberate Idlib and all other parts of Syria, just as we liberated Homs, eastern Aleppo and Ghouta. Idlib is Syrian territory, and any illegitimate military presence there is the responsibility of the State to which those troops belong. Some have called for the need to declare an immediate cease fire. With whom does the Council want us to declare a ceasefire? With the entities that the Council agreed to designate as terrorist groups, such as Jabhat Al-Nusra and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham? With whom does the Council want us to declare a ceasefire? With hundreds of cannibals that the Council has listed as terrorists? How can we declare ceasefire with entities that the Council agreed to name as terrorist -
