Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to express our appreciation for the convening
of this meeting and for the very comprehensive
briefing by Ms. Mueller. We appreciate the valuable
and often heroic work of her team on the ground. We
also appreciate the moving testimony of Ms. Nujeen
Mustapha, who reminded us of our obligation to bear
in mind the suffering of civilians in Syria, particularly
the most vulnerable.

Peru has been following the humanitarian situation
in Syria with deep regret. The conflict continues to
claim numerous lives and to cause the displacement
of tens of thousands of people. We have to particularly
deplore the escalation of violence in various areas in
north-western Syria, including Idlib, resulting from
terrorist organizations' control of the area and military
responses that ignore the most basic principles of
international humanitarian law and human rights. We
deplore the reported attacks on civilian infrastructure,
including schools and medical centres, as well as the
arbitrary arrests and abductions. In that context, we
believe that the efforts of Turkey and the Russian
Federation to deploy joint patrols aimed at enforcing
the scope of the agreement signed last September and
thereby prevent Idlib from becoming the scene of an
even greater humanitarian tragedy are critical.

We want to emphasize the importance of facilitating
the provision of sustained assistance to the civilian
population displaced in Rukban, while ensuring that
those who make the decision to leave the camp do so
under internationally accepted parameters and with
the support and assistance of the United Nations. We
also emphasize the urgency of continuing to meet the
growing needs of the internally displaced in Al-Hol,
who fled the clashes with the remnants of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. We are grateful for and
support the work being done by the United Nations and
other agencies to assist them in such a critical situation,
as well as their efforts to help those affected by the
devastating floods of recent weeks.

Moreover, we believe that it is essential that at
the meeting to be held this week in Nursultan new
and greater developments are brought forward on
the issues of identifying missing persons, the return
of mortal remains and the release of detainees and
missing persons, and that this defuses tensions. We
also stress the importance of continuing to mobilize the
international community in support of humanitarian
mine clearance and the removal of improvised explosive
devices in Syria, which continue to wreak havoc on the
population. We therefore welcome the recent launch of
the Humanitarian Mine Action Support to Syria project
and Japan's generous financial contributions that have
made it possible.

I conclude by emphasizing the urgency of a
permanent cessation of hostilities in order to begin to
overcome the suffering of the Syrian population caused
by this long conflict. Resolution 2254 (2015) and the
2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) should
guide these efforts.

