Mr. Milanovic' (Serbia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's open debate on this crucial topic.
We share the opinion expressed by many delegations
today that the world is facing increasing challenges.
That is why it is vital to observe the fundamental
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and, in
particular, to respect international law and the rules-
based international order.

One of the basic commitments of my country's policy
is to full respect for the peaceful solution of disputes in
international relations, in accordance with the general
principles of international law and the Charter. The use
of peaceful means in resolving disputes has universal
value because it is closely connected to the maintenance
of international peace and security.

In addition to their retributive purpose, the basic
functions of the international justice and criminal
tribunals provided for by the international system
of criminal law and derived from the Charter of the
United Nations include combating impunity; punishing
perpetrators who have been established as individually
criminally responsible for the commission ofwar crimes
and other internationally recognized crimes; deterring
the commission of future crimes; rehabilitating the
convicted; protecting society and the victims of crimes
and reconciling warring peoples.

The shared goals of the States Members of the
United Nations relative to the implementation of the
principles of international and humanitarian law,
particularly combating impunity for the most grievous
criminal offences, are achieved through criminal
prosecution by international criminal institutions,
special tribunals and courts and national judicial
mechanisms. Member States' efforts aimed primarily
at fighting impunity at international and national levels
do not always correspond with the set goals. On the
other hand, the efforts that some of them make in that
regard are not always fully appreciated.

The International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia was established by the Security Council
with the aim of fighting impunity and ensuring that all
responsible for the commission of the most grievous
crimes 4 including individuals in Government and
military positions at the highest level 4 are held
accountable, thereby contributing to the establishment
and maintenance of peace. Regrettably, Serbia's
experience with the work of the Tribunal has led us to
believe that while it has completed its mandate, it has
failed to implement the goals established in the relevant
Security Council resolutions. That is particularly true
with regard to the average length of proceedings, the
failure to honour procedural guarantees, the structure
of the indictments and, in that regard, the decisions
and judgments made. Serbia fully cooperated with
the Tribunal, but its decisions will be remembered in
my country for their inconsistency with regard to the
crimes committed against Serbian victims by members
of the other peoples of the former Yugoslavia. Against
the backdrop of such an imbalance in the Tribunal's
decisions, it is hardly possible to say that in its pursuit of
transitional justice in the region the Tribunal achieved
one ofits main objectives, that of regional reconciliation.

Nevertheless, my country remains committed
to respect for international law and its international
obligations. Furthermore, we are constantly improving
conditions within our national justice system and are
also putting special emphasis on promoting judicial
cooperation with other countries of the region. Together
we are working on the promotion of basic values and
common understanding, aimed at building regional
stability and reconciliation.

For Serbia, the ongoing process of making sure
that justice is done did not end this past December
with the Tribunal's completion of its tasks. We are
well aware of the challenges encountered by the
Specialist Chambers established to try war crimes in
Kosovo and Metohija, but we expect that they will be
overcome and that this judicial institution will finally
commence its work. Serbia welcomes the efforts that
the international community has made so far to ensure
the necessary conditions for the unencumbered work
of the Chambers. We believe that the international
community will persevere in demonstrating the clear
political will needed to bring all perpetrators of war
crimes to justice, regardless of their nationality, and
to use its influence to prevent any attempt to obstruct
the work of the Chambers. Serbia believes that the
prosecution of war crimes will significantly contribute
to regional stability and the restoration of trust among
Serbian and other non-Albanian communities in the
institutions of the international community and, by
extension, to reconciliation in Kosovo and Metohija.

