Mr. Pamir (Turkey): Allow me at the outset to
present to you, Sir, our congratulations on assuming the
presidency of the Council. We wish you every success.

Turkey has already aligned itself, yesterday, with
the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Spain on behalf of the European
Union. It was a skilfully crafted text reflecting our
main concerns with regard to the situation in the
Middle East. This being so, we deem it worthwhile to
bring forth the following at this gathering of the
Security Council.

It was not long ago that we met in this Chamber,
condemned violence and terrorism in the strongest
possible terms and warned the Israeli and the
Palestinian parties about the then looming threat of an
escalation of confrontation.

It is with great regret, therefore, that we note
today the sheer lack of any advance in warding off this
trend. Rather, the grim realities on the ground confirm
the frightening picture the Secretary-General brought
to the fore during a recent Council meeting, on 21
February. We add our voice to the Secretary-General's
call and urge the parties to do everything in their power
to get off this hook of spiralling violence, move away
from confrontation and return to the negotiating table.

It is evident that this dynamic of violence and
retaliation must stop, lest we run the risk of a full-
fledged war. We believe it is incumbent upon the
leaders of both parties to exercise maximum restraint
right now. And it is incumbent upon us, the
international community, to spare no effort in helping
the parties to overcome this vicious circle, which leads
nowhere other than to treacherous grounds.

Turkey, for its part, continues to encourage all
new and constructive ideas which have a fair and
realistic chance of application. We also believe that the
recommendations of the Mitchell report and the Tenet
understandings embody the right political instruments
and are still the right vision. Through them, peace can
be achieved on the basis of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace.

Let me highlight here that both parties have
agreed on the intrinsic even-handedness of the report
and the understandings, though they have yet to
implement them. After all, the only way to peace and
security is through meaningful dialogue. There cannot
be a military solution to this problem.

The main responsibility lies with the parties
themselves. We call on them to take the long view, to
see that there is a brighter future befitting the long and
honourable history of both nations. The future is not
the one depicted in a photograph on the front page of
yesterday's New York Times: Palestinian fathers
handing Kalashnikov rifles to their four-year-old sons
cannot herald a future that we want to head for, and
this image should not be allowed to reign over the
imaginations of new and coming generations. There is,
and always will be, a much better way.

A while ago, I stressed the importance of
statesmanship and restraint. In this regard, it is a
welcome development that the Palestinian leadership
has arrested the suspected criminals in the
assassination of the Israeli Minister of Tourism,
Mr. Rehavam Ze'evi. We hope that justice will be
brought to bear on the perpetrators of this heinous
crime. Such concrete steps should also be taken against
the perpetrators of other terrorist crimes against the
Israeli people. The security officials of both parties
should cooperate in earnest with a view to avoiding
renewed terrorist acts.

The decision on the part of the Israeli
Government to withdraw its tanks from Chairman
Arafat's compound is welcome, yet it needs to do
more. Turkey has always believed that putting
restrictions on Mr. Arafat, thus lessening his room to
manoeuvre and thereby hampering his propensity for
action, is counterproductive. Therefore, we believe that
such restrictions must be lifted, as Chairman Arafat is
the legitimate leader of the Palestinians and the only
interlocutor.

The establishment of a just and viable peace in
the Middle East remains the shared goal of the
international community. Turkey, for its part, has
always been a vocal and energetic supporter of the
peace process and will continue to act as a facilitator.
We welcome the efforts of the United Nations, the
"Quartet" and others. This having been said, we
consider greater American involvement to be key in
putting the process back on track and restoring the
brighter prospects that we have lost along the way.

