Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
My country notes with profound disappointment that,
despite the efforts to disarm Iraq within the framework
of United Nations Security Council resolutions 1284
(1999) and 1441 (2002), a military intervention has
been launched against Iraq without the explicit
authorization of the United Nations Security Council.
The withdrawal of the weapons inspectors and United
Nations personnel working in connection with the oil
for food programme in Iraq has left a gaping hole and
provoked numerous expressions of concern which
Switzerland wishes to echo here today.

Putting aside differences of views concerning the
conditions under which the operation of the coalition
forces was launched, the emergency situation that is
currently prevailing in Iraq now demands a responsible
and united effort on the part of the international
community to restore peace, meet humanitarian
challenges and assure the well-being and future of the
Iraqi people, as well as the reconstruction of their
country.

As a High Contracting Party to the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and in light of its humanitarian tradition,
Switzerland reminds the parties to the conflict of the
empirical necessity to respect and insure respect for
obligations set forth in those instruments. Although
neither Iraq nor the United States are parties to the
Additional Protocols to the 1949 Geneva Conventions,
many obligations contained in the first Additional
Protocol reflect customary law and apply on that basis.

The main distinction between civilians and
combatants and the principle of proportionality are
especially important. It is prohibited to use civilians as
human shields. Prisoners-of-war must be treated
humanely at all times and must be protected in
particular against all acts of violence or intimidation,
as well as against insults and public curiosity.
Switzerland emphasizes that international humanitarian
law sets limits to the methods and means of conducting
hostilities and that the use of arms that cause excessive
injury is prohibited. Moreover, it urges the parties to
the conflict to abstain from any use of weapons of mass
destruction.

Switzerland strongly supports the appeal of the
United Nations Secretary-General to the parties to the
conflict to do everything within their power to allow
United Nations humanitarian personnel to return to the
regions affected by the conflict. This demand is an
essential condition for ensuring the delivery of
humanitarian aid and the protection of vulnerable
people. In the immediate future, it is incumbent on the
States directly active in the war effort to take
responsibility for the urgent needs of the civilian
population.

Switzerland underlines the importance of a clear
separation between military and humanitarian
activities. It is imperative that the latter be guided by
the principles of humanity, impartiality and neutrality.
Switzerland also stresses that efficient coordination
must be ensured between the coalition forces and
humanitarian organizations.

Switzerland appeals to the parties to the conflict
to ensure access by the International Committee for the
Red Cross (ICRC) to people in need of protection and
aid. The impartial and neutral activities of the ICRC
must be facilitated.

Furthermore, my country demonstrated its
commitment and its concerns with regard to the
humanitarian consequences of this conflict even before
hostilities broke out by organizing a humanitarian
meeting on Iraq in Geneva on 15 and 16 February this
year. Given the events on the ground, Switzerland has
taken the initiative to convene on 2 April in Geneva the
first meeting of the Humanitarian Issues Group Iraq.

The Swiss authorities are concerned about the
direct consequences of the conflict on supplies to
civilians and encourage the Security Council to
continue today's efforts to reactivate the oil for food
programme without delay in a form that takes due
account of the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people.

The United Nations must assume its
indispensable role in reaching a settlement - without
delay - to the Iraq crisis, one that is acceptable to the
whole international community. The United Nations
must not be used as a tool or marginalized in this task.
It must resume its central role at the earliest
opportunity. The United Nations has an essential
mission to fulfil, in particular in the coordination of
humanitarian aid and in the restoration of the full
sovereignty of Iraq. Such sovereignty must be re-
established both at the political level, according full
respect to the unity and territorial integrity of Iraq, and
at the economic level, acknowledging that the
resources of the country are the property of the people
of Iraq and theirs alone.

Hence, Switzerland solemnly appeals to the
members of the Security Council to overcome their
differences and together to reassume their principal
responsibility, which is to maintain international peace
and security.

