Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian):
At the outset, let me congratulate the Russian
Federation on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his informative report
(S/2012/l33) and recognize the great importance of the
work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan, Mr. Jan Kubis.

Kazakhstan supports the rapid development of
Afghanistan as a peaceful, independent and stable
developing State with a cohesive society. At the regional
and national levels, Kazakhstan is contributing to the
stable and lasting development of Afghanistan and to
efforts to reduce the security threats emanating from
that country, including terrorism, drug-trafficking and
religious extremism. As such, on 26 April in Almaty, we
will hold a ministerial meeting on Afghanistan as part of
the Istanbul Process. We are confident that that meeting
will contribute to actively involving Afghanistan in
regional integration processes, to strengthening mutual
trade, economic and humanitarian cooperation, and
to accelerating the implementation of infrastructure
projects linking Afghanistan and the region. All of
that will ensure that there is genuine substance to the
ongoing international efforts under the auspices of the
United Nations, and thereby contribute to restoring
peace and stability in the country. In that regard, we call
on all participants in the upcoming meeting in Almaty
to adopt a responsible and results-driven approach to
the issues that will be discussed there.

We believe that the United Nations is playing a key
role in ensuring the coordination of the international
community's efforts aimed at achieving a political
settlement and recovery in Afghanistan, in close
cooperation with the Afghan Government and with
the support of the world community, above all the
countries of the region. In that context, Kazakhstan
has submitted proposals for the consideration of
the Secretary-General with regard to establishing
in Almaty a United Nations centre for multilateral
diplomacy, with the aim of making more active use of
the geographic, communications and infrastructure
capacities of our country in the interests of the United
Nations, including to provide Afghanistan with support
in terms of recovery and humanitarian assistance in the
post-2014 period.

We support the national reconciliation process
in Afghanistan. Our position is that intra-Afghan
dialogue can have a positive impact only if the Afghan
Government plays the leading role and if the militia
respect without conditions three basic principles,
namely, putting aside their weapons, recognizing
the Constitution and completely severing ties with
Al-Qaida and other extremist organizations.

Kazakhstan expects the Afghan Government and
the International Security Assistance Force to continue
their ongoing efforts to address drug production and
trafficking. The Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO), the Central Asian Regional Information and
Coordination Centre for combating the illicit trafficking
of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances and their
precursors (CARICC) and the anti-drug operation
Channel, conducted under the aegis of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization, must play an important
role in that regard. We welcome Afghanistan obtaining
observer-State status at the SCO and CARICC.

