Mr. Snoussi (Morocco) (interpretation from French): First of all, I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for having allowed my delegation to participate in this
debate. I also thank the Security Council for having
responded favourably to our request, on behalf of the
Arab countries and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, for a meeting.

It is a great honour for me to offer you, Sir, on
behalf of the delegation of the Kingdom of Morocco,
sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for May 1995. I am
pleased to express to you, a worthy representative of a
country with which my own country has strong ties of
friendship and cooperation, our greetings. My delegation
is firmly convinced that your talents as an experienced
diplomat, as well as your well-known human qualities,
will ensure the success of the Security Council's work
this month. I should also like to fulfil the pleasant duty of

 

congratulating Ambassador Karel Kovanda of the Czech
Republic on his outstanding performance as President of the
Council last month.

The Kingdom of Morocco, like many other
countries - in particular, Arab and Muslim countries -
learned with great consternation and bitterness of the
decisions taken by the Israeli Government concerning the
confiscation of 53 hectares of Palestinian land in the eastern
part of the Holy City of Al-Quds in order to establish new
settlements there.

Deeply distressed and concerned at this very serious
measure, the Ministerial Council of the League of Arab
States, which held an extraordinary meeting on 6 May 1995
in Cairo, unanimously condemned this recent decision by
the Israeli Government, which could compromise the
chances of peace being achieved in that part of the world.

For his part, the Secretary-General of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference (OIC), Mr. Hamid Algabid, who
has been following this question with great concern,
affirmed that this measure represented a grave step
backwards for the peace process, created new obstacles to
its progress and, equally, constituted a flagrant violation of
the agreements reached between the PLO and Israel. The
Secretary-General launched an appeal to the international
community to encourage the Israeli Government to put an
end to these confiscations.

For their part, the Arab Group and the Organization of
the Islamic Conference, in statements issued as official
documents of the Security Council, have also reacted to this
grave situation.

Indeed, the confiscation measures cannot be acceptable
to the international community because, in addition to their
blatant illegality, they involve a grave attack on the peace
process and undermine the trust that should prevail between
the Palestinians and the Israelis in their long quest for a just
and lasting peace. They also shake the trust that the Arab
world had begun to place in this long-awaited process. We
therefore have every right to be seriously concerned by
these measures, which represent a return to practices that
we thought were a thing of the past.

Unfortunately, since the occupation of the Holy City
of Al-Quds the Israeli authorities have systematically taken
action to modify its status, ignoring many resolutions of the
Security Council and of the General Assembly and the rules
and principles of international law. In fact, in its resolution
252 (1968) of 21 May 1968, the Security Council
considered

"that all legislative and administrative measures and
actions taken by Israel, including expropriation of
land and properties thereon, which tend to change
the legal status of Jerusalem are invalid and cannot
change that status". (resolution 252 ( I 968), para. 2)

In the same resolution the Security Council urgently
called upon Israel

"to rescind all such measures already taken and to
desist forthwith from taking any further action which
tends to change the status of Jerusalem". (ibid., para. 3)

This status has since then been reaffirmed by other
resolutions of the United Nations, all of which have
declared null and void the measures taken to change the
status of this Holy City, which has symbolic value and
spiritual and emotional dimensions not only for the
Muslim world but also for the Christian communities and
the Jewish world. The confiscation measures constitute an
action that not only tends to modify the status of this
Holy City but also dangerously creates an enormous
doubt in the mind of the Arabs and Muslims, at the very
time when they had decided to believe in the miracle of
peace in that part of the world.
This is where our greatest concerns reside, because
it is not just a question of attacking the rules and
resolutions of international legality but, in fact,
unfortunately calls into question a spirit and a will that
the parties concerned need to display at all times if they
are to rid themselves of the already-numerous pitfalls on
the path towards the long-awaited and desired peace.

The Washington Declaration of 13 September 1993,
welcomed with enormous hope by the international
community, specified clearly that the permanent status of
the city of Al-Quds was to remain among those questions
that would be subject to negotiations scheduled to begin
in May 1996. It stated that

"The two parties agree that the outcome of the
permanent status negotiations should not be
prejudiced or preempted by agreements reached for
the interim period." (S/26560, annex, p. 5)

Furthermore, article I of that Declaration clearly states:

 

"The aim of the negotiations is
the establishment of an Authority

"leading to a permanent settlement based on Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). (ibid., annex, p. 4)

In this respect it should be recalled that in its
resolution 242 (1967) the Security Council underscored the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force and
demanded the withdrawal of Israeli forces from the
territories occupied in June 1967, of which we consider the
city of Al-Quds to be an integral part. Therefore, at a time
when we were expecting that an end would be put to the
confiscations of land and to the establishment of
settlements, by virtue of the obligations undertaken by the
two parties, we saw with great regret that action was
continuing to be taken in this area that could call into
question the very chances of carrying on with the
Palestinian-Israeli peace process.

Aware of the terrible consequences of the confiscation
of Palestinian land, His Majesty King Hassan II, in his
capacity as Chairman of the Al-Quds Committee and as
current President of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, addressed letters to the Heads of State of the
members of the Security Council, drawing their attention to
the grave dangers involved in these measures and the
immense risks they posed to peace and calling on them to
act within the Security Council to prompt Israel to revoke
its decision. In his letter the King asserted:

"The measure that Israel has just taken certainly
could abort the peace process on the Palestinian front,
the more so since that peace is still fragile, could be
torpedoed by forces hostile to it, both in Palestine and
in Israel, and is blocked on the Syrian and Lebanese
fronts, where the process has not yet taken the
appropriate direction."

His Majesty the King also indicated:

"Israel's confiscation of Arab land in Jerusalem
for the purpose of establishing settlements is
unfortunately a reflection of its tendency to act
unilaterally, in addition to the fact that, by acting thus,
it is in violation of international law."

Moreover, His Majesty, on 4 May 1995, addressed to
Mr. Itzhak Rabin, the Prime Minister of Israel, a letter
which I shall now read out:

"Mr. Prime Minister,

"The confiscation of 53 hectares of Arab land
in Jerusalem has had the effect of a bombshell
throughout the world and has been the subject of
general concern.

"It has hurt us particularly and personally,
aware as we are of the gravity of the consequences
of this action both for Israel and for all the peoples
of the region.

"Patiently standing up to incomprehension and
often even hostility, and at the risk of compromising
our own position within the Arab nation, we have
worked for more than two decades for Judeo-Arab
rapprochement and for the establishment of the best
possible conditions and the best possible atmosphere
for the States of the region to live in peace and
understanding.

"Other pioneers have joined their efforts to ours
in the quest for a just and lasting peace,
guaranteeing to each and all the free exercise of and
strict respect for their rights.

"The road towards peace has been a long and
difficult one, studded with pitfalls. Our common will
has made it possible to overcome some of the
difficulties and to allow the world to begin to see a
glimmer of that peace to which it has aspired for so
long.
"Of course, not all the obstacles had been
removed, but there were grounds for hope.

"But now the expropriation of Arab land is
leading straight to an impasse from which it will be
difficult to emerge.

"We have considered your situation in the
particular circumstances being experienced by Israel,
and the approach of an election is always an
important event for a political leader.

"None the less, regardless of your electoral
concerns, they cannot legitimize a measure as
dangerous and as reprehensible as the expropriation
of something that belongs to others.

"We therefore strenuously protest against this
measure.

 

"We do so as much to defend the very interests
of peace as to draw your attention to the grave
dangers to which this exposes Israel and the immense
risks that it poses for a fragile peace which is still
seeking the means by which it can be strengthened.

"We address this letter to you in our dual
capacity as Chairman of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and Chairman of the Al-Quds
Committee."

We are speaking before the Security Council today in
the hope that it will make reason prevail and that it will act
responsibly in order to prompt Israel to give up its policy
of confiscating land in the city of Al-Quds and in the other
occupied territories, and that it will put an end to its policy
of establishing settlements in these territories.

My delegation hopes that the reasonable appeals made
to the Israeli Government will find a favourable echo,
because the very success of the Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations for the establishment of a just and lasting
peace depends on this - a peace to which we have so long
aspired - in the framework of a continuing, constructive
dialogue carried out in good faith. In this respect we
believe that the poll that was published today by the Israeli
newspaper Yediot Aharonot is an encouraging sign because
it reveals that the majority of Israelis have stated their
opposition to the recent confiscations in so far as they
threaten the peace process.

Morocco, for its part, has been very deeply involved
in the peace process and therefore cannot close its eyes to
the dangers hanging over this historic task which saw the
light of day on 13 September 1993 in Washington. We will
spare no effort, in a spirit of dialogue and persuasion, to
protect the peace process from any action that could
endanger it. We want above all to enable the Arab and
Jewish peoples in general to turn the page of the past and
look resolutely towards the future, which we hope will be
a promising one.

The establishment of diplomatic relations between
Arab countries and Israel is a gage of peace. The objectives
of the Casablanca conference on the economic development
of the Middle East and North Africa are also a gage of
confidence in the Israeli will to promote that peace and to
ensure a favourable and positive environment for it.
Regrettably, the recent measure cannot be viewed as falling
in this context. Quite the contrary, it is a step back from the
achievements since September 1993. That is why His
Majesty the King of Morocco and the Moroccan people are
deeply upset by these recent events, which certainly cloud
the prospects for peace.

Bearing in mind everything that we have said, we
firmly believe that the international community must
protect the peace process and encourage the parties to
show their good will and a constructive spirit to solve the
problems that have been encountered, and thereby arrive
at that peace to which we so aspire, a peace based on
mutual understanding, cooperation, security, dignity and
respect for the legitimate rights of all.

