Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the two Tribunals for their detailed and comprehensive
reports to us this morning.

We welcome the efforts of the Tribunals and the
Prosecutors to meet the deadlines set out in the
completion strategy. Although we recognize the
difficulties they face - especially the lack of
cooperation faced by the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia - we urge them to continue to do
what is necessary to meet the deadlines set while
observing the strictest standards of due process.
Meeting those deadlines is essential to the credibility
of the system, because justice should not just be
impartial but also rendered as speedily as possible. The
full cooperation of States is essential in order to
achieve the goal of providing justice for the victims
before both Tribunals and to carry out the completion
strategy.

More than 10 years have passed since the
Security Council established the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and yet important
leaders accused of committing serious crimes are still
at large. It is essential that States do their utmost to
ensure that fugitives are arrested and that, once they
are in the custody of a State, that State immediately
hands the fugitives over to the Tribunal. Cooperation in
other areas, such as access to documents and witnesses,
is essential to ensure that trials are not unduly delayed.
States should also cooperate by opening up their
territories to those who have been acquitted at trial.

Another important element in fulfilling the
completion strategies is the transfer of cases involving
low- and mid-level accused to competent national
jurisdictions. We acknowledge the efforts being made
in that regard by both Tribunals. In order to ensure the
success of such transfers, it is vital that the process be
accompanied by a strengthening of the capacities of
national judicial systems. The monitoring of national
trials by Tribunals will therefore be of particular
importance. Such strengthening also has the potential
of significant long-term repercussions for the rule of
law and for improving the administration of justice in
the countries concerned.

At the request of both Tribunals, the Security
Council has taken a number of steps to strengthen their
work and make it possible to fulfil their completion
strategies. My delegation is prepared to continue to
consider such requests and to provide both Tribunals
the necessary support to put an end to impunity for the
appalling crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda.

