Mr. Ruda Santolaria (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Peru, as a country committed to multilateralism,
international law and the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, welcomes Poland's initiative
in convening today's important open debate. We
want to highlight the presence of the President of
Poland, Mr. Andrzej Duda, as well as other high-level
participants. We would like to thank Ms. Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-
General; Judge Hisashi Owada, President Emeritus of
the International Court of Justice; and Judge Theodor
Meron, President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, for their briefings.

Peru would like to stress that in a world ofincreasing
interdependence, the validity, development and defence
of a rules-based international order are essential if
the international community is to effectively address
serious global challenges and threats to international
peace and security. In that regard, we believe that
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations, and a consistent approach to
sustainable peace, should continue to guide our efforts
to address contemporary conflicts. In particular, Peru
believes it is essential to ensure that the United Nations,
especially the Security Council, promotes the peaceful
settlement of disputes in accordance with the provisions
of Chapter VI of the Charter. We stress the importance
of strengthening the Organization's capacities in
preventive diplomacy and the early warnings required
for that purpose, in compliance with Articles 1, 34 and
99 of the Charter.

In that regard, Peru supports the reforms proposed
by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and his efforts,
including those of his Special Envoys, to promote more
coherent, efficient and effective action by the United
Nations system to prevent conflicts and humanitarian
crises. To that end, we welcome the establishment
of strategic alliances with regional and subregional
organizations, especially the African Union, and have
great expectations for the recently established High-
level Advisory Board on Mediation.

In the past few years, Peru has used various means
to peacefully settle disputes, including submitting a
dispute to the jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice and engaging in negotiations supported by
friendly guarantor countries to resolve sensitive and
complex border issues with its neighbours. On a basis
of international law, we have excellent relations with
them today that are undoubtedly in the interests of
our people and theirs. In that context, we support the
provision in Article 36 of the Charter for the Council to
recommend that parties to a legal dispute should, as a
general rule, resort to the Court. We also believe that it
would be appropriate to request more frequent advisory
opinions of the Court, in accordance with Article 96 of
the Charter.

We want to take this opportunity to express our
deep concern about the current frequent instances of
violations of international law, including Security
Council resolutions, and especially of international
humanitarian law. We cannot maintain international
peace and security without respect for the rule of law.
For example, one of the cornerstones of the international
order is the prohibition of the use of force in any way that
is incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations.
We are concerned about the possibility that some
countries are testing arguments and interpretations
that are ultimately alien to international law and that
undermine the system of collective security.

The Security Council is, in essence, a political
body, with the primary responsibility to maintain
international peace and security. That means defending
and promoting a rules-based international order,
which is evident, for example, with regard to its role
in maintaining regimes for the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. The Council is also
a source of law, insofar as it adopts resolutions and
presidential statements that may be binding. That
implies an additional responsibility, since its decisions,
or the lack of them, have a decisive impact on an
effective, legitimate and predictable system of collective
security. In that regard, there is much to be done. The
Council also has a responsibility to promote access to
justice by creating ad hoc tribunals, referring situations
to the International Criminal Court and ensuring the
implementation of its decisions through the cooperation
of States. Accountability is vital in order to prevent the
commission of atrocity crimes, which should not, under
any circumstances, remain unpunished. The Security
Council establishes various kinds of sanctions that
create legal obligations for all States, which should
always respect the guarantees of due process.

In conclusion, we would like to underscore the
urgent need to respect the Charter of the United Nations
and in particular the importance of the Council's
remaining united in carrying out the imperative
task of upholding and promoting international law
and shouldering its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

