Let me start by first thanking the briefer, Mr. Olof Skoog, for reminding us of the important role of the European Union (EU) High Representative with regard to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). I would like to pay special tribute to Ms. Helga Schmid, who was the Secretary-General of the European External Action Service and a kind of godmother to the JCPOA. After many years, she has now become the Secretary-General of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. I would also like to thank Mr. Philippe Kridelka and his predecessor, Mr. Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve, and their teams for their dedicated work as Facilitators over the past couple of years. Last but not least, I once again thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing and the continuing support of the Secretariat in the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). We also thank the Secretary-General personally for his continuing support of the JCPOA. In that context, I would like to address a point made by our Russian colleague regarding ongoing discussions in the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly. I support the point that he made. We should stand united in blocking the attempts of our United States partners to cut funds to the Secretariat for tasks related to the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). Our position on the JCPOA has not changed. As the E-3 - France, Germany and the United Kingdom - we have worked tirelessly to preserve that agreement. Just yesterday - 21 December - at an informal virtual meeting of JCPOA participants at the ministerial level, all remaining participants reaffirmed their commitment. They also acknowledged the prospect of a return by the United States to the agreement and underlined their readiness to positively address that in a joint effort. However, the Foreign Ministers also discussed current implementation challenges. There is a pressing need for Iran to stop all actions that run counter to its nuclear-related commitments and refrain from any further action that might violate and hollow out the JCPOA. Iran needs to return to full compliance with the JCPOA. We are deeply concerned about its installation of advanced centrifuges at the Natanz Fuel Enrichment Plant, which would be in clear violation of the JCPOA. We are also concerned that, if implemented, the recent law passed by the Iranian Parliament would substantially expand Iran's nuclear programme, in violation of the JCPOA, and limit monitoring access for the International Atomic Energy Agency. With regard to annex B to resolution 2231 (2015), I would like to briefly reiterate that we continue to consider Iran's development of nuclear-capable ballistic missiles and related technologies as inconsistent with paragraph 3 of annex B. We reaffirm the need to ensure compliance by all States with the provisions in annex B, including the prohibition on the transfer to and from Iran of items listed under the Missile Technology Control Regime. The situation is bleak with regard to many files on the agenda of the Security Council; it is not necessarily so with the Iran nuclear file. Resolution 2231 (2015) survived four years of frontal attacks and remains a cornerstone of the non- proliferation and security architecture in the region. I would like to thank everyone around the table who contributed to preserving the JCPOA and pay special tribute to the Ambassadors of Indonesia and the Niger during their presidencies. Once the JCPOA implementation is fully back in place, we should jointly address the wider challenges of the region. We must also continue to address the dismal human rights record of Iran.
