Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I wish to
express our thanks to Prime Minister Gusmao and to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ameerah Haq, for their briefings today and to all the
personnel of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) for their dedication to assisting
the people of Timor-Leste.

The next two years will determine the prospects
for a stable and peaceful future for Timor-Leste and its
people. The elections in mid-2012 remain the most
significant milestone ahead. As Timor-Leste works
towards those elections, we are pleased that the
security situation continues calm and that there has
been clear and steady improvement since 2006.

The men and women of UNMIT deserve credit
for their role in ensuring the stabilization of Timor-
Leste. Their work is now bearing fruit as the
Government increasingly assumes responsibility for
domestic security.

We are particularly encouraged by the imminent
handover of all policing districts to the national police
forces - the PNTL - and the fact that this transition
is being accomplished without any increase in crime or
disorder. The successful handover to the PNTL marks a
step towards the end of the United Nations
peacekeeping role. We do not envisage that the
Security Council will need to extend UNMIT's
peacekeeping mandate beyond February 2013.

As we prepare for UNMIT's departure in two
years' time, it is right that the United Nations police
(UNPOL) should begin its drawdown now. We note the
small drawdown of UNPOL personnel recently
recommended by the Secretary-General. We expect to
see this rapidly accelerated after the election in 2012.

The drawdown should be regarded as a display of trust
in the PNTL's ability to re-establish itself as the
primary provider of security in Timor-Leste. The
Government of Timor-Leste can play an important role
by ensuring that its police are sufficiently equipped
with important enablers such as generators,
communications facilities and office equipment to
enable the PNTL to reach its full potential.

The Government of Timor-Leste should also
ensure - as some of my colleagues have highlighted -
that the integrity of the PNTL is not compromised. The
words of Prime Minister Gusmao this morning on this
subject were encouraging. But we are concerned at the
news that 52 serving PNTL officers who face serious
criminal charges have been certified. We call on the
Government of Timor-Leste to give priority to resolving
this unsatisfactory situation.

The Government should also continue to take a
firm stance against impunity and to bring perpetrators
of war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide
to justice. It is important that work on legislation
providing for follow-up to the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation make real
progress alongside work on reparations for victims of
past abuses.

It is imperative that the United Nations now
prioritize planning for its post-2012 presence. UNMIT
must plan a coherent, realistic and durable exit
strategy, enabling civilian peacebuilding actors to take
the lead in helping shape Timor-Leste's future. We look
forward to receiving a detailed update on this planning
in the Secretary-General's report later this year.

At the same time, the wider United Nations
family must work towards addressing the longer-term
needs of the county, in close collaboration with the
Government of Timor-Leste. We stress the importance
of the High-Level Committee on Transition in this
regard. United Nations involvement in Timor-Leste has
the potential to be a beacon of success, modelling how
peacekeeping operations can be drawn down as civilian
peacebuilders continue their vital work. The United
Kingdom encourages the United Nations to seize this
opportunity.
