Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): At the outset, I
should like to associate my delegation with the sadness
that others have expressed at the loss of life in Grozny,

Turning to the item on our agenda, I would like
particularly to welcome the presence here of Senior
Minister Ana Pessoa Pinto. We look forward to hearing
her views. I take the effort she has made to be here
today not only as a gesture to acknowledge the new
phase that the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) is entering, but also as an
acknowledgement of all that Kamalesh Sharma has
achieved over his two years of close work with the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste, We thank
him for what he has done.
I would like also to associate my delegation with
the statement to be made by Ireland on behalf of the
European Union later in this debate.

We believe that the Secretary-General has made a
compelling case for the extension of UNMISET's
mandate for a further one-year consolidation phase. It
is important to ensure that the investments of the
international community and the achievements of the
Timorese people and Government are not undermined.
We look forward to engaging in negotiations this week
on a draft resolution to extend UNMISET in a reduced
form and with a modified mandate that reflects a
coherent exit strategy. We welcome the fact that
differences over the makeup of the security component
of the follow-on mission appear now to have been
resolved to the satisfaction of all concerned. We thank
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations for its
efforts in that regard.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2004/333) sets
out clearly the areas where progress has been achieved
and those where continued international support is
required. I will not dwell on them, but it is clearly the
case that a smooth buildup in the governance capacity
of East Timor is necessary for a smooth UNMISET
drawdown. We welcome the strengthening of key
public institutions, in particular through the passage of
the Civil Service Act and the Organic Law on the
Office of the Presidency, and we commend the positive
steps that have been made in preparation for elections
later this year, including the establishment of the National
Electoral Commission and the finalizing of the legal
framework under which the elections can take place.

Areas where the United Kingdom is particularly
keen to see further progress include the establishment
of necessary legal and institutional frameworks such as
a defence act and prison legislation, clarification of the
roles and responsibilities of the Timorese police and
armed forces, and improvement in the administration
of justice.

Finally, we welcome the continued constructive
cooperation between Indonesia and Timor-Leste. We
hope that that will facilitate the early resolution of
outstanding issues, including agreement on a land
border and the provision of justice for those
responsible for serious crimes in 1999. With respect to
the latter point, it is important that the work of the
Serious Crimes Unit should continue.

