Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we congratulate Ambassador Gary Quinlan
on assuming the chairmanship of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and
thank him for presenting the quarterly report on the
work of that subsidiary organ. We also acknowledge his
committed and transparent work.

During the reporting period, the Committee
continued to efficiently carry out its work in the
context of its mandate. In that regard, we believe
that it is important to keep Member States informed
of the Committee's work, for example by holding
briefings that are open to all States. We also believe
that it is appropriate for the Committee to respond to
all inquiries received from Member States in order to
encourage them to remain vigilant in implementing the
relevant resolutions. Furthermore, we believe that the
Committee plays a crucial role in providing assistance
and cooperation to Member States on implementing the
pertinent resolutions. In that regard, we believe that the
guidance notes that help States in their implementation
efforts are a key tool.

Allow me to underscore three points with regard to
the Iranian nuclear programme. First, I would like to
reaffirm the inalienable right of all States parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to
research, produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes without discrimination. That is the principled
position that we have stated in this and other relevant
forums. At the same time, my country has a firm and
long-standing commitment to the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, which I reaffirm
in the Council. I believe that the international

community should support the relevance of the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and its cornerstone, the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.

Secondly, I would like to mention the most recent
report of the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) of 21 February, which
was transmitted to the Council (see S/2013/103). In that
regard, we share the assessment of the Director General
and his concern about the lack of progress in clarifying
the outstanding issues, including those linked to a
possible military dimension of the Iranian nuclear
programme. We believe that the Islamic Republic
of Iran must continue to actively cooperate with the
Agency and supply all required information on its
nuclear programme, providing access to all necessary
sites. In that regard, it is important that Iran adopt the
necessary measures to fully implement its safeguards
agreement and to meet its other obligations, including
the relevant Security Council resolutions, and to regain
the international community's trust in the exclusively
peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.

Third1y, I would like to underscore that we are
encouraged by the recent talks between the Government
of Iran and the E3+3, held in Almaty. My country
believes that we must continue to seek a solution through
talks that allow for certainty about the peaceful nature
of the Iranian nuclear programme. We encourage the
parties to continue their efforts in that regard.

We also believe that it is relevant to recall the appeal
of the IAEA Board of Governors, in its resolution of
September 2012, for Iran to adopt and implement the
so-called structured approach to resolve the outstanding
issues. Since the adoption of that resolution, there have
been three rounds of negotiations between the IAEA
and Iran without the Director General having been
able to record substantive developments. We hope that
the periodic meetings between the two parties lead to
specific results with regard to the structured approach
so that the process of clarifying the outstanding issues
can begin. I have concluded my remarks.

