Ms. Adamson: I have the honour to speak on behalf
ofthe European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine and the Republic
of Moldova, align themselves with this statement.

The EU strongly acknowledges the crucial role
played by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and all the United Nations
agencies in supporting the Afghan people, encouraging
peace and reconciliation, monitoring and promoting
human rights, and helping to improve the credibility,
integrity, inclusiveness and sustainability of electoral
processes, as well as in coordinating the international
community's assistance. The EU wishes to have the
closest and strongest relationship with UNAMA, in
a spirit of transparent and open cooperation on the
ground and in international formats for the ultimate
benefit of Afghanistan.

The European Union remains fully committed to
supporting an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process. The EU takes note with interest that the
Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the Afghan Peace
and Reconciliation Process, consisting of Afghanistan,
China, Pakistan and the United States, has started to
reconvene for the first time in more than a year and
welcomes the preparations for the Kabul Process
meeting, scheduled for 1 February.

The EU supports the Kabul process on peace and
security and other meaningful international efforts
feeding into the Kabul process initiative aimed at
establishing a genuine Afghan peace and reconciliation
process. The EU expects the Kabul process meeting
on 1 February to yield concrete results and pave the
way towards further constructive discussions. We also
welcome all initiatives mounted in close coordination
with the Kabul process aimed at creating a conducive
environment for such a process, and the EU calls on all
parties, including the regional stakeholders, to engage
in working towards constructive solutions.

On 16 October, the Council of the European
Union adopted a new EU strategy on Afghanistan,
setting out our vision of how the European Union
will support Afghanistan, both in addressing its
formidable challenges and in bringing about positive
change in the lives of ordinary Afghans. The strategy
lays out a path for a coherent, ambitious and forward-
looking strategy for EU engagement and partnership.
It focuses on four priority areas critical to achieving
progress, namely, promoting peace, stability and
regional security; reinforcing democracy, the rule of
law and human rights and promoting good governance
and women's empowerment; supporting economic and
human development; and addressing challenges related
to migration.

The new EU strategy is one of several steps taken
to reinforce the European Union's strong commitment
to Afghanistan more than a year after the Brussels
Conference on Afghanistan, held in October 2016. In
addition, the provisional application, as of 1 December,
of the EU-Afghanistan cooperation agreement on
partnership and development establishes a formal
bilateral relationship between the EU and Afghanistan.

As the United States has also recently adopted a
new strategy on Afghanistan and South Asia, let me
emphasize that the EU will continue to work together
with the United States and the international community
in support of lasting peace, security and stability in
Afghanistan. Respect for human rights and democratic
elections continues to be a focus for the dialogue
between the EU and the Afghan authorities and for the
actions of the EU in the country. In that regard, the EU
congratulates Afghanistan on its election to the Human
Rights Council.

The EU maintains close contact with human rights
defenders in Afghanistan. In general, the EU has a high
expectation of the Afghan authorities that they will
seek to advance the protection of human rights. In that
context, however, the EU is extremely concerned by the
execution of five prisoners on 29 November - the first
executions to take place in Afghanistan since February
2015. We therefore call on Afghanistan to re-establish
its moratorium on executions with a View to abolishing
the death penalty. Human rights will be, from now
on, part of the structured dialogue between the EU
and Afghanistan under the cooperation agreement on
partnership and the development framework that I have

just mentioned.

With regard to elections, the EU and its member
States welcomed the announcement by the Independent
Electoral Commission of the date for the parliamentary
elections in Afghanistan, which are to be held in 2018.
That announcement was reassuring for both the Afghan
people and the international community as a sign of
the further democratization of the country. However,
there are signs that the process has been slowed down
by both technical and political difficulties. All efforts
must be deployed now to resolve those difficulties and
make those elections possible in the announced time
frame, and ensure that they are held in a democratic,
inclusive, transparent and credible manner. The EU
and its member States remain committed to supporting
the Afghan electoral process. The EU has committed
€15.5 million to assist the parliamentary and district
elections, alongside other members of the international
community and under the coordination of UNAMA.

Regional cooperation is key to lasting peace and
stability in Afghanistan and the region. Threats of
terrorism affecting all countries of the region can only
be confronted with increased political, economic and
security cooperation. Such cooperation is indispensable
for sustainable development. Afghanistan continues
to engage with its neighbours through international
forums, such as the Ministerial Conference of the
Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process and the regional
economic cooperation conference on Afghanistan.
The EU supports such regional forums aimed at
facilitating economic and political cooperation among
all regional stakeholders.

In June 2016, Federica Mogherini, Vice-President
of the European Commission and High Representative
of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
presented the global strategy for the European Union's
foreign and security policy. Its main objective is to
strengthen the relations of the EU with a "connected
Asia". It is noteworthy that, through the deepening of its
trade relations, the EU is becoming the largest market
for a number of Afghanistan's neighbouring countries.
The EU also stands ready to accompany the efforts
of the Afghan authorities to develop international
trade and investment, including with the EU and its
member States.

The EU and Afghanistan continue to engage
in a comprehensive dialogue on migration. The
implementation of the EU-Afghanistan joint way
forward is part of that discussion, with several planned
common actions related to the fight against smuggling
and trafficking in human beings and awareness-raising
activities on illegal migration. Discussions are also
under way to take stock of the implementation of the
reintegration assistance programme adopted in 2016,
with a view to ensuring a sustainable reintegration of
returnees from both the EU and neighbouring countries.
By the end of this year, the total amount of €78 million
allocated to Afghanistan will have been mobilized, and
the activities will have been launched.
The EU support will be soon complemented by
a new regional programme on migration and forced
displacement with a budget of about €200 million,
of which - as in 2016 - Afghanistan is the main
beneficiary. It will include activities at both the country
and the regional levels to address the challenges of
migration and forced displacement, including support
for Afghan refugees, internally displaced people
and returnees.

In October 2017 UNAMA reported a six per cent
decrease in the number of civilians killed and wounded
in the conflict this year, compared to the first nine
months of 2016 - a year that saw record highs in harm
to civilians. However, beyond those horrific figures,
it is extremely worrying that the proportion of women
killed and injured is on the rise, and extreme harm to
civilians continued to be inflicted amidst a worsening
toll from suicide attacks and a greater impact on
women and children. We call on all parties to protect
the civilian population, especially women and children,
in line with international humanitarian law and human
rights standards. We also need to continue to protect the
vital role played by humanitarian agencies and respect
their impartiality and humanitarian space as they work
to address the most urgent needs of the most vulnerable.
In view of the threat posed by the many mines and
improvised explosive devices to the population, the EU
also encourages Afghanistan to maintain the current
demining pace.

Insecurity and instability are also fuelled by the
illicit cultivation and production of and trafficking in
narcotics. We have seen alarming United Nations figures
indicating significant increases in opium production.
We encourage the Government of Afghanistan to
continue to forcefully implement its national drug
action plan, with the full support of the international
community and in close cooperation with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and other relevant
regional frameworks, such as the Paris Pact initiative.

In conclusion, the EU continues to consider
UNAMA to be a key partner in efforts to achieve
a lasting peace in Afghanistan. UNAMA has an
invaluable role to play in ensuring the broadest possible
international support for an Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned process. The EU will continue to support those
efforts with all the means at its disposal.

