Ms. Goolab (South Africa): Let me begin by thanking Deputy Special Envoy Khawla Matar for her briefing on the political situation in Syria. South Africa is encouraged to hear that Special Envoy Pedersen is continuing his efforts towards finding a political solution to the situation in Syria. His ongoing engagements with all the parties are welcome, particularly during these uncertain times. My delegation also supports the Special Envoy and his Office in his work to promote confidence-building measures to build trust among the parties. Such measures will go a long way in showing the commitment of the various parties to the work and the purpose of the Constitutional Committee, which is an essential component of the Syrian political process. In that regard, South Africa urges all segments and groups of the Constitutional Committee to recommit to making a constructive contribution to the constitution-building process. In addition, South Africa calls on the various parties to make every effort to work together, with the support of the Special Envoy, to find agreement on an agenda before the start of the next round of talks, to guide the work of the Committee. South Africa encourages members of the Constitutional Committee to be flexible in agreeing on an agenda, given that all issues will ultimately be on the table as discussions advance. The work of the Constitutional Committee is but one aspect of the larger process in Syria, as laid out in resolution 2254 (2015). As has been stated many times in the Council, the situation in Syria cannot be resolved through military means. The only sustainable solution to the current crisis is through the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015), which calls for an inclusive Syrian-led and Syrian-owned dialogue that reflects the will and voice of the Syrian people. In that regard, we welcome the participation and representation of women, as well as the different religious groups, at the various levels of the talks in order to ensure the widest possible representation in the process.
