Mr. Cheng Jingye (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I would like to express our pleasure at
seeing you, Sir, preside over today's meeting. I also
wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for
his briefing.

This will be the year's last meeting ofthe Council
on the question of Kosovo. In the past year, some
positive progress has been made on the Kosovo
question. What merits special mention is that in
October, through the efforts and impetus of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the parties
concerned, Belgrade and Pristina held their first direct
dialogue. In addition, to facilitate implementation of
the "standards before status" policy, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General recently
released the document on standards for Kosovo, which
was subsequently endorsed by the Security Council in a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2003/26). We welcome
those positive developments and believe they are of
crucial significance for advancing the Kosovo political
process. We look forward to the early formulation of a
concrete, specific implementation plan by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), in consultation with the bodies concerned.

However, we also realize that Kosovo is presently
faced with multiple difficulties and challenges. There is
still a high rate of violent crime. Security for ethnic
minorities and their freedom of movement have not yet
been effectively ensured. The return of refugees
remains at a trickle. The comprehensive settlement of
the Kosovo question is therefore a formidable
challenge that requires a redoubling of efforts by the
parties concerned and the continued attention and
assistance of the international community.

Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) provides
the basis for resolving the Kosovo question and the
"standards before status" policy provides the guiding
principle. Dialogue and cooperation offer an effective
way forward. We hope that the parties concerned will
assiduously fulfil their obligations to effectively
achieve the standards, resolve their differences through
dialogue and actively strive for harmony among the
ethnic communities in order to create the necessary
conditions for a final and satisfactory settlement of the
question of Kosovo.

