Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic):
The delegation of Kuwait is very pleased to see you, Sir,
presiding over the work of the Security Council for this
month. Your competence and experience guarantee that the
Security Council's work will be crowned with success. I
should like also to express our gratitude to your
predecessor, Ambassador Legwaila, the Permanent
Representative of Botswana, for the outstanding manner in
which he directed the work of the Council last month.

The Council is meeting today to consider the critical
situation in the Palestinian territories resulting from the
arbitrary measures and practices and inhuman treatment that
the Israeli occupying authorities have resorted to against the
people of Palestine in the occupied territories. Apart from
the fact that the Israeli Government has continued to pursue
its policy of confiscating lands, expanding its settlements
and demolishing houses, as well as other arbitrary practices,
other steps have recently been taken, and they can be
summarized as follows.

They have imposed restrictions on freedom of
movement in the Palestinian territories and have effected
the closure of certain zones in order to make it impossible
for people to move between Palestinian villages and towns.
They have also split the Palestinian territory, preventing
Palestinians from reaching the city of Jerusalem. They have
closed the Israeli border to Palestinians and their goods
from the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, and have
prevented the entrance of Israeli goods into Palestinian
territory, which has greatly harmed the Palestinian economy
and caused suffering to large sectors of the population of
the territory.

These measures are a flagrant violation of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 and of all other agreements,
instruments, and international norms. They represent a
sharp reversal by Israel, which has gone back on the
agreements concluded at Oslo and Cairo as part of the
peace process that started at Madrid in 1991. That the
Israeli authorities continue these practices damages the
entire peace process and creates tension and instability
throughout the region.

In View of its solidarity with the Palestinian people
and its desire successfully to continue the peace process
in the Middle East, Kuwait is profoundly concerned at the
inhuman practices engaged in by the Israeli authorities,
and requests the Security Council to demand that Israel
immediately cease these policies of collective punishment,
which they have unjustifiably claimed are simply for
security reasons and have resulted in the blockading of
the autonomous areas. We call upon them to respect their
agreements with the Palestinians and to continue
negotiations on a final agreement, which will make it
possible for the Palestinian people to fully exercise their
rights and will put an end to aggression and occupation,
leading to the exercise of these legitimate rights, first and
foremost the right to self-determination and to the
establishment of their own independent State, with the
holy city of Jerusalem as its capital.

Kuwait welcomed the agreement between the
Government of Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
extend autonomy as an important step towards full
implementation of all aspects of the Oslo Agreement.
Kuwait reaffirms that peace can be lasting and
comprehensive only if all aspects of it are carried out.
Therefore, we emphasize the need to make progress on
the Syrian and Lebanese tracks. We also call upon Israel
to withdraw from the occupied territories in Lebanon and
to place them once again under the control of the
Lebanese Government.

Kuwait's participation in the Sharm El Sheikh
Summit, which was held last month in the Arab Republic
of Egypt, underscored our conviction that it is vital to
give further momentum to the peace process and to make
progress towards creating appropriate conditions for
overcoming the obstacles to the peace which is so
earnestly desired, and towards finding ways to combat
terrorism, whatever its origin, and completely uprooting
it from the region. What is essential now is to resume the
peace process on all fronts to reach a formula that will
make that peace just and comprehensive.

 

In conclusion, I appeal to all parties concerned to
continue the peace process and to achieve progress with it,
rather than taking action that makes us lose the momentum
we have gained in recent years and which we hope will
continue. I appeal to them also to make our dream come
true: that peace may be restored to the Middle East.

We appeal to the international community to continue
its support to the Palestinian people to enable them to
rebuild their economic infrastructure, and to donor countries
to give them the continuous material support they need. We
were the first country to give such support to the
Palestinian people through the various international bodies
and institutions. We express satisfaction at the agreements
reached between the Palestinian Authority and the Israeli
Government as part of the peace process.

