Mr. Hamburger (Netherlands): I have the
honour to take the floor on behalf of the European
Union. The candidate countries Bulgaria, Romania,
Turkey and Croatia, the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and Montenegro,
and the European Free Trade Association countries
Iceland and Norway, members of the European
Economic Area, align themselves with this statement.

The European Union wishes to express its
appreciation for the opportunity that you have offered,
Mr. President, to discuss the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, a theme that is at the core of the work
of the Security Council. We also would like to thank
Mr. Egeland for his presentation this morning.

The European Union favours a continued debate
on the complex challenges we are facing. We welcome
the report of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change, which also addresses the
importance of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and provides another excellent opportunity to
intensify United Nations cooperation on that issue.

Today, the European Union reiterates to the
Security Council its commitment to enhancing the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and to the
Secretary-General's ten-point platform for action. The
European Union calls upon all States, as well as non-
governmental organizations and international
organizations, to consider that ten-point platform in
their efforts to protect civilians in armed conflict.

In general, we underline the fundamental
importance of international humanitarian law and the
need for all parties to fully respect their obligations
thereunder. We also call upon all concerned to support
neutral, impartial and independent humanitarian action.
We value the important work of the Red Cross
movement, especially the International Committee of
the Red Cross, in this regard.

Among civilians, who are the principal victims of
armed conflict, refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs) require the international community's
special attention when it comes to protection. Although
we are still far from solving the protection problems of
refugee populations, we have succeeded in defining
who should take up the responsibility for those
populations: the High Commissioner for Refugees.
When it comes to IDPs, of which there are many more,
there is no such clear defining of roles.

The European Union welcomes the collaborative
approach of the United Nations when it comes to
supporting and protecting IDPs. It sees the
collaborative approach as the best way forward and
supports the steps recently taken by Under-Secretary-
General Egeland to strengthen inter-agency
collaboration. However, in the case of one of the worst
crises of the moment - Darfur - implementation of
the collaborative approach has been far from perfect,
especially in its initial phase. The European Union
strongly supports the efforts of the United Nations to
bring about a genuine collaborative strategy in Darfur
and hopes we will all learn from the recent
experiences.

In that context, the European Union would like to
commend the African Union for its proactive and
positive role. Enhancing its presence may contribute
significantly to the protection of civilians.

The European Union is especially concerned
about the vulnerable position of women and children in
armed conflict. Violence against women and girls,
including rape and sexual slavery, is often used as a
weapon of war in order to dehumanize women, or the
community they belong to. The European Union
condemns such practices in the strongest terms. Under
all circumstances States must take all necessary
measures to protect women and girls from violence and
to promote the full enjoyment of their human rights.
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women,
peace and security, provides important
recommendations for the protection of women. The
recommendations of that resolution should be fully
implemented.

The European Union welcomes the efforts
undertaken by the United Nations to mainstream the
focus on the issue of the protection of children in
armed conflict throughout its system. In that regard,
the European Union notes the recent comprehensive
assessment by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations system's response to children affected by
armed conflict. The European Union looks forward to
the early implementation of the recommendations
contained in that report.

The European Union stresses the need to pay
special attention to the position and needs of children,
including non-combatants and girls, in peace
negotiations, in mandates of peace support operations
and in disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
resettlement programmes. The recruitment and use of
children by armed forces must be in strict conformity
with the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. For its part, the European Union
adopted guidelines on children and armed conflict in
2003. It also has a plan of action for concrete
initiatives in Burundi, Rwanda, Uganda, the Sudan,
Liberia, Cote d'Ivoire, Sierra Leone, Colombia and Sri
Lanka.

The European Union welcomes the Security
Council's stronger focus on protection in many of the
peacekeeping mandates, as well as the recognition of
the role that regional organizations can play in that
context. The European Union stresses the importance
of providing enough resources and personnel to
support such operations.

The European Union welcomes the appointment
by the Secretary-General of a Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide to serve as an early warning
instrument, and looks forward to the establishment of
close and regular relations between the Special Adviser
and the Security Council, the General Assembly and
the United Nations Commission on Human Rights.

Humanitarian catastrophes should be prevented
through early collective action by the international
community. The European Union underlines the
importance of mechanisms for the identification of
situations of potential instability and the creation of
instruments to prevent great human suffering, such as
the early appointment of human rights monitors.

The European Union believes that in a national
reconciliation process, various justice mechanisms may
play a role. At the same time we would like to
emphasize that there can be no impunity for the most
serious international crimes, including systematic
sexual and gender-based violence. The fight against
impunity in post-conflict societies with small capacity
for the administration of justice can be won only with
international support. In that respect, the European
Union welcomes the fact that the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court determined that there is a
rational basis to commence an investigation into crimes
allegedly committed in the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Uganda.

The European Union also welcomes the
relationship agreement between the United Nations and
the International Criminal Court which hopefully may
lead to effective cooperation. Furthermore, the
European Union recalls that the Security Council is
empowered to refer situations to the Court, even in
cases where countries are not States party to the Statute
of the Court. The European Union calls upon all States
of the United Nations that have not yet done so to
ratify the Rome Statute at the earliest possible
opportunity and to take all appropriate measures to
implement that treaty fully within their national
systems.

Allow me to conclude with the assurance by the
European Union of its commitment to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We stand ready to assist the

Council and the United Nations system in ensuring this
goal.

