We commend the Russian Federation's presidency of the Security Council for the month of October for convening today's debate. Latvia thanks Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and rest of the briefers for their remarks and valuable input in this debate. Latvia welcomes the most recent report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security and its recommendations (S/2020/946). Latvia aligns itself with the statements made on behalf of the European Union (EU) (annex 38) and of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 27). This year the global community marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the landmark resolution for women's rights in both conflict and in peace. While so much has already been achieved, we cannot become complacent and forget that we are not even halfway there, especially when we are presented with new challenges. The women and peace and security agenda has never been more relevant than during this time of global pandemic. It tests the knowledge and experiences that we have acquired over the years and poses unprecedented challenges to the rights, inclusion, representation, equality and protection of women and girls. It amplifies vulnerabilities in political, social and economic systems that in turn risk reversing gains made over decades. We cannot allow the rights of women and girls to become collateral damage. Women and girls are the least protected group in the pandemic. At the same time, they are constantly at the front lines of the battle against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), risking their lives to save lives. These unprecedented times show that women's participation in crisis prevention and gender-sensitive and human rights- based actions is crucial and one of the keys to a successful response to the COVID-19 pandemic and its consequences. The data confirm this point and demonstrate that women-led countries are showing better results than male-led countries during the pandemic, which leads us to deeper appreciation of just how crucial the women and peace and security agenda truly is. It is once again a reminder that women must be an integral part of our response, not only to COVID-19 but also to global security challenges and any other matters that have an impact on women and girls. The international community must join efforts to ensure the full implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. Only through working together can we accelerate gender equality and women's empowerment. Latvia strongly supports the women and peace and security agenda, particularly as it is fundamental to global security. Gender-equality issues and the empowerment of women are Latvia's long-standing priorities in its participation in international organizations and in development cooperation. As a State member of the European Union, we are actively involved in promoting the women and peace and security agenda within the EU's internal and external policies. Gender equality is also a priority for Latvia at the United Nations. We actively support the United Nations efforts, including financially aiding the operations of UN-Women. In September, Latvia was elected to the United Nations Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) for the 2021-2025 term. Our mandate in the CSW starts next year, and we are committed to playing an active role in shaping and enforcing global standards and policies for gender equality. We are proud that, in its research for Women, Business and the Law 2019: A Decade of Reform, the World Bank recognized Latvia as one of the six economies worldwide that grants women and men equal legal rights. Latvia emphasizes the advancement of women's participation in decision-making positions - for example, in the National Armed Forces, in State institutions and in politics. Specifically, Latvia has integrated participation principles of the women and peace and security agenda into practice with 16 per cent of soldiers in the National Armed Forces being women - NATO's average rate being only 10 per cent - and with 30 per cent of the personnel of the State police being women. On 14 July, the Latvian Government approved Latvia's national action plan on women, peace and security for the 2020-2025 term. Our plan envisages three main tasks within the women, peace and security framework: first, raising public awareness of gender equality issues and the elimination of gender-based violence, especially in the younger generation; secondly, training for the defence and home affairs sector, including the establishment of a gender adviser's position; and, thirdly, transmitting Latvia's experience and knowledge. These tasks are being implemented in close cooperation with non-governmental organizations, civil society and our foreign partners. The women and peace and security agenda is ever-changing and has evolved a great deal over the last 20 years. The twentieth anniversary is the right moment not just to reflect on the past but also to look towards the future and address existing challenges to the implementation of the agenda. As such reflection coincides with the global pandemic, we must reassess the framework and rethink our approach as we strive to take the women and peace and security agenda forward in the next 20 years. It is also the right time to ensure that the necessary steps are taken so that the agenda is celebrated every day and not just once a year. We must join our forces to ensure that voices of women and girls are heard loud and clear.
