Statement dated 30 March by the co-penholders, Belgium and Germany, delivered by the Permanent Representative of Belgium We want to thank Under-Secretary General Lowcock and Special Envoy Pedersen for their briefings today and we extend our gratitude to all humanitarian and medical workers in Syria. I will limit my statement to four points: First, we fully support the statements of the Secretary-General and of the Special Envoy on COVID-19. This virus constitutes an unprecedented threat to humanity, and its effects are potentially disastrous in Syria. Nine years of war have taken an extreme toll. Almost half of all health-care facilities have been partially or completely destroyed. There is a shortage of medical equipment and personnel. In particular, the 6 million internally displaced persons, especially those in the north-west, as well as detainees and abductees, are living in very challenging conditions and are extremely vulnerable to respiratory infections. Therefore, we welcome efforts by the World Health Organization to provide testing kits for the civilian population in Idlib. We also echo the Special Envoy's demands for: (1) a complete, immediate nationwide ceasefire; (2) large-scale releases of detainees and abductees; and (3) full humanitarian access, making full use of all modalities and respecting all humanitarian principles. These urgent demands have gone widely unanswered in the past. Under these extraordinary circumstances, they are mandatory. Secondly, in the north-west, the ceasefire between Russia and Turkey is fragile, yet it seems to be holding. This is positive news. However, the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Lowcock, in his statement, was abundantly clear on the challenges that people in Idlib continue to face and we remain very deeply concerned about their situation. Due to the military offensive, nearly 1 million internally displaced persons are living in an ever-smaller area, lacking housing, food and water. Due to the great needs, more than ever before, the cross- border modality has been used to import humanitarian aid into Idlib. We support the United Nations inter-agency mission that took place in early March and call for continued close monitoring of the humanitarian situation by the United Nations. Thirdly, in the north-east, gaps in the influx of medical aid are becoming clear since the Council did not agree on renewing the crossing point of Ya'rubiyah earlier this year. To fill this gap, the Secretary-General, in his report, called for more cross- line as well as more cross-border access. We request the United Nations to deliver clear facts and figures concerning cross-line access throughout Syria, and, in particular, to all areas and medical facilities in the north-east. We also request more specific information about access to non-governmental medical facilities. The Council and its member States should also actively consider renewing cross-border access into the north-east. The need is evident. Finally, we renew our call for accountability. In this regard, we strongly support the work of the Board of Inquiry, as well as the work of the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism.
