Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his detailed briefing
on the situation in the Middle East. We also welcome
the statements by the Permanent Representative of
Israel and the Permanent Observer of the Palestinian
Authority.

Despite the adoption of resolution 1860 (2009)
and the unilateral cessation of hostilities in the West
Bank, a tense calm prevails in the Middle East. The
humanitarian crisis brought about by the conflict has
not been resolved and continues to pose a threat to the
stability of the region. Now more than ever, it is
imperative that all of the actors concerned reiterate
their commitment to political dialogue, to the peace
process and to the establishment of a Palestinian State,
living side by side with Israel in peace within secure
and recognized borders.

The recent crisis in Gaza has shown once again
that weapons will not solve the conflict. Only a few
weeks after the partial cessation of hostilities, we note
with concern that rocket attacks from Gaza into
southern Israel, the most recent of which took place
yesterday in Ashkelon, have continued, as have air
incursions by the Israel Defense Forces into Gaza. My
delegation condemns these acts of violence and once
again urges all stakeholders to respect the provisions of
international humanitarian law at all times.

In addition to these events, we note that the lack
of substantial progress in intra-Palestinian dialogue and
the delays in the formation of a new Israeli
Government have led to the temporary interruption of
the peace process.

We also believe that the continuation of the
policy of demolitions and settlement activities in East
Jerusalem and the West Bank does not bode well for
the negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority or for the establishment of a lasting peace.
We therefore call on the parties to implement as soon
as possible the provisions of resolutions 1850 (2008)
and 1860 (2009), as they contain the elements
necessary for the establishment of a permanent
ceasefire and renewed dialogue. We must recall here
that it is only through the introduction of a monitoring
mechanism that a lasting ceasefire will be possible and
that an end will be put to illicit arms trafficking into
Gaza Strip, which was one of the central issues that
brought about the recent crisis. Here, we commend
Egypt for having taken steps to facilitate the intra-
Palestinian dialogue and establish the basis for an
agreement on Gaza. We also commend the
international community for its efforts to resolve the
humanitarian crisis and begin reconstruction efforts as
soon as possible.

We should redouble our efforts to make progress
on the basis of agreements achieved at Sharm el-
Sheikh in early March. The outcome of the Sharm el-
Sheikh conference was encouraging: it is a starting
point for adopting a long-term approach to respond to
the humanitarian crisis, taking account of fundamental
aspects such as the permanent opening of all border
crossings; support for the rebuilding of infrastructure;
the sustainable economic, social and environmental
development of Gaza; and the strengthening of
governance. That collective effort made it possible to
obtain pledges totalling nearly $4.5 billion. We trust
that those pledges will be translated into concrete
action to benefit the civilian population and regional
stability.

Mexico is participating in the effort by making a
contribution to the World Food Programme, through its
Operation Lifeline Gaza, which provides food to those
affected by the conflict and promotes school
attendance by children. We shall also continue to make
an active contribution to the work of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, which acted in an
exemplary manner throughout the recent conflict.

My delegation is concerned by the fact that
humanitarian work continues to be hindered, in
particular in terms of access for humanitarian
assistance and materials for rebuilding Gaza. In some
cases, we see actions that are clear violations of
international humanitarian law. Here, we recall the
importance of implementing the provisions of
resolution 1502 (2003) regarding the obligation of all
parties involved in an armed conflict to comply fully
with the rules and principles of international law
applicable to them related to the protection of
humanitarian personnel and United Nations and its
associated personnel, in particular international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law.

We welcome the Secretary-General's decision to
establish a Board of Inquiry to shed light on the attacks
on United Nations facilities in Gaza; we await the
findings of the Board's investigation and the
identification of actions to be taken to prevent further
incidents of this kind. We also call on the Government
of Israel to support the ongoing investigation -
undertaken at its own initiative - regarding possible
violations of international humanitarian law during the
military operations in Gaza. We hope also that there
will be an investigation of alleged human rights
violations by Hamas.

Tomorrow will mark 30 years since the signing of
the historic peace agreement between Israel and Egypt.
For that model to be reproduced in the region, three
objectives must be attained. First, negotiations between
Israel and the Palestinian Authority should be resumed,
with a firm commitment by the parties to constructive
dialogue without preconditions. In the present context,
meeting that objective depends on progress in the intra-
Palestinian dialogue and on the will of the new
Government of Israel to support the peace process.
Statements to that effect made yesterday by the new
Prime Minister seem to be encouraging.

Secondly, there must be a continued commitment
by Israel and Lebanon to the provisions of resolution
1701 (2006), and the normalization of relations
between Lebanon and Syria must continue. We are
pleased to note that, to date, as a result of the Doha
agreement of May 2008, calm has prevailed in
Lebanon in the preparations for the parliamentary
elections to take place in June this year. But we deplore
the incidents that took place during the
commemoration of the assassination of Prime Minister
Rafik Hariri and the tragic news of the recent
assassination of Kamal Medhat, leader of the Palestine
Liberation Organization in Lebanon.

Thirdly, the indirect contacts between Israel and
Syria, in which Turkey has played a key role in the
past, must be resumed. In particular, the endeavours of
the Special Envoys appointed by the President of the
United States will also make it possible to achieve
progress on this matter.

In conclusion, I reaffirm my delegation's
commitment to continue to support action by the
Security Council and interested States with a view to
attaining those objectives, while always giving
precedence to the contribution that the United Nations
should make, in the conviction that stability and
security in the Middle East will come about as a result
of dialogue and negotiation, not the use of force.

