Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): A
single important issue is usually enough to fill this
historic Chamber. Today, however, we are considering
two issues: the relationship between the Security
Council and the International Criminal Court (ICC);
and the future of peacekeeping in Bosnia.

Ever since we chaired the committee that drafted
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights more than
50 years ago, the United States has consistently led the
effort to strengthen international justice and
accountability. In the past decade, the United States
played a key role in the establishment of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda and the Special Court in Sierra Leone.
Slobodan Milosevic is on trial for his crimes
because a coalition of countries, led by the United
States, not only gave political support to the work of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia but also supplemented that support in
practical ways, in cooperation with the new leadership
in Belgrade.

Foday Sankoh and his followers will be brought
to justice for their crimes in Sierra Leone because the
United States sponsored a Security Council resolution
requesting the establishment of a Special Court, of
which we are a key supporter and the largest financial
contributor.

We continue to hope that the United Nations and
the Government of Cambodia can agree on a reliable,
independent and impartial structure for trial of Khmer
Rouge leaders. And we support the request of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda for
additional judges in order to speed the important work
of the Tribunal. We recently announced a Rewards for
Justice programme on Central Africa, with the goal of
bringing to Arusha the authors of the Rwandan
genocide who are still at large.

As our record demonstrates, the United States
believes in justice and the rule of law, and in
accountability for war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide. We accept the responsibility to
investigate and prosecute our own citizens for such
offences, should they occur. We do not shirk from
public and private protest - here in New York, in the
Human Rights Commission in Geneva, or wherever our
voice can be heard - whenever and wherever such
outrages are committed.

Our commitment to peace and security in Bosnia
and around the world is also not in question. The
United States contributes almost 10,000 of its citizens
to United Nations-established or United Nations-
authorized peacekeeping operations, in addition to the
thousands of troops we deploy in the Republic of
Korea with United Nations authorization.

In Bosnia, the United States has more than 2,000
troops and nearly 50 civilian police. The senior United
Nations official is an American citizen, on loan from
my Government. With such a record, it is clear that our
veto of the draft resolution on the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) did not
reflect rejection of peacekeeping in Bosnia. But it did
reflect our frustration at our inability to convince our
colleagues on the Security Council to take seriously
our concerns about the legal exposure of our
peacekeepers under the Rome Statute.

Peacekeeping is one of the hardest jobs in the
world. While we fully expect our peacekeepers to act
in accordance with established mandates and in a
lawful manner, peacekeepers can and do find
themselves in difficult, ambiguous situations.
Peacekeepers from States that are not parties to the
Rome Statute should not face, in addition to the
dangers and hardship of deployment, additional,
unnecessary legal jeopardy. If we want troop
contributors to offer qualified military units to
peacekeeping operations, it is in the interest of all
United Nations Member States to ensure that they are
not exposed to unnecessary additional risks. This
principle has been acknowledged over decades in
United Nations status-of-mission agreements and by
parallel agreements, such as in the Dayton Accords and
the Military Technical Agreement for the International
Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan.

We should be very clear: the legal position of
peacekeepers and of the States contributing them has
been an issue throughout the history of peacekeeping
and has been an important consideration for the
Governments that must decide whether to contribute
their citizens to peacekeeping operations or to help out
in unexpected crisis or emergency situations, as the
United States is frequently asked to do.

The Secretary-General noted that peacekeepers
have not been prosecuted for such crimes in the past.
We agree, and this is an additional reason why we do
not believe that the ability of the International Criminal
Court to pursue peacekeepers is central to its functions.

Does anyone really believe that the ICC should
be aimed at the citizen soldiers of contributing States,
deployed voluntarily at the request and with the
authorization of the international community, solely for
the purpose of maintaining peace and security?

Does anyone really believe that deferral of ICC
action in the unlikely event of an accusation against
peacekeepers, which would certainly be examined by
national authorities, would undermine the Court's
ability to go after the gross violators at whom it truly is
aimed?

Some have suggested that the United States is
taking too alarmist a view of the dangers that the ICC
poses to troop contributors. I would argue that
supporters of the ICC take too alarmist a View of the
pragmatic solution that the United States is proposing.

Deferral of investigations and prosecutions -
and I wish to stress this point - in keeping with the
Rome Statute cannot undermine the role the ICC plays
on the world stage. Failure to address concerns about
placing peacekeepers in legal jeopardy before the ICC,
however, can impede the provision of peacekeepers to
the United Nations. It certainly will affect our ability to
contribute peacekeepers.

Although we do not recognize the jurisdiction of
the ICC and do not intend to become party to the Rome
Statute, we do not question the good intentions of its
architects. We respect the obligations of those States
that have ratified the Rome Statute. Indeed, in the
proposals we have put forward before the Council, we
have sought to work within the provisions of that
Statute. We hope that other States, in turn, will respect
our concerns about peacekeepers.

Our latest proposal uses article 16 of the Rome
Statute - as we were urged to do by other Council
members - to address our concerns about the
implications of the Rome Statute for nations that are
not parties to it, but which want to continue to
contribute peacekeepers to United Nations missions.
We respectfully disagree with analyses that say that our
approach is inconsistent with the Rome Statute. Article
16 contemplates that the Security Council may make a
renewable request to the ICC not to commence or
proceed with investigations or prosecutions for a
12-month period on the basis of a Chapter VII
resolution. We believe that it is consistent both with the
terms of article 16 and with the primary responsibility
of the Security Council for maintaining international
peace and security for the Council to adopt such a
resolution with regard to operations it authorizes or
establishes, and for the Council to decide to renew such
requests.

We have offered a solution to this problem that is
consistent with the obligations of all United Nations
Member States, including those that are parties to the
Rome Statute; that provides the protections we seek;
and that strengthens the capacity of the United Nations
to carry out peace operations. We urge other
delegations to consider this balanced solution and to
work with us on a practical way forward.

