Ms. Rice (United States ofAmerica): I would like to
thank the Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-General
Valerie Amos, Assistant Secretary-General Ivan
Simonovic' and Director Philip Spoerri of the
International Committee of the Red Cross for
their statements. I would also like to commend the
thousands of United Nations peacekeepers, observers
and humanitarian and human rights workers for their
dedication to protecting civilians in harm's way despite
great challenges and risks.

Protecting civilians is a fundamental responsibility
of the international community, and a priority for the
United States. Too many situations still cry out for
stronger action. We must redouble our efforts to prevent
and confront abuses of civilians. Today I would like to
stress three priorities for the United States, namely,
ensuring safety and access for humanitarian workers,
advancing accountability, and strengthening United
Nations capacity.

The United States is appalled by the numbers of
reports of efforts to intimidate, obstruct and harm
humanitarian workers. This must stop. As stated in
resolution 1894 (2009), we must take "appropriate steps
in response to deliberate attacks against humanitarian
personnel" (resolution 1894 (2009), para. 16(c)).

Secondly, the United States strongly rejects
impunity and supports efforts to hold accountable
violators of international humanitarian and human
rights law. The conviction of Charles Taylor by the
Special Court for Sierra Leone and the International
Criminal Court's judgement against Thomas Lubanga
Dyilo of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
represent milestones for international justice.

There has also been steady progress in bringing
to justice those responsible for mass atrocities in the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. But many perpetrators
remain at large, including the key architects ofgenocide
in Darfur. Moreover, justice has not yet been rendered
for the Walikale rapes nearly two years ago.

We support efforts to expose and document human
rights abuses, and have sponsored resolutions throughout
the United Nations system that stressed the need for
accountability. We agree with the Secretary-General
that the Security Council has not spoken out enough
about the failure to prevent attacks on journalists, as
called for in resolution 1738 (2006).

Thirdly, the United States remains firmly committed
to working with the international community and
the United Nations to protect civilians. Over the past
year, the United States has conducted a comprehensive
review of our own structures and capabilities, in order to
develop better tools and processes to prevent atrocities.
The recently released United States policy directive
supports efforts by the Secretariat and United Nations
field missions to review existing capabilities, identify
gaps and improve information-sharing and training.

The Secretary-General has encouraged all relevant
United Nations entities to brief the Council on the
protection of civilians, which is something that we
strongly support. In particular, we would welcome a
briefing to the Security Council on the implementation
of resolution 1894 (2009), and an annual briefing
on the capacity of current United Nations-mandated
peacekeeping and special political missions with
respect to their efforts to protect civilians, particularly
to identify lessons learned and resources gaps.

In addition, we would ask that all relevant United
Nations entities include in future reports to the Council
information on the threats and vulnerabilities facing
populations, as well as their strategies to mitigate those.

The Security Council has proved that it can
act to protect civilians under threat. The perennial
question remains, when will it? Last year, the Council
and the broader international community took a
principled stand, saving untold lives in Libya. As the
Secretary-General said in his report (S/2012/376),
the Council's response to the situation in Libya was
decisive. The Council first referred the situation to
the International Criminal Court, in resolution 1970
(2011). When Al-Qadhafi's regime remained defiant,
we adopted, without opposition, resolution 1973 (2011),
which contained a strong civilian-protection mandate,
well understood by all members of the Council, to
authorize the use of force to prevent brutal actions by
that regime against the Libyan people. Those actions
have given Libyans a well-deserved chance to chart
a future where their sovereignty, dignity and human
rights are respected.

By contrast, the situation in Syria represents a
colossal failure by the Security Council to protect
civilians. For over a year, the Council has not been
willing to protect the Syrian people from the brutal
actions of their Government. During our last debate
on this topic, in November (see S/PV.6650), the High
Commissioner for Human Rights estimated the death
toll from months of violence at 3,500. It has at least
tripled since then. The regime's relentless campaign of
violence against its own people has grown ever more
reprehensible, and ever more dangerous to international
peace and security.

The recent suspension of operations by the United
Nations Supervision Mission in Syria is a testament
to the gravity of the situation. It is a shame that the
Council continues to stand by rather than to stand up.
We must take meaningful steps, including by imposing
binding sanctions under Chapter VII, to pressure the
Syrian regime to comply with the Joint Special Envoy's
six-point plan and work towards a political transition
that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people.

In the Sudan, the Government in Khartoum
continues not only to fail to protect civilians, but to
bomb civilian areas and impede the delivery of urgently
needed humanitarian assistance. The United States
strongly condemns the violations of international law
and the human rights abuses in Darfur and the two
areas. We and many others have repeatedly called on
the Government of the Sudan to end its indiscriminate
aerial bombardments and provide immediate and
unrestricted humanitarian access in Southern Kordofan
and Blue Nile States. The Sudan must also guarantee
unrestricted humanitarian access to all of Darfur.

In conclusion, since the Council's presidential
statement of 22 November 2010 on the protection of
civilians (S/PRST/2010/25), we have witnessed robust
international action to protect civilians, including in
Cote d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and of course Libya, as I mentioned earlier, but we have
also witnessed the failure to help those in dire need.
The United States remains committed to the protection
of civilians and will continue working with the Council
and our international partners towards that end.

