Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): I, too, would like to take this
opportunity to wish the very best to our friend Francois
Delattre, an exemplary diplomat who has left his mark
here in the Security Council. We wish him success in
his next role in Paris.

At the outset, we thank Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif
for briefing us on the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Mali (S/2019/454). We welcome the
presence of His Excellency Mr. Tiebile Drame, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Mali.

The Dominican Republic commends the peaceful
way in which the Government, the opposition and
other stakeholders reconciled their differences to reach
a political agreement towards holding an inclusive
dialogue to discuss the constitutional review within a
national consultative framework, form a representative
Government and implement the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali and, in turn, seek joint
solutions to the various factors of instability affecting
the country.

We urge all stakeholders in Mali's political life
to put their differences aside and to see this time of
transition as an opportunity for all to integrate and
together overcome the prevailing challenges facing
the country. We emphasize the crucial and urgent need
for all Malians to desire and adopt a cohesive vision
for change towards a Mali of peaceful and stable
coexistence.

We deplore the security situation in northern
Mali and the ongoing deterioration in the centre of the
country and in the subregion. Attacks on the Malian
defence and security forces, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and civilians and the large-scale
intercommunal violence taking place in parallel to
other factors, such as a lack of State control, poverty,
religious violence and the situation in the Sahel, present
us with a very worrying situation.

The Dominican Republic, like the Secretary-
General, understands that in order to prevent an
increase in violence, it is necessary to take the causes
of the crisis into account. At the same time, properly
equipping and training the security forces and the Blue
Helmets, enhancing coordinated work among partners,
together with an effective presence of the reconstituted
and reformed Malian security forces, and curbing the
resources of groups and the trafficking in small arms
and light weapons are areas that must be strengthened.

Itis alsonecessarytoworkalongsidethe Government
of Mali and its institutions to establish channels of
information and cooperation with local communities
in order to expand early warning mechanisms to assist
in the joint planning of conflict prevention strategies,
in line with MINUSMA's multidimensional approach,
while responding to the overriding priority of stability
in Mali.

The Dominican Republic condemns the grave
human rights violations and transgressions perpetrated
by community self-defence groups and terrorist groups
in a context of increasing humanitarian needs, in
particular for protection. We urge the international
community to redouble its efforts to establish the
necessary mechanisms for the protection of the most
vulnerable, particularly internally displaced persons,
especially women and children, who are exposed to
high levels of insecurity and violence.

In that regard, we express our regret at the sad news
of the attack on civilians in the village of Sobame-Da,
in the Mopti region, on 9 June, in which 95 people
lost their lives. In that dire situation, we appreciate
the efforts of MINUSMA to provide humanitarian
assistance in support of those affected by the tragedy.
We hope that the perpetrators will be brought to justice
as soon as possible.

We would also like to express our concern about
the humanitarian situation in the country, where,
according to the March harmonization framework,
3.8 million people will suffer from food insecurity
and 106,000 people have been internally displaced
due to the lack of access to water resources, among
other things. Those consequences are to a great extent
the result of changing climatic conditions, which are
difficult for populations already vulnerable due to
conflict to mitigate. Tackling the effects of climate
change has been an unprecedented challenge both for
those populations and for humanitarian actors on the
ground, who deal first-hand with the humanitarian
consequences of the interplay between adverse climate
conditions and security on a daily basis. It is therefore
necessary to find ways to deliver a humanitarian
response commensurate with that growing reality and
to have the necessary funding for that task.

A fundamental part of that approach is to better
understand climate-related risks that directly affect
the security situation in the country and their role as
a multiplier of threats and vulnerabilities for already
greatly affected populations. We believe that that is
a key task for the Security Council, and in particular
MINUSMA and all humanitarian actors on the ground.

We regret that, in the reconfiguration of the new
Government, the number of women in ministerial
positions has decreased and that there has been no
progress in women's participation in the peace process.
However, we welcome the adoption of the third national
action plan for the period 2019-2023 on women and
peace and security to promote women's participation in
the peace process and governance.

We firmly believe that the inclusion of women has
great potential to transform societies and contribute
to peace and security. We also believe that the
participation of young people in stabilization efforts
in Mali is necessary. The resolve of young people and
their innovative ideas, as well as their peacebuilding
projects, create a multiplier effect and hope for a
generation that deserves and needs a more promising
future for its communities.

The future for which young Malians yearn
today is increasingly obscured by a lack of jobs,
underdevelopment and the more than 953 closed schools
in the northern and central regions of the country. No
country can achieve development without educational
and training opportunities. We therefore urge national,
regional and international stakeholders to redouble
their efforts to control the activities of armed groups
in order to restore peace and stability to the people
of Mali, which in turn would facilitate the reopening
of schools, thereby contributing to the development
of young people and in turn the future of the entire
country.

In conclusion, we deeply regret the deaths of four
Blue Helmets and a number of Malian armed forces
personnel. We commend Mr. Annadif and MINUSMA
for all their efforts in such a difficult environment. We
look forward to the effective implementation of the
action plan to improve the security of peacekeepers. We
also thank the Group of Five for the Sahel, Operation
Barkhane and the entire international community. To
echo the words of the Secretary-General, we want to
reiterate that impunity fuels violence and we therefore
hope to see all the perpetrators prosecuted.

Improving the current violent and unstable situation
in Mali demands the full participation and support of all
Malians, especially all the signatory parties, in fulfilling
their commitments under the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. A fully implemented agreement,
along with dialogue and firm, clear and proactive
measures, will help to create a safer environment for
confronting the pressing challenges facing Mali and the
Sahel region and guiding Malian society towards more
solid and sustainable socioeconomic development.

