The President (spoke in French): Pursuant to the
decision taken at the 5123" meeting of the Security
Council, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the representative of Iraq to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sumaida'ie
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will continue its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council congratulates the
people of Iraq on the successful elections of 30
January 2005. These elections represent a historic
moment for Iraq and a positive step in its political
transition. In turning out to the polls, Iraqis
demonstrated their respect for the rule of law and
non-violence. They voted for democracy and full
ownership of their affairs. The Security Council
commends the Iraqi people for having taken this
step to exercise their right to freely determine
their own political future and encourages them to
continue to do so in moving ahead with their
political transition.

"The Security Council congratulates the
newly-elected coalitions and individuals in these
elections.

"The elections took place under difficult
conditions, and the Security Council salutes the
bravery of the Iraqi people who demonstrated
their commitment to democracy, defying the
terrorists. The Security Council commends the
tens of thousands of Iraqis who ran as candidates,
administered the elections, staffed the polls,

observed the elections, and provided security.
The Security Council gives special recognition to
the Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq for
its fortitude and organizational skill in
administering the elections.

"The Security Council commends the
Secretary-General and the United Nations for
successfully assisting election preparations,
including advice and support extended to the
Iraqis by the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Iraq, Ashraf Qazi, the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, particularly
the lead electoral adviser Carlos Valenzuela, the
United Nations Electoral Assistance Division and
its Director Carina Perelli. The Security Council
also appreciates the assistance given by other
international actors, including European Union
electoral experts.

"The Security Council also notes the
commendable role played by the Iraqi security
forces and the multinational forces-Iraq in
providing security to the elections.

"These elections are an important step for
Iraq's political transition, as outlined in Security
Council resolution 1546 (2004). The Security
Council looks forward to the seating of the
Transitional National Assembly and the
formation of a new transitional Government of
Iraq in the near future. A constitution of Iraq, to
be drafted under the authority of the Transitional
National Assembly, is expected to be put to a
referendum by October 2005 and followed by
general elections by December 2005 under the
new constitution. The Security Council affirms its
continuing support for the Iraqi people in their
political transition and reaffirms the
independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of Iraq.

"Underlining the importance of the
maximum possible participation of all
components of Iraqi society in the political
process, the Security Council stresses the need
for sustained political efforts aimed at making the
next steps of the transition, in particular the
coming constitutional process, as inclusive,
participatory and transparent as possible. The
Council welcomes the statements recently made
by Iraqi leaders in this regard and strongly

encourages the Transitional Government of Iraq
and the Transitional National Assembly of Iraq to
reach out broadly to all segments of Iraqi society,
with a view to promoting genuine political
dialogue and national reconciliation and ensuring
that all Iraqis are duly represented and have a
voice in the political process and the drafting of
the Iraqi Constitution.

"The Security Council reaffirms the leading
role of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and UNAMI under resolution
1546 (2004) in support of Iraq's own efforts, and
as requested by the Government of Iraq, to
promote national dialogue and consensus
building on the drafting of a national constitution.
In this regard, the Council urges the United
Nations to prepare itself rapidly and encourages
the members of the international community to
provide advisers and technical support to the
United Nations to help it fulfil this role.

"The Security Council condemns, in the
strongest possible terms, acts of terrorism in Iraq,
which should not be allowed to disrupt Iraq's
political and economic transition. The Council
calls on those who use violence in an attempt to
subvert the political process to lay down their
arms and participate in the political process. It
encourages the Iraqi authorities to engage with all
those who renounce violence and to create a
political atmosphere conducive to national
reconciliation and political competition through
peaceful means.

"The Security Council stresses the
continued importance of Iraq's neighbouring
countries and regional organizations in
supporting the political process, cooperating with
the Iraqi authorities to control transit across Iraq's
borders and extending other support for the
people of Iraq in their efforts to achieve security
and prosperity.

"Consistent with resolution 1546 (2004),
the Security Council reaffirms its support for a
federal, democratic, pluralist and unified Iraq, in
which there is full respect for human rights. It
welcomes the international community's support
to Iraq and underlines the importance of
enhanced and expeditious assistance from all
States and relevant international organizations in
support of Iraq's further implementation of the
political transition process and efforts to achieve
national reconciliation, economic reconstruction
and stability, in accordance with resolution 1546
(2004)."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under symbol S/PRST/2005/5.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.25 17.171.

