Mr. Dauth (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this open meeting on an issue to
which Australia and, as my colleague from Fiji has
said, all countries of the Pacific Islands Forum attach a
great deal of importance. We, like others, are grateful
for the comprehensive briefing provided by Mr.
Sinclair. We are also grateful for the typically
professional and comprehensive briefing provided by
my friend and colleague Ambassador Aisi of Papua
New Guinea.

We welcome the opportunity to address the
Security Council this morning during its consideration
of this issue. We have been a proud supporter of the
peace process, including through our leadership of the
four-country regional Peace Monitoring Group (PMG).
During its five-year deployment, the PMG helped
promote stability and build confidence in the peace
process. This included crucial support to the United
Nations Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB),
particularly in implementing the agreed weapons
disposal plan.

On 1 July, following requests for a continued
regional presence beyond the PMG, Australia, New
Zealand, Fiji and Vanuatu deployed as many have
remarked this morning - the small, unarmed civilian-
led Bougainville Transition Team (BTT). The decision
to deploy the BTT demonstrates once again the
capacity of the South Pacific community to work
together to meet challenges to peace and security in our
region. We are, of course, carrying forward that work
at the same time as we are working in Solomon
Islands - as all members are aware.

 

In many ways, the decision to withdraw the PMG
and deploy the BTT also reflects the progress that has
been made to date. This includes the negotiation and
signature of the comprehensive Bougainville Peace
Agreement, and strong moves towards its
implementation. Since the Peace Agreement was
signed just under two years ago, around 1,900 weapons
have been contained, a constitution has been drafted
and the Papua New Guinea Defence Force has formally
withdrawn from Bougainville.

We welcome the recent verification of stage II of
the weapons disposal process by UNPOB Director
Sinclair. Verification will bring into effect Papua New
Guinea laws implementing the Peace Agreement and
allowing for Bougainville's autonomy. We commend
all parties for the determination and commitment they
have shown to date, and urge them to press forward
with the final stages of the peace process. In particular,
parties must focus on reaching an early and credible
decision on the final fate of the weapons that
permanently removes the weapons from
Bougainvillean communities. They should also move
swiftly to plan for free and fair elections for their
autonomous Government.

There is, of course, no room for complacency.
UNPOB must remain seized of the important matter of
concluding the formal peace process before its mandate
expires at the end of the year. In particular, UNPOB
should focus on promoting an early and credible stage
III decision. The Secretariat in New York must be
closely engaged and must provide the guidance to
ensure that this occurs. In closing, we would note that
although much has been achieved, the challenges
facing Bougainville in the coming period are
numerous, and include establishing an effective and
affordable autonomous administration, developing
credible legal and judicial arrangements, and
encouraging economic development. Australia urges all
parties to remain seized of these challenges, and is
itself committed to providing the parties with ongoing
support. We hope that the international community and
the United Nations system will also stand ready to
assist in these endeavours.

