Mr. Ramirez Carreflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to thank the
President for this meeting on the Syrian Arab Republic
on the implementation of resolution 2139 (2014) on
humanitarian assistance. We also wish to thank the
High Commissioner of the United Nations for Refugees,
Mr. Antonio Guterres, and the Assistant Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Ms. Kyung-wha Kang.

In addressing the dramatic humanitarian situation
in Syria, we have to speak with clarity before the
international community. We cannot address this
problem without failing to refer to the causes that led
to the armed conflict and the devastating effect that
the conflict has on the country, in particular on the
civilian population, which has been victim of violence.
In violation of international law, foreign powers have
backed - financially and otherwise - armed groups
and terrorists in order to promote through violence the
toppling of the legitimate regime in Syria, ignoring
the country's right to self-determination. Such illegal
actions have also endangered the unity, territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political independence of
Syria.

Venezuela rejects war, human rights violations and
atrocities that arise as a result of religious, political and
ethnic intolerance. We are indignant about and lament
the fact that other countries are intervening, which has
led to political and military instability in the region
and brought so much suffering to the people, triggering
barbarities that threaten human beings. The financing
of the war has led to an escalation in the crisis aimed at
toppling the Government of President Bashar Al-Assad.
Weapons and military capacity have been given to
terrorist groups that today are expanding their barbaric
acts and have destroyed the country.

The existence of terrorist groups is not just a problem
in Syria. The expansion of their actions currently affects
neighbouring countries and threatens to broaden the
their presence and control over other territories. That
is why the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela wishes
to reiterate that the only way to stop the humanitarian
crisis hinges on a political solution to the conflict that
is negotiated and inclusive. Accordingly, there should
be an immediate ceasefire that helps to bring about a
firm and lasting peace that ensures reconciliation in
this sister Arab country.

We reiterate our commitment to the respect for
the unity, independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria in step with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. We
back the initiatives that are aimed at seeking peace
in Syria. We therefore welcome the diplomatic efforts
that have been deployed in Moscow and Cairo aimed at
assisting the parties and finding a political solution to
the conflict. We encourage ongoing diplomatic efforts
through the holding of upcoming events. Further, our
country wishes to express its most firm support for
the actions undertaken by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, who in his
latest report showed optimism regarding peace and at
the same time expressed that within the equation of this
armed conflict the Al-Assad Government is part of the
solution.

In that regard, our country supports the
implementation of the mechanism on a freeze - the
ceasefire in Aleppo - so as to contribute to alleviating
the tragic humanitarian situation being experienced
by the civilian population victimized by the armed
conflict. We must build confidence among the parties
and give peace a chance.

We have noted with concern the latest information
on the humanitarian situation in Syria. The Secretary-
General's twelfth report (S/2015/124) paints a critical
picture of the situation in Aleppo, Raqqa, Horns,
Damascus and Al-Hasakeh, among other places. We
are concerned about the humanitarian impact produced
by the crisis in Syria, which is spilling over into
neighbouring States.

Given the challenges that have arisen from
this protracted conflict, we appreciate and wish to
commend the work of the humanitarian agencies. We
reject the idea of those agencies being the victims of
violence and military targets. However, we view with
concern the fact that the extraordinary force that the
humanitarian agencies represent is being blocked by
the actions of terrorist organizations operating in Syria,
which, as stated in the report, are stealing humanitarian
assistance from multilateral agencies such as the World
Food Programme for reasons of propaganda. There is a
need for strict adherence to the guiding principles ofthe
United Nations regarding the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to the Syrian people. All humanitarian
assistance must be coordinated with the Syrian
Government, and it is imperative that such assistance
not reach terrorist groups.

We view with concern the displacement of millions
of civilians as a result of the war. Venezuela therefore
appreciates the solidarity of the neighbouring countries
that are providing assistance in their own territories to
Syrian refugees. The complex humanitarian situation
affecting the Syrian civilian population requires a
sustained effort from the international community in
terms of ensuring the financial resources necessary to
mitigate the shortfalls in food, medicine and other basic
services that have arisen because of the armed conflict.
Funds are not currently sufficient to address the crisis,
and we therefore call on the donor community to fulfil
its pledges to contribute to such efforts.

We condemn the deliberate attacks carried out
against civilians and humanitarian personnel, as
well as the terrorist acts in Syria, regardless of the
perpetrators. We call on the parties to fully observe
the norms and principles of international humanitarian
law on the protection of civilians in time of conflict,
pursuant to the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.
We also condemn the recruitment of children and the
separation of families by armed groups in Syria. We
demand that these actors put an end to such practices,
which represent flagrant violations of international law,
in particular of the relevant legal instruments.

Lastly, we reiterate that overcoming the humanitarian
problems that have arisen because of the war and that
are causing suffering to the civilian population in Syria
will necessarily involve an inclusive dialogue, without
any conditions, and a negotiated political solution to the
conflict. The parties' commitment to achieving peace
and stability in the country without foreign interference
is essential. The international community must support
all diplomatic efforts to that end.

