Mr. Shinyo (Japan): I would like to join my
colleagues in thanking the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Qazi, and Ambassador
Wolcott Sanders for their informative briefings on,
respectively, the activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq and the Multinational
Force.

Iraq is at an important crossroads, as observed in
the Secretary-General's report. Iraq - the people and
the Government - continues to be confronted with
mounting, complex internal challenges in achieving
national reconciliation, ensuring security in
communities and promoting reconstruction and
development. Of particularly serious concern is the
deteriorating security situation, which is characterized
by increasing sectarian violence and insurgent and
terrorist attacks in many parts of Iraq.

Japan condemns any acts that may contribute to
destabilizing the situation in Iraq, including the
terrorist attacks in Sadr City on 23 November, which
took a heavy toll in innocent civilian lives, and the
mass abduction of employees and visitors at the
Ministry of Higher Education in Baghdad.

Security provides the necessary foundation for a
recovering nation's activities, including reconstruction
and development. At the same time, political stability
in turn leads to improvement in the security situation.
Japan reiterates the importance of ownership of the
nation-building process by the Iraqi people in
establishing responsible governance by the Iraqi
Government and national reconstruction. In this regard,
Japan appreciates the continued efforts of the
Government of Iraq, under the leadership of Prime
Minister Al-Maliki, to promote the National
Reconciliation Plan and the Security Plan. It is also
imperative that the broader international community
actively provide the necessary support to assist the
efforts made by the Government and the people of Iraq
for nation-building.

In this connection, the positive cooperation
extended, and the constructive role played, by the
neighbouring and regional countries must not be
overlooked. We welcome the recently announced
normalization of diplomatic relations between Iraq and
Syria, as well as the recent visit to Iran by Iraqi
President Talabani, following the visit of Prime
Minister Al-Maliki to the country in September. We
expect that improved relations between Iraq and the
neighbouring and regional countries though efforts
such as these will lead to political and security stability
in Iraq.

At the end of November the Council adopted
resolution 1723 (2006), which extended the mandate of
the Multinational Force (MNF). Japan welcomes the
fact that Iraqi forces are gradually assuming
responsibility for security in substantial areas of the
country, owing to progress in training the Iraqi security

forces by the MNF. Japan expects that the continued
presence of the MNF in Iraq will further facilitate this
positive development. We pay tribute to the important
role that the MNF has been playing in this area.

Japan also wishes to commend once again the
important role that United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) has been fulfilling in the Iraq
process under challenging circumstances, and to
express its strong support for the Mission's activities.
In the current situation, we continue to place
importance on three areas of UNAMI's mandate-based
activities, namely: the promotion of national dialogue,
the facilitation of coordination and delivery of
reconstruction and development assistance, and
assistance in the constitutional and electoral processes.

Japan considers the three elements of political
stability, improvement of security and economic
reconstruction, to be interlinked. From this point of
view, we welcome the advancement of the discussion
on the International Compact for Iraq. Broader
participation of the international community will be
key to the success of the Compact process.

We highly appreciate, in this connection, the
cooperation by the Governments of the United Arab
Emirates and Kuwait in hosting the preparatory
meetings in September and October. By the same
token, we appreciate the strong role that the United
Nations, through UNAMI, has been playing to promote
the Compact process as a co-chair. This includes
organizing the Foreign Minister-level meeting on Iraq
and the meeting to brief on the developments on the
Compact, both held in New York in September and
November. Japan looks forward to the finalization and
adoption of the Compact at the earliest possible time.

The international community must intensify its
support for Iraq so that the country can overcome the
present difficulties and make meaningful strides
towards becoming a democratic and stable State. Japan,
for its part, will maintain its commitment to
proactively provide appropriate support in Iraq, mainly
in the following two areas.

First, Japan provides airlift support activities to
UNAMI and the Multinational Force through its Air
Self-Defence Force assets. After concluding its
humanitarian and reconstruction support activities in
Iraq, for which it deployed its Ground Self-Defence
Force contingents, Japan began providing regular airlift
services to United Nations personnel to facilitate the
ongoing activities of UNAMI and their possible
expansion. The Government of Japan made a Cabinet-
level decision on 8 December to extend, until the end
of July next year, the Basic Plan regarding response
measures on the law concerning the special measures
on humanitarian and reconstruction assistance in Iraq,
which is the framework for Japan's cooperation and
assistance to the country. We are pleased to report that
that decision will enable Japan to continue to provide
airlift support.

Secondly, various projects amounting to
$1.5 billion in grant aid have been completed to
support Iraqi reconstruction. Additional aid of up to
$3.5 billion - made available through a soft loan
window, largely for improvement of infrastructure and
other economic and social projects - is in the pipeline
for steady implementation. It is our pleasure to note
that Japan announced yesterday, 10 December, its
authorization of two oil and electricity projects in
utilizing the soft loan, in addition to the six projects
previously announced in fields that include seaports,
irrigation, thermal power plants, roads and bridges and
oil refineries. We hope that implementation of these
projects will begin immediately upon the completion of
the necessary procedures for financing. Moreover,
Japan will remain actively and continuously engaged in
the Compact process, in cooperation with the United
Nations and other relevant parties.

