Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): I would like to thank
Mr. Zerihoun and Mr. Sidikou for their briefings on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Angola welcomed the signing on 18 October of
a comprehensive political agreement on organizing
peaceful, credible and transparent elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and notes with
appreciation the confidence-building measures that
the Government has taken so far, encouraging all
the Congolese stakeholders to remain committed
to peace and the political process. On 12 November,
the Government of Angola issued a declaration on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, stating that it
would be closely monitoring its neighbour's situation,
based on the two countries' relations of friendship and
cooperation and their historical and cultural ties, and
affirming Angola's respect for the sovereignty of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its policy of
non-interference in that country's affairs.

Angola believes that peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must be preserved,
since they are crucial to peace and stability in the region,
especially in central and southern Africa and the Great
Lakes area. We also believe firmly that the country's
ongoing political disputes must be resolved through
dialogue and without violence or any other illegitimate
means. While we affirm our support for a peaceful
solution to the disputes between the Government
and the opposition, we call on the parties concerned
to maintain dialogue and negotiations as a means of
finding a way out of their political and pre-electoral
impasse and avoiding violent confrontation at all costs.

We also welcome the decision to entrust the post
of Prime Minister to someone from the ranks of the
opposition, who we encourage to engage in any
inclusive dialogue as a key instrument to ending the
crisis. Respect for the Constitution and other legal
instruments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
by the Government and the opposition are fundamental
prerequisites, which presuppose that the President of
the Republic can be replaced only through a democratic
electoral process.

The appointment of Mr. Samy Badibanga as the
new Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to lead the transitional Government is a
key development in the complex political situation
prevailing in the country and we encourage the Prime
Minister to pursue negotiations for a national dialogue
with all Congolese political actors and stakeholders.
The recent announcement that elections will take place
after the completion of voter registration be a positive
sign of commitment to organizing elections in due
course. It is our firm desire that the Congolese authority
and the people be able to put their differences aside and
engage in a transparent dialogue in order to establish an
inclusive transitional Government and agree on a road
map to guide the country to political stability, post-
electoral peace and development.

Finally, we reiterate our support for the efforts
of the African Union facilitation, led by Mr. Edem
Kodjo and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Mr. Maman Sidikou, and welcome the regional
initiatives, in particular that of the International
Conference of the Great Lakes region, aimed at
strengthening synergies with the Security Council
in line with the common Vision expressed during the
recent visit to Angola by the Security Council mission.

