Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Ijoin
the speakers before me in thanking Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
his briefing and his commitment to that country.

Luxembourg associates itself with the statement to
be made by the observer of the European Union.

The High Representative has painted a somewhat
gloomy picture of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The political crisis at the Federation level
continues to obstruct essential reforms. The country's
unity and territorial integrity are still not subject to full
consensus within political circles and have been called
into question in some disturbing separatist rhetoric. The
country is also dealing with a difficult socioeconomic
situation. In the absence of a shared vision for their
country's future, Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders
have failed to launch the reforms necessary for
achieving their self-imposed goals regarding European
and Euro-Atlantic integration.

That said, not all the news is bad, as the High
Representative notes in his forty-third report to
the Security Council (S/2013/263, annex) and as he
recalled this morning. We welcome the fact that the
State-level Council of Ministers, which was reshuffled
in November, is meeting regularly. It is also noteworthy
that the State budget for 2013 was adopted on time for
the first time in two years.

Moreover, we see that the security situation has
remained calm and stable. Since its establishment in
2004, the European Union-led force Operation Althea,
has never had to intervene to restore peace, since the
Bosnian authorities themselves have been able to deal
with potential security threats. Against this backdrop,
Operation Althea was reconfigured in September. We
welcome the fact that since then the force's efforts have
been chiefly focused on capacity-building and training,
while retaining the means to contribute to the Bosnian
authorities' capacity for deterrent.

Luxembourg welcomes the increased political
presence of the European Union on the ground since
September 2011 and the strengthened mandate of
its Special Representative and Head of Delegation
in Sarajevo, Mr. Peter Sorensen, which testify to the
European Union's continued willingness to help Bosnia
and Herzegovina do a better job in moving forward with
its programme of reform towards stability, development
and integration with the European Union.

Now that Croatia will be joining the European
Union in a few weeks and relations between Serbia
and Kosovo are normalizing, thanks to the dialogue
facilitated by the European Union, we, like the High
Representative, are concerned about the fact that
Bosnia and Herzegovina is lagging behind compared
with its neighbours. We take this opportunity to
encourage the political leaders to overcome their
differences and to implement the reforms needed for
progress in the country. It is most urgent to implement
the judgement of the European Court of Human Rights
in the Sejdie-Finci vs. Bosnia and Herzegovina case
regarding the rights of minorities to be elected to the
Bosnian Presidency and the House of Peoples of the
Bosnian Parliament. We regret that fact that, despite the
facilitation of the European Union, the political leaders
did not succeed in reaching an agreement on this issue
by the deadline of 11 April.

Allow me to conclude by reaffirming our profound
conviction that the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
a united, stable and multi-ethnic country lies steadfastly
within a European context. That is, moreover, the wish
of the vast majority of the Bosnian population. For
its part, as a member of the European Union and an
elected member of the Security Council, Luxembourg
will spare no effort in encouraging the leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to meet the aspirations of
their citizens by overcoming the current stalemate and
taking the decisions needed to truly take the destiny of
their country into their own hands.

