Ms. Rice (United States of America): The United
States is disgusted that a couple of members of this
Council continue to prevent us from fulfilling our sole
purpose here, which is to address an ever-deepening
crisis in Syria and a growing threat to regional peace
and security. For months, this Council has been held
hostage by a couple of members. Those members stand
behind empty arguments and individual interests, while
delaying and seeking to strip bare any text that would
pressure Al-Assad to change his actions. That
intransigence is even more shameful when we consider
that at least one of those members continues to deliver
weapons to Al-Assad.

The United States has long said that it is past time
for the Council to assume its responsibilities and to
impose tough, targeted sanctions and an arms embargo
12-22356

on the Al-Assad regime, as many individual countries
have already done. But today's draft resolution
(S/2012/77) did not even do that. The text simply
supported an Arab League plan that Al-Assad himself
already agreed to uphold and the subsequent Arab
League decision towards a peaceful resolution of the
crisis. The sponsors of the draft resolution truly went
the last mile to try to reach consensus on a draft that
already more than accommodates the concerns of a few
Council members about the use of force and sanctions.
Subsequent attempts today to introduce wrecking
amendments at the eleventh hour, only to further delay
Council action, are unforgivable.

Since yesterday, the Syrian Government has
waged and intensified an especially horrific campaign
in Horns to murder hundreds, including women and
children, with artillery, tanks and other indiscriminate
violence. Syrian forces continue to prevent hundreds of
innocent and injured civilians from seeking medical
help. The international community must protect the
Syrian people from that abhorrent brutality. But a
couple of members of this Council remain steadfast in
their willingness to sell out the Syrian people and to
shield a craven tyrant.

The United States, by contrast, stands fully and
irrevocably with the long-suffering people of Syria.

Since those same two Council members vetoed
the last draft resolution on Syria, we have heard reports
from the High Commissioner for Human Rights that
the regime may be committing crimes against
humanity. We also heard from Arab League Secretary-
General Elaraby and from Qatari Prime Minister
Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr Al-Thani, who noted that
the Assad regime has "failed to make any serious effort
to cooperate" (see S/PV.67]0, p.4) with the Arab
League and that Assad's "killing machine continues
effectively unabated" (ibid., p.5).

Since those two members last vetoed a draft
resolution on Syria, an estimated 3,000 more civilians
have been killed, with another almost 250 killed just
yesterday. Many thousands more have been held
captive and tortured by Al-Assad and his Shabia gangs.
Since those two members last vetoed a resolution,
however, and despite the absence of Security Council
action, we have seen more and more Syrians speak out
in peaceful demonstrations against the regime.

Once again, the courageous people of Syria can
clearly see who on this Council supports their yearning
5
for liberty and universal rights and who does not. And
during this season of change, the people of the Middle
East can now see clearly which nations have chosen to
ignore their calls for democracy and instead to prop up
desperate dictators. Those who oppose the draft
resolution have denied this last chance to end
Al-Assad's brutality through peaceful means under
Arab League auspices. Any further bloodshed will be
on their hands.

The Governments that once again stymied
Council action today need to reverse course and to
heed the voices of the Syrian people - for their own
sake, for the sake of Syria, for the sake of the Middle
East, and for the sake of this Council.

