Mr. Corman (Turkey): As this is the first open
meeting of the Council this month, I wish to
congratulate the Permanent Mission of China and you
yourself, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of January. I would also like
to welcome to the Council the five newly elected

members, while at the same time paying tribute to the
five former members for successfully completing their
terms on the Council. I would like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his comprehensive report
(S/2009/674) and his Special Representative, Mr. Kai
Eide, for his informative and frank briefing. We join
the Secretary-General and you, Mr. President, in
recognizing Mr. Eide's excellent service in
Afghanistan. I would also like to welcome Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan to the Council.

We would like to commend the report of the
Secretary-General, which provides a comprehensive
outlook. We also agree with the report's content and
observations. This meeting is taking place at a time
when many developments are unfolding with regard to
Afghanistan. We would therefore like to give Turkey's
views concerning the situation in Afghanistan. I will
limit my remarks to three main areas: international
developments and the strengthening of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
regional developments and the parliamentary elections.

First, it is a welcome development that the
international community is widely discussing
developments in Afghanistan. While doing so - as has
been clearly expressed by Mr. Eide - we should
design our priorities in cooperation with the Afghan
Administration. Turkey believes that there is a need for
a comprehensive approach. This should include
security, governance, the rule of law, human rights and
social and economic development. But it should not be
limited to military means alone. In addition, four areas
need special attention: comprehensive economic
development, strong and well-trained Afghan military
and police, inclusive national reconciliation and a
modern education and justice system to effectively
combat extremism. In other words, a political and
economic action plan is needed.

As suggested in the report, the role of UNAMA
should be strengthened in order to better serve the
Afghan people. The new role should be designed
jointly with the Afghan Administration. On the other
hand, security threats against the United Nations are
increasing. This is the first time that the United Nations
has been targeted so deliberately. However, those
terrorist attacks should not deter us. They should only
strengthen our determination to assist the Afghan
people. The continuation of a strong United Nations
presence is of the utmost importance. We should
therefore all support the Secretary-General in his
efforts to that end.

Secondly, we think that regional ownership could
be a key to success in Afghanistan. While there are
several international developments unfolding regarding
Afghanistan, regional cooperation should be
encouraged as well. From that perspective, in 2007,
Turkey initiated the Turkey-Afghanistan-Pakistan
trilateral summit process. The fourth trilateral summit
will take place in Turkey on 24 January, with a focus
on education.

Similarly, we will also host a regional summit on
26 January with the participation of the neighbours of
Afghanistan and some observers, so that those
attending the London Conference on 28 January -
where regional cooperation will be one of the topics to
be discussed - can bring with them regional input.
The regional summit will aim to address challenges
that are common to countries of the region, as well as
to enhance regional dialogue. We will also host the
fourth Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan in Turkey in 2010.

Thirdly, I would like to reiterate our views with
regard to elections. We believe that the new
Administration should embrace the whole nation
following the presidential elections. It should refocus
on national unity and reconstruction efforts as soon as
possible. It should reach out to all ethnic groups
through inclusive policies. On the other hand, all who
competed against President Karzai in the elections
should offer their support to the new Administration. In
our opinion, what Afghanistan needs now is to
strengthen democratic values and an efficient State
mechanism to combat several problems, including
misconduct. In democracies, parliaments stand for
those two elements.

Along the same lines, it would be quite preferable
for the parliamentary elections be held in 2010, as
foreseen in the Afghan Constitution. If there is need for
improvement in some procedures, these could, and
should, be realized. But since the international
community is defending the rule of law, it is hard to
explain the postponement of the elections. They may
be delayed for some time, but not for a long time. The
elections should be seen as a tool, but not as an
obstacle: a tool to encourage different groups to join in
national reconciliation and national unity.
Finally, we would like to reiterate that, in
addition to our diplomatic efforts, Turkey will continue
its contribution in Afghanistan in the period ahead, in
cooperation with the United Nations. We are also the
lead country on Afghanistan in the Council for this
year

