Mr. Oshima (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. Minister, and the delegation of Peru for holding
today's debate. We appreciate your presiding over this
meeting personally to address this important issue. I
also thank Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Ann M. Veneman, Executive
Director of UNICEF, and Mr. Gabriel Oling Olang,
representative of Save the Children, for their briefings.

Let me begin by thanking the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2006/826), submitted to the Council
pursuant to resolution 1612 (2005), on the
implementation of that resolution and related
resolutions. The content of the Secretary-General's
report is of great interest to us. Although progress has
been made with respect to the protection of children,
the situation of children affected by armed conflict
continues to be grave and alarming. The recent conflict
in the Middle East region, for example, showed once
again that children bear the main brunt of conflict.
Sadly, in many parts of the world, cases of the
recruitment and abusive use of children and other grave
violations against children in armed conflict persist.

Japan fully supports actions, as recommended in
the report, whereby the United Nations energetically
calls upon parties to conflict to prepare concrete time-
bound action plans to halt the recruitment and the use
of children in violation of applicable international
obligations.

Japan welcomes the establishment of monitoring
and reporting mechanisms in several countries -
Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Cote
d'Ivoire, Somalia, the Sudan, Nepal and Sri Lanka -
as signs of encouraging progress. We look forward to
receiving objective and reliable information on the
violations being committed against children with a
view to contributing to efforts to remedy such abuses.
We commend the reports submitted by the
monitoring and reporting mechanism regarding the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan,
which provided vital and pertinent information that
will allow the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, chaired by France, to
work on appropriate recommendations for action.

We wish to note at the same time that it is
important to conduct a comprehensive assessment of
the monitoring and reporting mechanism itself for
possible improvements in its operations. In this
connection, the recent independent review of the
mechanism, submitted by the Office of Internal
Oversight Services pursuant to resolution 1612 (2005),
has provided useful inputs, and we look forward to
detailed work in the Working Group to consider and
formulate concrete proposals that will further improve
the practice of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism. My Government appreciates the valuable
contributions of the Working Group, especially with
respect to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Sudan, which have been forwarded to the relevant
parties for concrete action.

Japan, along with other Member States and
partners, has advocated the concept of human security
in order to enhance the protection and empowerment of
men, women and children at the community and the
individual level. As part of its efforts to implement that
concept on the ground, we have put in place assistance
programmes and projects in a number of regions and
countries, particularly Asia and Africa. One important
aspect of that assistance effort is the process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. There
is much more that should be done in this and other
related areas, because assistance in these areas
constitutes a key element of the protection of children
in armed conflict, as well as of adult soldiers.

In his report, the Secretary-General calls upon
donors to ensure that adequate resources and funding
are made available for the purpose of assisting the
rehabilitation and reintegration of children in armed
conflict. Bearing in mind the concept of human
security, my Government has supported the
rehabilitation of former child soldiers, for example, in
the Great Lakes region, through the relevant United
Nations agencies.

In closing, my delegation wishes to stress once
again that the issue of children and armed conflict

should be a priority for the international community,
and it is especially important to mainstream this issue
into all policies and programmes of the United Nations
system. Japan is fully committed to engaging in the
issue of children and armed conflict and will continue
to work closely with other Member States, the United
Nations system and national organizations, as well as
non-governmental organizations and civil society.

