The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Bulgaria for his kind words addressed

to me.

The next speaker is the representative of the Libyan
Arab J amahiriya. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

Mr. Muntasser (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
(interpretation from Arabic): At the outset, my delegation
extends to you, Sir, its warm congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. We are convinced that you will accomplish this
task with the greatest competence. My delegation also
wishes to express its gratitude to Ambassador Manzi
Bakuramutsa, the Permanent Representative of Rwanda, for
his leadership of the Council last month.

I take this opportunity, on behalf of my country, to
congratulate the new members of the Security Council:
Botswana, Germany, Honduras, Indonesia and Italy.

The representative of Indonesia spoke yesterday on
behalf of the member countries of the Non-Aligned
Movement. My delegation fully endorses his statement and
wishes to add the following comments.

During the forty-seventh session of the General
Assembly my delegation welcomed "An Agenda for
Peace", drawn up by the Secretary-General. Today, in
discussing the "Supplement to An Agenda for Peace"
(S/l995/1), my delegation wishes to thank the Secretary-
General for his preparation of this important document,
which we welcome as a further contribution to
strengthening United Nations efforts to overcome negative
factors and devise new approaches towards creating a world
in which security and stability prevail, on foundations
established by all States, foundations of equality and mutual
respect.

Desirous of working for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Secretary-General has
put forward some new ideas and proposals for
strengthening the role of the United Nations in this respect.
He has raised some very important issues. My delegation
would like to express its view on some of these issues.

It must be recognized that there has been an increase
in the number of peace-keeping operations undertaken by
the United Nations. This is a result of an international
imbalance, and it is that imbalance that should be stressed
rather than the efforts to solve armed conflicts as such.
We must deal with the underlying causes of this
imbalance, whether political, economic or social.

It must be noted that the United Nations has scored
some limited successes with its peace-keeping operations.
But we must ensure more successes for these operations
through the international support that is so essential and
through the formulation of a clear mandate for each
operation.

The Secretary-General has stated his views on the
ways to meet actual and potential challenges. He has
emphasized that the United Nations is in the best position
to take a global, long-term approach in order to achieve
lasting settlements of conflicts. My delegation supports
his position on this, and we believe that the practical
application of his approach requires that the United
Nations discharge its functions under the Charter more
appropriately. Moreover, certain great Powers must be
prevented from exploiting the failures that have occurred
in this sphere to resort to such unilateral methods as
direct military intervention, as happened in Somalia, Haiti
and Rwanda, which casts doubt on the real motives of
such actions.

The Secretary-General has raised a number of points
in the sphere of disarmament. My delegation shares his
concern at the tremendous arms traffic and also at the
existence of various types of mines. We support his
appeal to all Member States to accord the highest priority
to this question.

With regard to the other matters dealt with by the
Secretary-General in this connection, we believe that the
international community must focus its efforts more on
nuclear weapons since they constitute the greatest danger
to international peace and security. The most important
requirement is the elimination of these weapons and
indeed all weapons of mass destruction. Their
manufacture, acquisition and use must be prohibited. We
must also face the fact that one country is trying to
acquire the largest possible number of nuclear weapons.
My country has drawn attention to this fact in an official
document, distributed by the United Nations under the
symbol S/l994/l386.

My delegation also associates itself with the
Secretary-General's desire to see the 1995 Conference of
States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of

 

Nuclear Weapons crowned with success. My delegation
emphasizes that the objective of the Conference must be the
extension of that Treaty. This objective is linked to some
other questions that must be dealt with - in the first place,
the questions of providing credible security safeguards for
non-nuclear countries and guaranteeing global adherence to
the non-proliferation Treaty. My country attaches the
greatest importance to this matter because the region in
which we are situated suffers from a disequilibrium in the
security sphere because Israel possesses nuclear weapons
and refuses to accede to the non-proliferation Treaty and to
subject its nuclear installations to International Atomic
Energy Agency's control and safeguards.

The Supplement to An Agenda for Peace deals very
frankly and objectively with a large number of issues. The
fact is that the Libyan Arab J amahiriya has repeatedly
drawn attention to a number of those issues. My delegation
does not intend to repeat what we have already said on this
subject, but we wish to comment on two questions that are
important to us.

First, we believe that the Secretary-General is entirely
correct when he refers to the difficulties caused by the
vagueness of the purposes of certain Security Council
resolutions. We are raising this matter because my country
has had practical experience with it. We have taken
practical steps; we have accepted a number of initiatives;
we have displayed a great deal of flexibility. We reacted
positively to the clear demands contained in Security
Council resolution 731 (1992). Some non-governmental
organizations and a number of countries, including some
members of the Security Council, have recognized that a
sufficient number of measures have been taken to justify
the lifting of sanctions. But certain countries members of
the Security Council have refused to recognize this and,
invoking their own interpretation of the resolution, persist
in refusing to lift or even alleviate some of the sanctions
imposed under resolutions 748 (1992) and 883 (1993).

This policy has gone so far that my country is
convinced that the purpose of the sanctions is simply to
inflict the greatest possible damage on the Libyan people.
We have pointed out in many forums, including this
Council, the magnitude of the wrong that has been done to
us. We have set forth the facts in official documents, the
latest having been distributed under the symbol S/ 1994/921.
I need only cite here, as an example of the damage caused
by the sanctions, the crash of a Libyan civil aircraft in
1992, when 157 persons were killed - a crash resulting
from the ban on providing Libya with spare parts for its
aircraft. Moreover, 1,622 people have been killed in road
accidents, and 350 people - most of them children,
women and handicapped persons - have died because
they could not be sent abroad for treatment.

Great economic damage has also been caused by
these sanctions. The figure has been estimated to be more
than $4.5 billion. This shows the real purpose of the
sanctions imposed on Libya. It should be noted that the
position of one country has made it impossible to send
sick persons abroad for treatment.

My delegation shares the Secretary-General's View
that sanctions are incompatible with the achievement of
development objectives.
If the letter and the spirit of the Charter are
observed, the situation will necessarily worsen if sanctions
take the form of vengeance-seeking and punishment,
particularly when it is absolutely clear that the purpose of
the sanctions is to serve certain political interests, to the
detriment of the Libyan people, who have committed no
act endangering international peace and security.

The proposals for peaceful solutions have been
turned down by the countries that insisted that these
sanctions be imposed. Why were they in such a hurry to
invoke Chapter VII of the Charter - and in a way
incompatible with international norms and rules? My
country has asked that account be taken of international
norms and rules, and we have called upon the organs of
the United Nations, including the Security Council, to try
to convince the other parties to adhere to the principles of
justice and serve the interests of all parties.

In conclusion, this discussion has made it possible
for us to state our views in general terms. In due course,
we will spell out our position on the other proposals
contained in the "Supplement to An Agenda for Peace".
We support the suggestion made by the Chairman of the
Non-Aligned Movement that the General Assembly set up
an open-ended working group to study this Supplement in
more detail and to submit its comments and its
recommendations.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Sierra Leone. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.


