Mr. Kafando: Iwould like to start by congratulating
you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month.

It is an honour for me to address the Security
Council in my capacity as Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the first time. As members are
aware, the facilitator of the East African Community,
former President Benjamin Mkapa, was scheduled to
brief the Council with me. Because of a health-related
issue, he could not be here today. I wish him a speedy
recovery.

My briefing will focus on three aspects: first, my
meetings in Bujumbura; secondly, my preliminary
assessment of the situation in Burundi; and thirdly, a
possible way forward.

(spoke in French)

When I arrived in Bujumbura on 27 June, I
was received in turn by the Minister for External
Relations and International Cooperation, Mr. Alain
Aime Nyamitwe, and by the President, Pierre
Nkurunziza. I spent approximately an hour talking
alone with President Nkurunziza. My meeting with
the President was essentially a courtesy visit. In
Bujumbura I also met with various Burundian political
stakeholders - representatives of civil society and
religious groups and members of the diplomatic corps,
as well as of the United Nations family.

In Tanzania, I was received by former the President
and facilitator of the inclusive inter-Burundian
dialogue, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, East Africa, Regional and
International Cooperation of the United Republic of
Tanzania, Mr. Mahiga. The facilitator said that he
had concluded his work for which the report had been
sent to President Museveni, the chief mediator of the
inter-Burundi dialogue.

In Addis Ababa, I also conducted talks on the
sidelines of the African Union Summit with the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uganda and African
leaders - namely, the current Chairperson of the
African Union, Mr. Alpha Conde, as well as with
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki - who are closely following the
situation in Burundi.

I have just briefly listed the contacts with whom I
met within the framework of my first trip to Burundi
and the subregion. I imagine that members are now
wondering what assessment I took away from those
various meetings and exchanges. Based on those
meetings, there appear to be divergent assessments of
the political situation that prevails in the country. The
Burundian authorities are confident in their ability to
conduct the country's affairs in serenity. They consider
that the general situation is calm, while condemning
foreign interference in the management of their internal
affairs and recalling their commitment to maintaining
their national sovereignty.

The representatives of the political opposition
and some civil society members are concerned about
what they deem to be abuse of power by the current
Government. They are calling, therefore, for greater
involvement by the region and the international
community to promote an inclusive dialogue, without
preconditions, in which all Burundians take part. They
are calling for the suspension of the constitutional
review process under way and for an end to violations
of their basic rights and the hostility of the authorities
towards those rights, which often go hand in hand,
they claim, with suppression by the forces maintaining
order and by Government-affiliated groups. However,
political parties and civil society organizations that
support the Government have a completely different
point of view.

The economic situation continues to worsen
because of the tense political environment, which in
turn deters private national and international investors.
There is unemployment, in particular among young
people. That situation causes people to leave for
neighbouring countries, thereby increasing the number
of refugees.

The security situation has improved since the
beginning of the year. In Bujumbura, all appears calm
and people freely go about their work. Nonetheless, it
should be noted that there have been grenade attacks
over the past few weeks that have left many people
dead and injured. The reasons for those attacks have
not yet been made clear.

People want an atmosphere of peace in Burundi,
but under what conditions and at what price might
that be achieved? The first requirement must be to
give priority to inclusive dialogue, a sine qua non for
any settlement of the crisis. It is imperative for the
Burundian Government to acquiesce to the insistent
demands of the countries of the subregion and of the
African Union - which are supported in this by the
United Nations - to move to an inclusive dialogue that
would include members of the opposition in exile and
those in the country. I believe that that is the price to
be paid if we are to restore trust among Burundians,
to ensure credible, stable and democratic institutions
and to promote genuine national reconciliation.
From that perspective, the Arusha Agreement must
remain the reference standard, the cornerstone. All
non-governmental stakeholders with whom I have met
have acknowledged that, have demanded that.

The new prospects and guidelines that we must
develop to resolve the situation in Burundi must
converge, it seems to me, towardjoint, collective action
by African leaders, first by those in the subregion, in
solidarity with the United Nations. Suchjoint collective
action must be aimed at convincing the Burundian
regime to accept appeasement measures, in particular
those put forward by the Facilitator and the more
general measures featured in the Arusha Agreement.

Joint action must also be geared towards
encouraging the Burundian regime to participate in the
inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue. The recent visit
paid by President Nkurunziza to President Magufuli of
Tanzania is an encouraging sign in that regard. Let us
hope that that gesture indicates a willingness to move
the inclusive dialogue process forward. It is for that
reason that, in my capacity as Special Envoy, and now
that many high-ranking African officials have decided
to personally and fully take part in the resolving the
crisis, I suggest that more discernment be brought to
the analysis of the Burundi question.

As you know, Mr. President, I am on my first fact-
finding mission, and I intend to continue consultations
in the coming days. I truly believe in the subregion's
commitment to working for peace in Burundi, with the
support of the African Union. I strongly recommend
that the United Nations firmly support those efforts.
Even ifa bit more patience is required, we will certainly
reach a dynamic compromise. I repeat that all of our
efforts must demonstrate unwavering support for the
region and in particular the efforts of the Mediator and
Facilitator and those of the Government of Tanzania.

