At the outset, I would like to thank the Dominican Republic for convening this debate on the important issue of youth, peace, and security. I also thank Secretary- General Antonio Guterres for being with us today and for his valuable briefing, as well as the civil society briefers for their insights. Young people represent the majority in the countries affected by conflict and violence or in post-conflict situations. They are one of the most vulnerable strata of those societies and endure the devastating impact of conflicts and violence at all levels and stages. Inaccurate perspectives and stereotypes portray them as a problem that needs to be solved, or identify them as either perpetrators or victims. The upsurge in terrorism and violent extremism also tends to be linked to the role of young people. As we celebrate the fifth anniversary of the youth, peace and security agenda, we reiterate the crucial role of young people, as recognized by resolution 2250 (2015), for their contribution to efforts to maintain and promote peace and security, and to prevent and resolve conflicts. We call for the global implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) in order to prioritize our youth in conflict- and post-conflict-related efforts. We consider the five pillars highlighted by resolution 2250 (2015) - participation, partnerships, prevention, protection, and disengagement and reintegration - essential to promoting young people's role and contribution to peace processes and conflict resolution. In the same vein, we underscore the need for youth empowerment strategies to more effectively promote and enhance their role in conflict transformation by considering young people as dynamic forces capable of strengthening the foundation of societies and as key stakeholders in peacebuilding strategies and action plans. They must have access to economic opportunities, political participation, social services and security, and they must be protected from all forms of marginalization, hopelessness and stigmatization that may lead to radicalization and violent extremism. The considerable efforts being made by the international community and within the United Nations system to recognize and promote the role of youth in peacebuilding processes must be continued and enhanced to further operationalize resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) and institutionalize the youth, peace and security agenda. In that regard, additional measures can be taken, such as adding specific language to mission mandates to encourage the meaningful participation of youth in peace and security efforts, including in mediation and peace negotiations; monitoring ceasefires and the implementation of peace agreements; integrating a youth, peace and security analysis into thematic and country-specific reports and briefings to the Security Council, and increasing the participation of young briefers in the Council; and developing and adopting national road maps and action plans for the implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018). In conclusion, we reiterate the importance of youth in any society, and the pivotal role they can play, when they are successfully empowered and engaged in transformation programmes, in not only maintaining peace and security but also in combating terrorism and realizing the Sustainable Development Goals.
